.START 

Since its New York premiere last December, a strange and beautiful little Hungarian film has been making its way around the country. "A Hungarian Fairy Tale" has been doing so well, in its modest way, that its distributor now has tripled the number of prints available -- to three from one.
So, in the next couple of months, a movie that might have been limited to the film-festival circuit will be shown in commercial theaters in such diverse cities as Chicago; Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; Austin, Texas; Tulsa, Okla.; and Clearwater, Fla., among others. 

Director Gyula Gazdag has staged this political satire as a dark and mysterious fable, whose seductive black-and-white imagery lingers in memory like a disturbing dream.
Cinematographer Elemer Ragalyi's camera work gives the film the resonance of a great silent movie; most of the time even non-Magyars don't really need to read the subtitles.
And you would know this fairy tale is Hungarian by its absurdist humor, and somewhat melancholy sentimentality. 

The mood of fantasy is set at the beginning.
An ethereal young woman sitting in the audience at a performance of Mozart's "The Magic Flute" senses that for the handsome stranger who's been eyeing her all evening, she is the night's leading lady.
As the music continues, she drifts off with him into the shadows so elegantly composed by cameraman Ragalyi. 

A child results from this one-night stand.
Yet his birth isn't cause for grief.
His mother, an elusive beauty played by Maria Varga, seems quite happy indeed to have this memento of her night at the opera.
Though she and her little boy live in standard-issue East bloc style, their life together has a kind of magic.
Ms. Varga's pretty, saintly Mom couldn't be more idealized.
She makes ironing her little boy's shirt seem like the highest calling, a joyful act. 

She never loses her composure, even when the state intrudes into the cocoon she's knitted around herself and her child.
Hungarian law, it seems, requires that every child have a recognized father.
If he doesn't, the state simply invents one.
This "father" needn't exist in the outside world, but the bureaucrats need him for their files. 

The mother dutifully presents herself to the clerk in charge of phantom fathers (Frantisek Husak).
He takes his job very seriously, especially when he's confronted with this mother, this angel.
When she glances at his nameplate and gives his name to her child, he agrees, then provides the name of the city where he used to live as the "father's" address. 

Fate intervenes in the form of a brick, which falls on the mother's head.
The tragedy's purpose is to propel the little boy, Andris (David Vermes), now an adolescent, into searching for the father he doesn't know doesn't exist.
His first step is to escape from his state-appointed guardians, who want to put him in a children's home.
Then the story begins in earnest. 

Young Mr. Vermes has blond hair and haunted black eyes.
He's been called a 12-year-old Marlon Brando, a comparison that seems almost eerily right.
His adventures in search of his father have the elliptical quality of a dream.
Nothing connects -- "makes sense" in a literal way -- yet somehow it all makes perfect sense, the way things do in fairy tales. 

While young Andris jumps trains and steals guns and befriends strangers in strange cities, the clerk who manufactured a father for him is also stirred into action by the death of Andris's mother. (Or so it seems.
In the film's internal metaphysics, people know things they can't possibly know, and behave in ways that are plausible only by fairy-tale logic.) First, the clerk burns the phony records he's spent so many years creating; then he sets out to create a real human relationship in the real world. 

Both the little boy and the rather frail clerk are rebels, battling the bureaucracy in their own ways.
They do it the way all good fairy-tale heroes do, by seeking their fortunes and their hearts' desires. 

