.START 

Is vanilla ice cream poisonous?
How about bread?
Surely not.
But if California chose to strictly enforce Proposition 65, lobbied into law by Jane Fonda and her friends three years ago, those foods and most others would have warning labels.
The vanilla extract in ice cream contains ethyl alcohol, classified as a "reproductive toxicant." Bread, cereal, milk and other "fortified" foods contain Vitamin A, also a "reproductive toxicant." 

Since Prop 65, California has mandated warning signs in bars, on menus and on labels warning pregnant women of the risks posed by the ethyl alcohol in their cocktails or wine.
But the panel of scientists designated to interpret the law has been circumspect in pressing the law's extreme standards further. 

Says Jeffrey Nedelman, vice president for public affairs for the Grocery Manufacturers of America (GMA): "The scientists are not going to do anything dumb.
And the environmentalists know that should vanilla ice cream have to bear a warning, even the Bush administration could not sit by.
The feds would step in. 

"The same with Vitamin A. Vitamin A taken in large amounts is a very serious reproductive toxin.
The federal government requires companies to put vitamin A in products to be allowed to say they are fortified.
The amount used invokes the consumer-warning requirement of Prop 65.
So the state, in a Solomon-like decision, chose to exempt the amount required by the federal government. 

"There's nothing in the law that says they can do that.
The law says if you violate the safety standard you must provide a warning.
We haven't sued because it has provided us with relief.
The environmentalists haven't sued for the same reason as ethyl alcohol.
It would dramatically show the system to be the sham it is." 

Maybe there are some natural limits after all to food-scare politics.
It is doubtful that the Natural Resources Defense Council did itself a lot of good by raising the big apple scare alleging that Alar, a preservative coating, was a health threat.
After near-hysteria in the school-lunch program and big losses by apple growers, the federal government had to step in and reassure consumers that apples are safe to eat.
When scares are pushed beyond believability, people begin to wonder about motives, as they should. 

But that doesn't mean this brand of politics is dead or dying.
John Van de Kamp, California's attorney general, will probably use a proposition even broader and more draconian than Prop 65 in his bid for the California governorship next year.
Pressures for measures similar to Prop 65 exist in Massachusetts and some other states.
Public health generates virile politics, overwhelming rational counterarguments about the level of risk and the costs of risk reduction.
During the Prop 65 campaign, Jane Fonda produced a film showing the deformed children of mothers alleged to have been poisoned during pregnancy. 

Now, of course, in dealing with toxins, the amount of exposure is everything.
If a human ingested saccharin in an amount equivalent to that fed rats to force a warning label on saccharin products, he or she might get cancer.
But eating that much saccharin would be impossible.
Dioxins are a favorite environmentalist bugaboo and the paper industry is spending hundreds of millions of dollars to take traces of dioxin out of milk cartons.
But dioxins are everywhere and a recent reinvestigation of intense dioxin exposures caused by an accident in Seveso, Italy, 20 years ago showed no increased incidence of cancer. 

"In California, the birth-defect standard is 10 times more stringent than anything any scientific organization in the world has endorsed," says Mr. Nedelman. "The state government brought in as witnesses top Ph.
D.s from the academic community and people from Washington.
They found toxicologists, food scientists, risk assessors, and to a man they all said this is crazy, this makes no sense.
Hayden was there.
When his turn came he said, 'I've heard what you have to say, and my only reaction is that we in California want to be better. '" Tom Hayden, a state legislator, was the student activist of the '60s who married Jane Fonda.
They now are estranged. 

But, however unreasonable, the GMA has decided that given California's health consciousness and its susceptibilities to the politicking of movie stars, the next version of Prop 65 could succeed too.
The CEOs of the GMA's 130-member firms, which register some $280 billion in food sales annually, agreed this summer to ask for overriding federal regulation despite their federalism concerns.
This kind of response to state pressures is not new.
The auto industry, for example, has often asked for federal standards to avoid having to equip cars 50 different ways for 50 different states. 

The GMA decided it was getting licked in the states. "The idea of the Natural Resources Defense Council and the Sierra Club as tree-huggers and little ladies in blue hair and tennis shoes just couldn't be further from the truth," says Mr. Nedelman. "They are well-financed, highly paid, very skilled advocates.
Most of the environmental case law in this country has been litigated by the NRDC or the Sierra Club and they win.
They are very, very able." 

If court battles and legislative campaigns are too slow, there is always direct action, calling up supermarket chieftains and telling them that demonstrators will shortly be crowding into their stores if they don't take such and such product off the shelves.
Supermarket companies, operating as they do on high volume and narrow margins, are very susceptible to such threats and some capitulated quickly during the apple scare. 

"Supermarkets are happy places," says Mr. Nedelman. "People go to spend money and they don't want signs and they don't want pickets.
Alar was the first example of the change in the tactics from trying to make the system work to what some people call environmental blackmail." 

Perhaps the food industry itself has unconsciously erred by putting its own stress on health and safety, sometimes with not much more scientific basis than that employed by its enemies.
By one estimate nearly a third of food-industry advertising makes some kind of nutritional or health claim.
Shoppers can get, for example, decaffeinated instant tea without sugar, the same with sugar, tea with caffeine and sugar, low-sugar, etc., etc. Supermarket managers tear their hair at this proliferation, which accounts for why some are charging for shelf space.
Customers with concerns about health and safety have those concerns reinforced by the advertising bombardment, which sets them up for the next food scare. 

But, of course, the driving force in the food-scare movement consists of the hundreds of organizations that bill themselves as "environmentalist." In a way, they have become an industry as well.
Their ability to attract foundation grants and individual contributions rests on their ability to make news, and they often have allies in the press who suspend skepticism when they make claims, even wild ones.
They say they represent the "public interest" but they don't do so badly for their own interests, either.
Do we need an "environmentalism" industry?
Maybe.
But the answer would be more certain if the one we have exercised more quality control over its "science." 

