.START 

International Trading Group Ltd., the big commodity options trading firm accused by federal regulators of fraudulent sales practices, filed for bankruptcy-law protection and is going out of business, regulators said. 

The firm was sued in federal court in Los Angeles a month ago by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, which charged ITG used high-pressure sales practices and excessive commissions to defraud investors out of hundreds of millions of dollars.
ITG has denied the charges and officials at the San Mateo, Calif.-based firm wouldn't comment. 

Dennis Klejna, the CFTC's director of enforcement, said he was informed by ITG that it filed bankruptcy papers in San Francisco and that it plans to go out of business. "Our main interest was to put the firm out of business and we did it fairly quickly," he said. 

While it took only a month after the CFTC lawsuit for ITG to decide to disband, the federal agency and other commodity regulators had been investigating ITG for years, and the firm continued to chalk up big sales until recently. 

Auditors from the National Futures Association, the futures industry-funded regulatory group, will be at ITG's headquarters today to make sure customer accounts are either closed or transferred to another futures commission merchant in an orderly manner, according to Daniel J. Roth, NFA's general counsel. 

Monex Options Ltd., a Newport Beach, Calif., firm, said it agreed to accept about 1,700 accounts from ITG. Monex said it isn't buying any ITG assets, assuming any ITG liabilities or hiring any ITG brokers. 

It wasn't clear whether the CFTC, which has asked in its lawsuit that a receiver be appointed to handle ITG's affairs, would back the transfer of accounts to Monex or not.
Mr. Klejna wouldn't comment on that. 

ITG filed under Chapter 7 of the federal bankruptcy law for "commodity broker liquidation," listing assets as of Sept. 30 of $11.7 million and liabilities of $10.5 million. 

The CFTC plans to continue pressing its lawsuit against David and Bruce Beare, ITG's founders, in hopes of recovering funds for investors.
According to the CFTC charges, ITG customers lost $428 million from January 1984 to May 1989 while paying the firm commissions of $283 million.
ITG allegedly charged commissions as high as 40% on commodity options investments. 

In recent weeks, word had circulated among commodities industry officials that ITG was considering closing its doors rather than try to hang onto its business and wage a protracted battle with the CFTC at the same time.
Some ITG brokers had defected to other firms. 

Asked last week whether the firm planned to go out of business, a lawyer for ITG refused to comment. 

Founded by the Beare family in 1975, ITG became a sales juggernaut in the commodity options business, reaching a peak in 1987 of $282 million in options sales and $78.3 million in income from fees and commissions. 

The firm, according to one of its own filings in an unrelated lawsuit, had a highly sophisticated marketing operation.
It mailed out nearly 20 million pieces of direct-mail advertising during the past five years, which through various means of follow-up produced 13,979 customers.
ITG figured each new customer cost it $543.85 in marketing expenses. 

The firm spent millions of dollars on broadcast advertising as well, and had hundreds of brokers making calls to potential investors. 

