.START 

A high-school student pushes through the mob in front of the eight giant white pillars of the Greensville County Court House and thrusts a scrap of paper at the gubernatorial candidate.
It says: "This is to certify that Edwin Taylor was present at Doug Wilder's speech." 

Edwin Taylor, the 17-year-old student, is black, and so is Doug Wilder, the Democratic nominee for governor in Virginia.
They both stand only yards from the monument to Confederate war dead who fought "in defense of rights they believed sacred" at the center of this tiny town near the North Carolina border.
And then, in the autumn sunshine, the student brandishes the paper signed by Mr. Wilder. "It's special to me that we might have a black governor," he says. "If we have a black governor, we all have hope." 

Moments earlier, Mr. Wilder, Virginia's 58-year-old lieutenant governor and a strong contender to become the nation's first elected black governor, was speeding through southern Virginia, reflecting that here -- "right here," he emphasized, pointing out the van window to the fields ripe with peanuts -- the crops once were harvested by slaves. "That shows you the progress," he said. "Now let's move on." 

Mr. Wilder, engaged in a close and difficult race, has little time for symbolism these days.
But sometimes it seems as if his rival, former GOP Virginia Attorney General Marshall Coleman, is running against a symbol.
Virginia is the state that V.O. Key, in his classic study of the South four decades ago, called a "political museum piece" and where, only three decades ago, resistance to desegregation was so widespread that some schools closed for a year rather than permit blacks to sit with whites in the same classroom. 

"Virginia has changed irretrievably regardless of whether Wilder wins or loses," says Robert Hollsworth, a political scientist at Virginia Commonwealth University. "The very fact that he is a serious contender -- the fact that no one believes he can't win -- shows that this is a very different Virginia.
This is still a conservative state, but it's not a Southern segregationist state anymore." 

Race is seldom mentioned by either candidate.
But the prospect of a black man in the governor's mansion in Richmond has, far more than most politicians and commentators admit, skewed the political calculus of a state long ruled by tobacco gentry, textile barons of a dozen rural crossroads, a tiny band of editorialists that drew on the philosophy of John C. Calhoun, and Harry Byrd's political machine, which deliberately kept voter turnout small, white and easy to manipulate.
Even some local, lifetime Republican officials are siding with Mr. Wilder because they believe it is time for Virginia to have a black governor.
On the other hand, some whites who agree with Mr. Wilder on the issues -- he has sided with abortion-rights activists and has stressed economic development -- hesitate because of his race. 

"People don't talk about it every minute, but it's there," says Vincent Callahan, assistant minority leader of the House of Delegates and chairman of the Coleman campaign committee. "There are all these articles about racial overtones even when there aren't racial overtones.
It's a tough atmosphere in which to campaign.
You have to ignore the racial thing -- totally -- but it's always there." 

The result is frustration on both sides.
Mr. Wilder, who went to an elementary school with neither indoor plumbing nor white classmates or teachers and who didn't really know any whites until he took a summer job in his late teens running an elevator, wants to talk about job creation, capital improvements and low taxes.
Mr. Coleman, the only Republican elected Virginia attorney general in this century, wants to talk about his child-care initiatives, his anti-drug plan and his charges that the lieutenant governor is soft on crime and an "unapologetic, ardent liberal." 

Rep. Frank Wolf, a Republican from Virginia's Washington suburbs and a Coleman ally, pleads: "People are going to elect a governor, not a symbol." 

Mr. Wilder's advisers are convinced, however, that if the lieutenant governor prevails, it won't be on symbolism but on issues -- particularly abortion.
A solid majority of the state's voters oppose restrictions on abortion rights, according to recent polls, and even Republicans concede that Wilder television advertisements on that issue have been surprisingly potent. 

Polls show a very tight race.
They indicate that Mr. Coleman leads among whites, that Mr. Wilder will probably win almost all the black vote and that the undecideds -- the critical variable in Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley's unsuccessful 1982 effort in California to become the first elected black governor -- are whites. 

"Wilder has a more difficult constituency than Bradley because Wilder is running in a real Southern state where there are still remnants of resistance to the civil-rights movement," says Eddie Williams, the director of the Joint Center for Political Studies. "But if the lieutenant governorship is any example, Virginians can overcome that.
Race can break one way or the other, and it doesn't always have to break against the black candidate." 

Indeed, Virginia has a remarkable record of embracing black politicians.
Some cities -- including Richmond, Roanoke, Newport News, Portsmouth, Fredericksburg and Petersburg -- have elected black mayors in the past decade. "For blacks to win elections in white districts here is routine," says Bobby Scott, a black state senator from Newport News. "This is one of the places in the country where you can't predict the winner based on the candidate's race." 

Mr. Wilder's campaign strategists aren't focusing on the symbolism of his campaign, arguing, as consultant Frank Greer puts it, that the candidate is running as "a mainstream politician who has earned the right to be governor." Mr. Wilder is a moderate in the broad spectrum of American black politicians, not quite as eager to lean to the left as the Rev. Jesse Jackson nor to lean to the right as Mayor Bradley, both also Democrats. "He could be a key link between the two strains," says Robert Starks, a political scientist at the Northeastern Illinois University Center for Inner City Studies. 

Both Mr. Wilder and David Dinkins, the Democratic nominee seeking to become the first black mayor of New York, are engaged in landmark campaigns.
But Mr. Dinkins has a much more visible and vocal black constituency with more urgent demands for change.
Unlike Mr. Dinkins, who has sought Mr. Jackson's help, Mr. Wilder has tried to keep the civil-rights leader at a distance.
Mr. Jackson's emotional style would be incongruous in a campaign such as Mr. Wilder's, which is built around a low-key van tour taking the candidate to courthouses and community centers in some remote corners of the state. 

Though there is little evidence of increased black voter registration this fall, Mr. Wilder has energized many black voters. "Blacks know that having a black governor will be good for this state," says the Rev. Michael Porter, pastor of the Shiloh Baptist Church in Boykins, another southern Virginia community. "It will be sort of refreshing." 

But there remains resistance to electing a black man to the top office of this state, where only one out of every six residents is black. "On the issues," says Edwin Kinney, a white construction worker in Franklin, "I'm pretty close" to Mr. Wilder. "But I worry about race.
I wonder if he'll lean toward black folk." 

However, some white Republicans are backing Mr. Wilder because he is black.
Eugene Threadgill, until this spring the legal counsel of the Fairfax County Republican Committee, is supporting Mr. Wilder to send a signal both to the nation and to young blacks. "In a normal year, I would vote for the party candidate," he says. "But in this particular year, there's a bigger, overriding issue, the possibility of having a black governor." 

For his part, the 47-year-old Mr. Coleman, confident in a double-breasted suit and cranberry-and-gray rep tie, has the air of the modern Southern governor, with wing-tip shoes, a preppie mien and a progressive past.
He boasts that when he was elected attorney general, he got the largest black vote a Virginia Republican ever won. 

Nonetheless, Mr. Coleman's aides haven't determined how to blunt the racial symbolism of the campaign without descending into racial politics. "Coleman is in the position that all those favorable to Wilder or to the advancement of the black race can talk about how historic or fascinating it is that Wilder could be the first black governor," says Raymond Guest, the GOP leader in the House of Delegates. "Then if anyone says something less than joyful about that proposition, it becomes racist.
That's a very, very tough position." 

The two men were first thrown together in 1973, when J. Marshall Coleman and L. Douglas Wilder were selected as Virginia's two most promising young state lawmakers and were sent, together, to a national conference on state issues held by the Eagleton Institute of Rutgers University. 

Both men are veterans of bruising statewide campaigns.
Mr. Coleman gave Charles Robb, now the state's junior U.S. senator, a tough battle in the 1981 gubernatorial race before Mr. Robb won.
Mr. Wilder made a historic breakthrough when elected lieutenant governor in 1985. 

Both have moved from the liberalism of their youth, and both have been publicly rebuked by leading members of their own party.
Four years ago, former Republican Gov. Mills Godwin virtually vetoed Mr. Coleman's bid for the GOP lieutenant-governor nomination.
That same year, Gov. Robb, by then an unassailable senior statesman in Virginia, sent two long, blistering letters criticizing Mr. Wilder for slighting him and warning: "Your credibility with most key participants is disappearing rapidly, and many who have supported you in the past are no longer sure that you can be trusted or that you can still be an effective team player." 

Now, Mr. Coleman once again is in good odor with state Republicans, who were impressed with his grit in prevailing in a tough three-way GOP primary and are eager to end the intraparty strife that undermined their last two gubernatorial efforts.
Mr. Wilder has patched up his difficulties with Sen. Robb, who has made a television commercial and a series of campaign appearances on his behalf. 

And now, the two candidates are flinging against each other the charges of untrustworthiness once flung within their own parties. 

Mr. Coleman, campaigning at a time of drug-related crime in the District of Columbia and just a month after looting by black college students during the Labor Day Greekfest at Virginia Beach, has been stressing law-and-order themes.
He has been endorsed by the state's Fraternal Order of Police, which in 1985 backed Mr. Wilder for lieutenant governor.
One of Mr. Coleman's TV advertisements emphasized Mr. Wilder's 1977 state senate vote against the death penalty. (Mr.
Wilder now favors it for certain crimes.) 

"There's never been a person who's been more liberal in law-and-order in the modern history of Virginia," Mr. Coleman says in an interview while campaigning in northern Virginia. "He never supported the death penalty until he ran for statewide office." Such tactics trouble Mr. Wilder's supporters. "So much negative advertising, especially on law-and-order questions, doesn't let Doug tell a positive story, and it's especially important for him," says former Democratic Lt. Gov. Henry Howell, a populist defeated in the 1973 gubernatorial race. "I'm worried that law-and-order talk revives the racial overtones that Virginia is proud to have shed." 

In recent weeks, Mr. Wilder has taken the offensive.
He is focusing his attacks on abortion and airing an advertisement that, against the backdrop of Monticello, talks about the "strong tradition of freedom and individual rights -- rights that are now in danger in the race for governor." The TV ad concludes: "Doug Wilder believes the government shouldn't interfere in your right to choose." 

The Coleman camp, at first divided over whether to respond to the Wilder ad, then made a deliberate decision to ignore it.
In part, it wanted to let the abortion furor die down a month before the election rather than to fuel it late in the political season in a state where, a Washington Post poll showed last month, only a third of the voters want to restrict abortions to cases of rape, incest or to save a woman's life.
But the topic dominated a televised debate Monday night, and last week the National Abortion Action League weighed in with full-page newspaper ads warning: "Marshall Coleman believes that politicians should make a woman's most personal and private decisions for her." 

It is Virginia's peculiar destiny that this year's gubernatorial race should pit a black politician who says he had little involvement in the civil-rights movement of the 1960s against a white politician who boasts of striving, during his student years at the University of Virginia, to persuade Charlottesville restaurateurs to integrate. 

The public shows a willingness to view "this just as two candidates running for office," Mr. Coleman says as his car glides by a gleaming office complex in Arlington, just outside Washington.
A few days later, Mr. Wilder, stopping at roadside stores stocked with pepper-coated country hams and beef sticks, says he doesn't think that the progress of blacks will be stymied if he doesn't prevail next month. "If I don't win, it won't mean I was rejected" because of race, he says. "It would mean I didn't get enough votes." 

