.START 

Yields on certificates of deposits offered to consumers by major banks were little changed in the latest week, but those on large-deposit issues plummeted. 

The average one-year CD targeted at consumers gained 0.01 of a percentage point to 8.16%.
The average six-month issue was down the same amount at 8.12%, according to Banxquote Money Markets, a New York information service.
These consumer CDs usually have minimum deposit requirements below $50,000. 

"Consumer CDs from major banks are still resisting a fall," said Norberto Mehl, Banxquote's chairman.
He said the resistance is a result of "this very heavy rollover period" of October, when a huge amount of CDs is maturing and banks are trying to lure depositors with attractive yields.
The heavy rollover at this time of year is due to several factors including the anniversary of the deregulation of CD rates in 1983, the anniversary of the stock market crash in 1987 and the fact that it's six months after the April income tax filing deadline. 

Large-deposit CD yields, meanwhile, fell in the week ended yesterday to an average of 8.08% from 8.30% in the one-year maturity.
So-called jumbo CDs are those sold in denominations of more than $90,000.
The average six-month jumbo was off 0.19 of a percentage point to 8.10%. 

"Normally, when the jumbo CD yields fall so sharply, the banks will move quickly to cut their consumer CD yields" accordingly, Mr. Mehl said.
He said sales of consumer CDs have been "slow" so far in October, which could have helped keep yields up. 

Yields on CDs sold through broker-dealer networks were off even more sharply than the average yields on jumbo CDs, Banxquote said. 

Declines on jumbo and broker-dealer CDs "didn't signal anything but a fall {of rates} in the Treasury market," Mr. Mehl said.
In contrast to consumer CD yields, which banks generally keep at the same level for a week at a time, jumbo CD yields fluctuate daily to more accurately reflect prevailing interest rates.
In the week ended yesterday, the biggest cuts in jumbo CD yields -- as much as half of a percentage point -- were made at large New York and Texas banks. 

New U.S. Treasury bills, meanwhile, were auctioned yesterday with significantly lower yields.
The average six-month bill was sold with a yield of 8.01%, compared with 8.36% Oct. 2.
The recent changes in CD yields were made yesterday morning, well before the afternoon Treasury auction. 

The average bank money market deposit yield was 6.96%, compared with 6.97% a week earlier, Banxquote said. 

