.START 

American Airlines' parent AMR Corp., in one of its first overt moves to thwart a $7.54 billion takeover bid by Donald Trump, has sought help from Congress to delay any effort by the New York developer to oust the AMR board. 

AMR was pushing for a provision that would require prior approval by the Department of Transportation before a prospective buyer could begin a proxy fight to oust an airline's board, according to an aide to Sen. Wendell Ford (D., Ky).
Sen. Ford is chairman of the Aviation subcommittee of the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee. 

The senator's aide said AMR offered a version of such legislation, but that Sen. Ford chose to stick with his own bill.
The bill, already pending in the Senate, would strengthen the authority of the Transportation Department to review airline takeovers before they occur. 

"Speed is more important" than finetuning the legislation, said the staffer. "People have just had enough" of the takeover bids that have swept the airline industry this year.
In June, Northwest Airlines' parent NWA Inc. agreed to a $3.65 billion leveraged buy-out.
And last month, UAL Corp. agreed to a $6.79 billion bid by management and pilots. 

House sources say that Rep. James Oberstar (D., Minn.), chairman of the House Aviation Subcommittee, also is close to introducing legislation that would give the Transportation Department authority to approve or reject leveraged buy-outs of airlines. 

But the effective date remains uncertain; several lawmakers want the legislation to include the AMR deal but not the proposed takeover of UAL. UAL has support on Capitol Hill because of the employee participation in the buy-out proposal.
In addition, some lawmakers believe that transaction is too far along to now require approval. 

As it stands, the Ford bill could delay any takeover by Mr. Trump for several months while the Transportation Department reviews it.
AMR's idea for legislation would have imposed a similar delay on a procedure known as a consent solicitation, under which Mr. Trump could seek to oust the entire AMR board by a majority vote of shareholders. 

Dallas-based AMR has retained the Washington lobbying firm of Wexler, Reynolds and Fuller.
Partners include Anne Wexler, a former Carter Administration official, and Craig Fuller, who served as a top aide to George Bush during his vice presidency and presidential campaign. 

A member of the firm said it was involved in "strategic planning" for AMR, but wouldn't elaborate, referring questions about proposed legislation to Sen. Ford's staff. 

AMR declined to comment on its lobbying effort.
The threat of a consent solicitation has emerged as one of the airline's main weaknesses in the early stages of its battle against Mr. Trump. 

The prospect of AMR waging a vigorous battle against Mr. Trump on several fronts, including Washington, contributed to a decline in its stock price to a level even further from the $120 a share he announced in his bid. 

AMR stock fell $3.375 to $101.375 a share in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, in its first decline since Mr. Trump announced his bid Oct. 5.
Volume was 1.7 million shares.
AMR shares had risen in three previous trading days. 

The drop reflected reports of the legislative activity, as well as airline fare cuts and a forecast of lower-than-expected earnings at USAir Group Inc., and lack of any evident progress by Mr. Trump in lining up financing for his bid. 

Mr. Trump's own attention was diverted at midafternoon yesterday by the death of three of his casino executives in the crash of a chartered helicopter en route to Atlantic City. "This is not a good day here," said one aide to Mr. Trump. 

One AMR shareholder who sold the last of his stock Monday was John Neff, manager of the Vanguard Windsor Fund, the second largest U.S. stock mutual fund with $8.8 billion in assets.
The fund had held more than three million AMR shares earlier this year. 

Mr. Neff cited the risks that Mr. Trump might not be serious about the bid, or might have trouble obtaining financing in a weak junk-bond market.
He also warned that if Mr. Trump couldn't improve on running the airline, "his margin for error's kind of slight" on the $6 billion of debt needed to acquire AMR. 

Laurie McGinley in Washington contributed to this article. 

