.START 

Many of the best commodity trading advisers in the business are having a tough year making the kind of money to which their investors have become accustomed.
August was particularly dismal for some of these futures-market superstars. 

And while astute commodity-market investors don't expect a smooth elevator ride to riches, that doesn't help investors who were attracted by these advisers' outstanding track records.
Their average annual returns had approached 100% in some cases, but now returns are vastly shrunken or nonexistent. 

Take SJO Inc.
The Chicago firm roughly doubled its investors' money annually for the four years ended Aug. 30.
But in the 12 months through August, SJO's return was minus 10%, and in August alone it was down 20%. 

And many of SJO's investors are mad.
Gary Sherman, the firm's president, says SJO has lost about 20% of its capital as a result of investor withdrawals in recent months.
He doesn't try to dissuade investors from pulling out, he says, except that "I point out that the pros always come back and that we are pros." 

The other pros are feeling performance pinches, too.
Half of the 14 top commodity trading advisers selected by consultant Barclay Trading Group together had investment losses of 6% or more in August, and three had losses of at least 20%.
The collective returns of the 14 traders in the year ended Aug. 30 shrank to roughly a third the size of their average annual compounded gains over the past four years. 

What went wrong?
Sol Waksman, president of Barclay Trading Group, says, "Most of these traders are trend-followers, and they always encounter such periods." 

Trend-following traders attempt to spot a trend in commodity prices.
If they think a commodity is headed up, they will buy futures contracts (hoping to sell them at a price greater than what they paid for them).
If they think a commodity is about to plunge, they will sell futures contracts (looking to buy them back at a lower price). 

But the trend followers do poorly when a market appears to start a trend, then heads in the opposite direction after a few days.
Over the past year such choppy markets have been the rule, rather than the exception, several of the advisers say. 

Paul Tudor Jones, one of the biggest and most successful commodity advisers, says August was probably one of the worst months for trend followers since he has been in the business. "I think the largest amount of money to be made is in trend-following," he says, "but sometimes it pays to be a contrarian.
That's what we did in August." He made a 10.4% return that month. 

Richard Luna of Denver says that people like himself who raise money for commodity advisers are currently unable to find U.S. investors willing to put money into the markets.
He says, "I'm afraid the public is going to say: 'The CTAs don't know where these markets are going, so why am I giving them my money? ' " 

He thinks that many investors will retreat to the safety of Treasury bills or some other investment that doesn't cause heart palpitations.
However, Mr. Luna says it is a bit easier to locate people overseas willing to invest with commodity advisers. 

These have been tough times even for advisers who trade on fundamentals, shunning trends and studying such basic market factors as supply and demand.
Agricultural markets, for example, have been particularly choppy, with prices falling for about a year. 

"Fundamentalists find it easier to make money in bull markets, but we have been in a prolonged bear market in the agriculturals since the summer of 1988's price run-up in the grains," says Charles M. Wilson, a Memphis, Tenn., commodity adviser who has about $75 million under management.
Mr. Wilson has an average four-year annual compound return of more than 40%, but his accounts are down 22.3% for the 12 months ended in August. 

Barclay Trading, which compiles the list of 14 top trading gurus, is a Fairfield, Iowa, consultant to investors selecting commodity trading advisers.
To be considered for its cream-of-the-crop list, shown in the table accompanying this article, an adviser must have at least $5 million under management and have a trading record that extends back to 

The average investment loss for all 14 superstar traders was 6.4% in August.
That was a bit worse than the average 5.3% investment loss for 123 advisers tracked by the Barclay CTA Index. 

Barclay's Mr. Waksman observes that the same 14 top trading advisers' performances in 1987 and 1988 exceeded their long-term track records, just the opposite of what happened in the most recent 12 months.
The 14 top advisers had an average return in 1987 of 107.6% and in 1988 of 74.7%. 

Not every trader has taken a bath in recent months.
Avoiding the agricultural markets helped Edwin Miller, founder of Elm Financial Corp. in Dallas, post only a 1.4% decline in August, while gaining 49.3% in the 12 months ended that month. 

Mr. Miller says part of his success is due to trading exclusively for commodity funds and pools and no longer managing individual private accounts.
He says individual investors are constantly calling into question the advisers' abilities and wanting to decrease or increase the amount of money in their accounts. "Under those circumstances, you cannot do what you are hired to do," he says. 

paid small or no commissions and no management fees through first quarter of 1988. more than four years.
The 12-month, four-year and August numbers are estimates. 

