.START 

McDonnell Douglas Corp. said it will build a new family of two-engine, mid-range airliners, but without the propfan engines that the company has touted as a "step in aviation history." 

The new commercial transport series, to be dubbed MD-90, would initially have versions seating 114 or 153 passengers and, perhaps by the mid-1990s, a 180-seat model.
All would be powered by turbofan engines made by International Aero Engines, a consortium.
The new aircraft, essentially a higher-technology variation of the current MD-80 series, will be built on the same production line here, officials of the Douglas Aircraft unit said at a news conference. 

Launch of the MD-90 series is planned for 1990, with delivery to begin in 1994. 

The decision to shelve the propfan -- after a four-year investment of more than $100 million in development, some of it coming from partner General Electric Co. -- came after Douglas received a chilly reception from potential airline customers earlier this year. "Our customers have indicated to us they're not interested" in the propfan, which combines qualities of jet and propeller engines and promises sharply higher fuel efficiency, said Walter J. Orlowski, general manager for the MD90 program. 

Despite the fact that the propfan is at least 35% more fuel efficient than existing engines, Mr. Orlowski said airlines were reluctant to subscribe to a revolutionary engine program, especially at projected prices of about $4 million each that would be about 40% more expensive than the engine powering the MD-80. 

"They said, 'As long as fuel prices remain flat, we're not willing to pay a premium, '" Mr. Orlowski said.
Development of the propfan has now been put into an "advanced engineering and research phase," with only a "small level of activity devoted to it," and the company has no near-term plans to employ the technology, he added. 

The shelving of propfan work by the Douglas unit of St. Louis-based McDonnell didn't surprise analysts, some of whom said that even without a formal announcement the propfan had been set aside months ago because of projected high initial cost and maintenance requirements. 

"They really had no choice," said Bill Deatherage, an analyst with New York-based Dean Witter Reynolds.
The MD-80s are reaching obsolesence, he said, and are powered by engines noisier and less fuel-efficient than those on the new Boeing Co. 737s and 757s. 

"It's just another derivative of the MD-80," said Steve Binder of Bear Stearns & Co., New York. "It helps them to upgrade the MD-80 market to a market that needs more range, greater seating capacity and better fuel efficiency." 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, McDonnell Douglas shares closed at $71, down 50 cents. 

The V-2500 turbofan engine, certified last year and in use already on the Airbus Industrie A-320 jetliner, was developed by a consortium of United Technologies Corp. 's Pratt & Whitney unit, Rolls-Royce Ltd. of Britain, the Fiat Aviazione unit of Fiat S.p.
A. of Italy, Motoren-und Turbinen Union Munchen G.m.b.
H. of West Germany and Japanese Aero Engines.
It is said to be quieter than any engine in its class, but less fuel-efficient than the propfan GE and other engine manufacturers have been developing.
Douglas officials declined to compare the fuel efficiency of the two. 

Turbofan engines suck air in front and force it out the rear, with blades that whirl inside the engine housing and add to the thrust.
The more air that can bypass the engine core by circulating through the fan blades, the greater the efficiency.
The propfan, also known as the ultra high bypass engine, increases the amount of bypassing air by featuring rows of long, curved blades jutting from the engine's rear. 

Seattle-based Boeing, the world's largest builder of jetliners and one-time advocate of propfans for the early 1990s, also has put its propfan program on the back burner, in late 1987, in favor of planes with more-conventional engines.
Boeing, however, had been planning to develop an all-new airliner to be powered by the engines.
Douglas' plan had involved using the new engines on models derived from existing MD-80s.
Douglas, in fact, has used the potential for conversion of MD-80s to propfan technology as a selling point to snatch airline orders from Boeing. 

The ability to produce the new MD-90 with turbofan engines on the MD-80s' assembly line seems to have been a major factor behind the Douglas propfan decision.
Douglas will continue to produce the MD-80 series of aircraft, one of the most successful it has ever produced, as it adds MD-90 production. 

The MD-90s will employ a "modular" production approach, Douglas said, and will feature a new electrical generating system, new pylons for mounting engines to the rear of the frame, and an updated flight deck.
But other parts of the aircraft fuselage will be interchangable with the MD-80. 

By adopting the new modular approach, the company hopes to avoid the delivery delays it experienced when it introduced the MD-80 in 1980 as successor to the DC-9, which it phased out in 1982.
As of Oct. 1, McDonnell had delivered 649 MD-80s, had firm orders for 435 more and commitments for an additional 479 of the aircraft. 

In February, McDonnell began a top-to-bottom management reorganization at Douglas to help it recover after if fell far behind in its delivery schedule, and to avoid quality control problems.
The company said it expects to crank up the MD-90 program alongside the MD-80 without any growth in the work force beyond the current 17,600. 

Jeff Rowe contributed to this article. 

