.START 

LIN BROADCASTING received a revised takeover offer from McCaw Cellular, challenging LIN's agreement to merge its cellular telephone operations with BellSouth.
McCaw offered to pay $125 a share to gain 50.3% of LIN and to buy the remaining shares by 1994.
The new terms are meant to appease institutional shareholders who want to remain owners of cellular stocks. 

McDonnell Douglas said it will build a new family of two-engine, midrange airliners, but without the so-called propfan engines it has touted in the past.
The company said customers weren't willing to pay extra for the more fuel-efficient engines. 

Procter & Gamble's chairman and chief executive, John Smale, is retiring earlier than expected.
In another surprise, his successor will be Edwin Artzt, who was the architect of the company's turnaround overseas. 

MGM/UA Communications terminated its $1.5 billion agreement to be acquired by Qintex Australia.
MGM also sued the company, charging it with breach of contract and fraud. 

Saatchi & Saatchi's biggest holder has been approached by one or more parties interested in "restructuring transactions," the first sign potential suitors are stalking the ad giant. 

The dollar surged and the stock and bond market rallies fizzled after Fed Chairman Greenspan indicated the central bank won't lower interest rates to halt the currency's run-up. 

The thrift-rescue law has created such a complex bureaucracy that costs and delays appear to be growing.
The new law also makes it more difficult and expensive for banks and thrifts to get legal advice. 

Northwest Airlines is expected to announce soon that it will order up to 90 jets from Boeing.
The order, with a potential value of $5 billion, is a blow to European jet maker Airbus. 

MCI Communications turned up the heat in the telephone wars by suing AT&T for allegedly false and deceptive advertising claims.
AT&T said it is planning a countersuit. 

The auto industry has won the support of key lawmakers for a substantial weakening of a proposed requirement that Detroit produce and sell cars that can run on alternate fuels. 

American Air's parent has sought help from Congress to delay any effort by developer Donald Trump to oust the carrier's board. 

Telerate said an independent panel rejected as inadequate Dow Jones's $18-a-share tender offer and suggested the two companies hold talks. 

The semiconductor industry's leading indicator slipped in September to a four-year low, reflecting inventory cutbacks and falling chip prices. 

Markets -- 

Stocks: Volume 147,560,000 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 2785.33, off 6.08; transportation 1505.87, off 12.62; utilities 219.50, up 0.37. 

Bonds: Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3378.46, up 

Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 129.15, off 0.62; spot index 128.41, off 0.90. 

Dollar: 144.55 yen, up 1.75; 1.9080 marks, up 0.0205. 

