.START 

The semiconductor industry's leading indicator slipped in September to its lowest level since 1985, reflecting inventory cutbacks, falling chip prices and generally sluggish electronics markets. 

But analysts say the indicator is skewed by plummeting prices for certain memory chips that don't affect all chip makers. "There is less in the weak book-to-bill ratio than meets the eye," said analyst Eli Sayegh of S.G. Warburg & Co. 

The Semiconductor Industry Association, based in Cupertino, Calif., said the socalled book-to-bill ratio for September was 0.90 to 1, down from 0.94 in August.
Both figures are preliminary.
A 0.90 rate means that for every $100 of products shipped, or billed, chip makers received $90 in new orders, or bookings. 

The 0.90 figure, which was lower than most analysts expected, bespeaks a continuing slump in the chip industry.
Except for August, when the ratio rose to 0.94 from July's 0.92, the index has fallen or been unchanged every month since February, when it hit 1.07.
September's 0.90 figure is the lowest since November 1985, when the rate was 0.89.
And most analysts expect a fundamentally weak electronics industry to keep growth in chip sales flat for the rest of the year and much of next year. 

The big factor dragging down September's ratio was falling prices for standard memory chips, especially dynamic random-access memories, said analyst Daniel L. Klesken at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. Average prices for one-megabit DRAMs have fallen to about $12 from $18 early in the year, he said, with spot prices as low as $8.
Such price cuts drag down the book-to-bill ratio, he said, because "you're shipping at last month's prices but you're booking at this month's prices." 

But few U.S. makers produce the chips, and other products aren't so bad off.
Last month Texas Instruments Inc. said that although its markets were softening and prices were falling for memory chips, certain logic chips were in short supply.
Despite a sluggish market, Texas Instrument said its capital spending this year will exceed by about 5% the previously estimated $800 million. 

Companies with little exposure to DRAMs are better off than the new September chip data suggest.
W.J. Sanders III, chairman and chief exeuctive officer of Advanced Micro Devices Inc., announced yesterday "essentially flat results in a period of generally weak demand for semiconductors," partly because the company doesn't make DRAMs. "Declining prices for DRAMs," Mr. Sanders said, "will most likely be the largest contributor to a modest industry slowdown." 

Semiconductor billings in September were $1.45 billion, 17% higher than August's $1.24 billion and 13% above the year-earlier period.
Average monthly orders for the three months ended Sept. 30 were $1.15 billion, down 0.2% from August's figure and 1.4% below the year-earlier figure. 

Orders were also down because a surfeit of chips, combined with economic uncertainty, is encouraging computer makers and other chip buyers to cut inventories to the bone.
Average inventories for some chips are as low as four weeks' supply, according to the association, down from a peak of 16 weeks last year when chips were in short supply. 

