.START 

Procter & Gamble Co. stunned shareholders and Wall Street yesterday with two surprise announcements: the departure of its widely regarded chairman and the appointment of an unexpected successor. 

Not only is chairman and chief executive officer John G. Smale retiring early, but his successor isn't P&G's president, John E. Pepper, generally considered the heir apparent. 

Instead, the consumer-products giant named Edwin L. Artzt as chairman and chief executive.
Currently vice chairman, Mr. Artzt was the architect of the company's turnaround in the international market. 

"I'm surprised," said Bonita Austin, an analyst with Wertheim Schroder & Co. "I've always been told that Pepper is the man." 

And as if these top changes weren't enough of a surprise, P&G also announced that one of the executives overseeing the company's highly-touted olestra fat substitute has decided to leave for personal reasons. 

Separately, P&G announced that it boosted its quarterly dividend to 90 cents a share, from 80 cents, and approved a 2-for-1 stock split. 

While the naming of Mr. Artzt surprised some on Wall Street, it apparently makes perfect sense within the company, where both Messrs.
Artzt and Pepper were considered to be on equal footing. 

P&G watchers speculated that Mr. Artzt, 59 years old, is being rewarded for his role in reviving the moribund overseas operations.
Moreover, Mr. Pepper is only 51 and will assume responsibility for the international operations, relinquishing all U.S. duties except for P&G's Norwich unit.
That will broaden his foreign experience before he moves, as expected, into the top posts in a few years, observers say. 

"Pepper is still the No. 1 heir apparent," says Hugh Zurkuhlen, analyst with Salomon Brothers in New York.
And because he is viewed as such, many don't expect him to feel slighted and abandon P&G.
Mr. Pepper began his career at P&G, a company that instills loyalty and advocates a logical chain of promotions. 

Indeed, Jay Freedman, an analyst with Kidder Peabody, says P&G has "set up an orderly succession." 

Ms. Austin, however, says that Mr. Pepper can't help but be disappointed.
When named P&G president three years ago, it was assumed his next step would be into the chairman's office, following the path of Mr. Smale. "It certainly is a slap in the face," Ms. Austin said. 

Mr. Pepper couldn't be reached for comment.
However, Mr. Artzt dismissed any speculation that Mr. Pepper was bypassed. 

"That's really not fair to John Pepper," he said in an interview. "If John and I were of the same generation there would be some basis for speculation, but we're not.
John is still a very young guy with a hell of a future." 

Mr. Artzt said he was "honored to be chosen and, let's face it, if I'm ever going to run the company, now is the time to do it." 

Still, the move does mark an earlier-than-expected departure for Mr. Smale, who is credited with strengthening the company through $4 billion of acquisitions that opened new markets such as health care.
Mr. Smale, who is in good health, said he chose to leave because he believes "it's time to turn this responsibility over to someone else." 

Apparently, Wall Street was sufficiently concerned about Mr. Smale's early departure that the company's common closed off, despite the dividend boost and stock split.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, P&G closed at $130.625, down 87.5 cents. 

The charismatic Mr. Artzt, who began his career in P&G's advertising department, will assume the top posts in January and begin preparing the company for the 1990s.
One immediate task will be incorporating the recently acquired Noxell Corp., which marks P&G's first foray into the lucrative cosmetics business. 

But perhaps the largest challenge remains in his area of expertise -- international operations, from which P&G soon will derive more than 50% of its sales.
In each of the past two years, international earnings have soared 37%. 

One way Mr. Artzt is expected to stimulate growth overseas is by introducing P&G's health and beauty care products into new markets, such as Latin America and Pacific Rim countries.
That could prove difficult given that many countries consider such basic products as Vicks cough drops a drug requiring registration and local government approval. 

Indeed, Mr. Artzt noted that the company must "be better and faster" in marketing its products around the world. 

Likewise, in the U.S., Mr. Artzt, who is considered much more outgoing than the reserved Mr. Smale, has his work cut out for him.
He must revive the company's struggling food division, which incurred a loss of $14 million last year and is contending with disappointments from such products as Citrus Hill orange juice, still No.3 behind industry leaders Tropicana and Minute Maid.
One way he hopes to do so is by concentrating heavily on research and development.
But he sees the biggest opportunities in olestra, which is part of the food division.
Olestra is a fat substitute that would take the calories and fat out of fried foods.
It has yet to receive approval by the Food and Drug Administration; P&G had hoped to have the two-year-old product approved by the end of 1988. 

Mr. Artzt is undaunted by the unexpected exit of Charles A. Lieppe, vice president, edible oil products division, which includes olestra.
Mr. Lieppe will be succeeded by Walker J. Wallace, now general manager of olestra brands. 

"I think it would be a real mistake to read anything into his departure," said Mr. Artzt.
He added that Mr. Lieppe's decision to leave was purely personal and wouldn't affect olestra. 

Mr. Lieppe, who was considered a candidate for higher posts at P&G, wasn't available for comment. 

Mr. Artzt, who began his P&G career in 1953, made his mark by helping Mr. Smale salvage earlier company setbacks around the globe, including Japan. 

For instance, P&G entered Japan in 1972 with diapers and detergents, but within 10 years had piled up $200 million in losses.
Problems were many: Japanese customers are very discriminating, the local competition strong, and P&G's shapeless disposable diaper was clobbered by a more absorbent Japanese product.
Now, however, Japan is one of P&G's most profitable overseas operations. 

Mr. Artzt, after graduating from the University of Oregon, worked three full-time jobs at a newspaper, a television station and an advertising agency. "It was a real killer," he said, but noted that it helped him decide on a career in advertising, which led him to P&G. 

Mr. Smale, who joined P&G in 1952, remains a director and chairman of the board's executive committee.
During his tenure, he took P&G into new markets, largely by acquisitions.
Since 1980, annual sales have doubled to $21.4 billion. 

The increased dividend is payable on or after Nov. 15 to stock of record Oct. 20; the split is payable Nov. 17 to stock of record Oct. 20.
The number of authorized common shares is doubled to one billion. 

In related management changes, P&G elected three executive vice presidents to assume responsibility for its U.S. operations, reporting directly to Mr. Artzt. 

B. Jurgen Hintz and Durk I. Jager, both group vice presidents, will oversee the core businesses.
Mr. Hintz, 47, will oversee P&G's U.S. paper products, cellulose and chemicals, as well as the food and beverage unit.
Mr. Jager, 46, will be in charge of P&G's soap and detergents, as well as health and beauty care. 

Gerald V. Dirvin, 52, a senior vice president, was named executive vice president, overseeing sales, advertising, personnel, market research and other areas. 

