.START 

Stephen L. Carter's Sept. 13 editorial-page article "Racial Preferences?
So What?" candidly addressed a sad consequence of the racial-preference system in higher education.
There are, regrettably, other consequences of equal seriousness. 

While Harvard was eager to scrape Mr. Carter, and other blacks, from the bottom of the academic barrel, second- and third-tier schools would have fought just to get access to Harvard's barrel.
With elite schools such as Harvard and Yale siphoning off even mediocre black candidates and competing for them as if they were so many Nobel laureates, the lesser-rank institutions must reach down to even lower levels to meet quotas for black students. 

Once these students are ensconced in degree-granting programs, the same artificial pressures that ensured them space all but guarantees them a degree.
It is politically unacceptable for any post-graduate program to confront statistics that demonstrate that blacks disproportionately fail to complete the program. 

Professional schools and graduate programs might not be able to educate all these people properly, but the campus does know how to enable these people to become credentialized. 

Mr. Carter, whose subsequent success speaks for itself, has nothing to apologize for.
If there is any justice in affirmative action, examples such as his stand on the positive side of the ledger. 

Affirmative action has provided some blacks with professional degrees; it has not necessarily provided all of them with quality professional educations.
Where it has failed to do so, it has created a new class of black victims. 

Abraham H. Miller 

Bradley Resident Scholar 

Heritage Foundation 

Washington 

The very thought of the affirmative-action issue creates barriers in my psyche when relating to black colleagues. 

As a white man I say I want to be rid of racism in our society.
Yet my fear of the stigma I attach to prejudice tricks me into denying any racist inclinations I may have, leaving them unexplored.
Mr. Carter's reflections helped move me to insight and to a resolve to deal with the issue where it matters most: in myself.
Lawrence S. Toth 

Redford, Mich. 

The most insidious danger is the subliminal message sent to young black men and women.
So-called affirmative-action programs are, in reality, based upon the assumption that certain ethnic and racial groups are, for whatever reasons, inherently unable to compete effectively with certain other groups.
The message is crystal clear: You're not good enough to make it on your own. 

The long-range effects of this message are not to be underestimated.
Many studies have demonstrated the importance of self-image as it relates to achievement. 

Randy Young 

Santa Ana, Calif. 

What Mr. Carter fails to state is that, by and large, it is at the admission process where racial preference ends.
Many colleges and universities have difficulty in retaining students of color, so many of them relax admissions standards and then do nothing to assist those who are underprepared for the academic rigor.
Subsequently, these underprepared, racial-preference admissions either attend other schools that are less academically rigorous or they drop out. 

Those of us who do well in school are labeled by many of our white cohorts as "quotas." For the most part, the white students who label us as such have neither witnessed our ability to examine and discuss critical issues in the classroom nor observed our ability to solve complex problems in many different fields of study.
We are seen merely as products of affirmative-action quotas, not as real contributors to the development of new knowledge. 

I will admit some professors hold their students of color (particularly Hispanics and African-Americans) to a lower academic standard than that of white students.
These professors pass us along without really teaching us what we need to know to contribute to society.
They do this either because they believe our presence is merely to fulfill a quota (so it really doesn't matter if we get a good education), or they believe we are intellectually inferior to our white classmates.
To them I say, "Shame on you." These professors do us and this country a great disservice. 

Alma Clayton-Pedersen, M.Ed 

Vanderbilt University 

Nashville, Tenn. 

Mr. Carter highlights an anomaly of the law-school recruitment process.
He generously refers to an interviewer's questions of a law student as "inexplicable and inexcusable." A more accurate term may have been "incompetent." 

Most law firms assign recruitment haphazardly, to attorneys who are highly competent in law but often have no training in interviewing others. 

Hiring decisions, therefore, often result from first impressions and high grade averages.
This may well lead to selection of a clone who in time will be asking the same "inexplicable and inexcusable" questions of another generation of law students. 

Thomas E. Harvey 

Washington 

