.START 

Northwest Airlines is expected to announce as early as this week that it signed a contract for as many as 90 Boeing Co. jetliners.
The order, potentially valued at $5 billion, is a blow to Airbus Industrie, the European consortium that recently appeared to have gained a firm foothold with the carrier. 

An industry source said that officials at NWA Inc., Northwest Air's parent company, agreed to a pact that includes as many as 80 Boeing 757 planes, at least half of which are firm orders.
The remainder would be options.
The 186-seat 757 normally sells for $46 million to $52 million. 

Northwest also was said to be considering six firm orders and four options for new Boeing 747-400 jumbo jets that seat as many as 412 passengers.
Northwest paid an estimated $96 million each for 747s when they were first ordered in 1985.
Now, Boeing prices the 747-400, its most expensive jetliner, at $116 million to $136 million apiece. 

It wasn't known whether Northwest's new owners have given final approval to all details in the order, and an official of the carrier declined to comment.
Northwest has said previously that it would soon announce a major aircraft order. 

Industry sources also have said that Al Checchi, who led the investor group that recently bought NWA, has shown a strong preference for American-made aircraft.
It was Steven Rothmeier, Northwest's recently departed chairman, who had forged the carrier's recent link with Airbus. 

A Boeing spokesman declined to comment, saying the company doesn't ever talk in advance about the ordering plans of its customers.
So far this year, the Seattle-based concern -- now in the second week of a strike by machinists that threatens to paralyze production -- has taken orders for 742 aircraft valued at a record $39.36 billion. 

Industry analysts speculated that to win back Northwest's business, Boeing may have offered the carrier deep discounts on the jets.
The earliest deliveries wouldn't occur until 

The decision appears to be a setback for Airbus, which submitted a rival bid for 40 orders and 40 options on the new stretched version of the A-320, which is comparable in size to the 757. 

During the past several years, Northwest has stepped in the middle of trade controversies regarding subsidies Airbus receives from European governments, and it has ignored critics of Airbus's high-technology designs in deciding to buy planes from the manufacturer. 

Its relationship had been cementing since 1986, when Airbus snagged its first Northwest order, selling the carrier as many as 100 of its A-320-200 midsize jetliners in a transaction valued at $3.2 billion at the time.
Since then, Northwest has placed orders for A-330s and A-340s, longer-range, wider-body aircraft. 

Industry analysts said the latest Airbus proposal to sell a spin-off of the A-320, called A-321, would have complemented Northwest's previous orders.
Since June, the Minneapolis-based airline has received delivery of six A-320s. 

It appears Northwest was debating between the A-321 and 757 planes largely on how well the aircraft would fit into plans for expanded domestic service through the 1990s, said David Treitel, senior vice president at Simat, Hellisen and Eichner Inc., an airline consulting firm. 

What's more, the carrier plans to use its next order to replace existing aircraft, Mr. Treitel said. 

The 747-400 planes, which have an 8,000-mile range, are expected to be used to expand Northwest's Pacific routes.
The carrier already has five 747-400s in its fleet. 

In the latest order expected from Northwest, the long-range jetliners and 757s are likely to be equipped with engines manufactured by United Technologies Corp. 's Pratt & Whitney unit. 

Roy J. Harris Jr. in Los Angeles contributed to this article. 

