.START 

THE HIGH COURT ALLOWED use of a racketeering law against abortion foes. 

Turning away free-speech arguments, the Supreme Court let stand a verdict that 26 anti-abortion protesters violated the federal anti-racketeering law by repeatedly interfering with the operations of a Philadelphia abortion clinic.
The justices didn't issue an opinion about whether civil lawsuits against protesters are a proper use of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law.
But the court's action is likely to spur increased use of the RICO law by abortion clinics that face protests aimed at blocking their operations. 

Florida's legislature convened a special session on abortion that drew thousands of demonstrators.
Democratic leaders don't expect new curbs. 

South Africa's president announced that eight black political prisoners, including members of the outlawed African National Congress, would be freed soon.
Nelson Mandela isn't among them.
The group includes Walter Sisulu, who has served 26 years in prison after being jailed with Mandela for plotting to overthrow the government. 

East German officials held an unprecedented meeting with opposition leaders in Dresden to discuss demands for democratic freedoms, and similar talks were expected in Leipzig.
While the officials hinted at a possible compromise to avert further unrest, hard-line Communist rulers in East Berlin renewed their criticism of the protesters. 

A federal judge in Washington refused to block NASA's launch of the space shuttle Atlantis and its plutonium-powered Galileo space probe, which anti-nuclear activists had argued posed an unacceptable risk.
The space agency, however, postponed tomorrow's scheduled liftoff because of a problem with one of the shuttle's main engines. 

Bush accepted a call for a summit with the presidents of Bolivia, Colombia and Peru to discuss ways to combat the multibillion-dollar cocaine trade.
The Andean leaders, who held a one-day meeting in the Peruvian city of Ica in an attempt to devise a common anti-drug strategy, have proposed that the summit be held within 90 days. 

The Bush administration said 42 Panamanians, including some of the military forces involved in last week's failed coup, have been flown to Miami and invited to seek political asylum.
In Caracas, Venezuela's President Perez accused Noriega's regime of executing rebel officers imprisoned after the attempted insurrection. 

Secretary of State Baker has proposed a meeting with the foreign ministers of Egypt and Israel in the next two weeks in an attempt to revive stalled Mideast peace efforts.
Israeli officials said Baker had drafted a five-point plan aimed at overcoming obstacles to starting Israeli-Palestinian talks on elections in the occupied territories. 

Syrian-backed Moslems withdrew from an Arab League cease-fire panel in Lebanon after a Moslem military officer was killed on the line dividing Beirut's Christian and Moslem sectors.
The pullout was considered a serious setback to moves aimed at consolidating a truce that began Sept. 23. 

The White House said the Soviet Union is continuing to provide "vast amounts" of arms and other support to the Afghan government, and it seems likely that Soviet advisers still are involved in the fighting against anti-Kabul rebels.
Moscow said its last troops left Afghanistan in February. 

Pope John Paul II celebrated Mass in the ancient Javanese city of Jogjakarta, the heartland of Indonesia's Hindu, Moslem and Buddhist culture.
The pontiff, on an Asian tour, later called on officials in Jakarta to protect religious freedom in the mostly Islamic nation, where there have been signs of pressure on the Roman Catholic minority. 

Poland's government warned that Poles face a tough winter with blackouts, food shortages and rising prices.
The Solidarityled regime said it would issue food stamps to the poor.
The state electric industry, meanwhile, said government-owned enterprises owe it more than $39 million.
It threatened to withhold service unless paid. 

Southern African nations expressed opposition to a complete halt to the trade in ivory, saying a ban would decrease their income.
The remarks came during an international conference in Switzerland aimed at saving the threatened African elephant. 

Soviet Premier Ryzhkov asked the legislature to postpone a proposed freeze on the prices of consumer goods.
He said the government needed at least "10 days" to complete a comprehensive economic package. 

