.START 

The U.S. called a European Community decision to limit the role of foreigners in its broadcasting industry "blatantly protectionist and unjustifiable," and said it would seek international arbitration. 

The EC on Oct. 3 called on its television broadcasters to reserve a majority of their programming time for works of "European origin." Yesterday, in a sharply worded statement, U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills said she is "deeply disturbed" that the EC adopted the local-content requirement.
She said the directive discriminates against U.S. and other non-EC movie and television producers. 

The U.S. believes the EC policy "is inconsistent with the Community's obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade," Mrs. Hills said, adding that she is initiating "prompt action in that forum." The GATT is the Geneva-based international trade organization set up to reduce trade barriers and arbitrate trade disputes. 

The Bush administration has made current talks designed to produce a new overall GATT agreement the cornerstone of its trade policy, which it says aims "to open markets and expand trade." U.S. officials are growing increasingly concerned that the Europeans are placing a greater priority on the planned unification of their own market by 1992, and on the changes going on in Eastern Europe, than they are on the current round of GATT negotiations. 

In recent weeks, both Mrs. Hills and Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher have expressed concern about the EC's use of protectionist measures, such as regulations governing local content. 

U.S. moviemakers and broadcasters reacted strongly to the EC directive when it was first adopted.
The EC is one of the fastest expanding markets for the American broadcasting industry. 

Mrs. Hills, who is on an official visit to South Korea and Japan, said in her statement released here that the U.S. also is concerned by news reports that the EC is "pledging hundreds of millions of dollars in subsidies to European producers and writers." The EC's trading partners "can't be expected to view the single (EC) market process as trade-liberalizing when it produces such an obviously protectionist initiative," Mrs. Hills added. 

U.S. politicians are especially upset by the EC move.
Rep. Sam Gibbons (D., Fla.), chairman of the House Ways and Means subcommittee on trade, last week introduced a resolution protesting the action and threatening possible trade retaliation under the tough section 301 of the 1988 trade act. 

Bush administration officials are no less dismayed. "If the U.S. did this, it would be called 'isolationism' or 'fortress America'" said Deputy U.S. Trade Representative Julius Katz. 

The EC has maintained it needs the broadcasting directive to protect European culture.
Mrs. Hills described this argument as "fallacious," and said the local-content provision "restricts trade and freedom of choice for consumers." 

"We don't understand why the Spanish culture is more protected by a film produced in Germany by 'Europeans' than by a Spanish film of Mexican origin," she said, "Or why the English culture is promoted more by a film produced in France by 'Europeans' than by a film of New Zealand origin." 

The acting head of the EC delegation in Washington, Corrado Perzio-Biroli, issued a statement calling Mrs. Hills's comments "excessive." The directive, he said, "was passed by a large majority of member states and it is EC law." Mr. Perzio-Biroli said the new directive "provides for the liberalization of the European broadcasting sector . . . and is fully compatible with international trade rules." 

