.START 

The dollar bolted out of its narrow trading range yesterday, buoyed by comments from Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan. 

The foreign exchange market bid the dollar above the 1.90-mark level for the first time since late September, when the Group of Seven industrialized nations vowed to drive the U.S. currency lower.
Traders appeared to ignore rumors that the Fed had intervened in the market. 

Mr. Greenspan, speaking to U.S. and Soviet officials at the U.S. Ambassador's residence in Moscow, warned that in setting monetary policy "inordinate attention to some types of intermediate targets," such as the immediate level of exchange rates or interest rates, "may not promote the attainment of long-term goals." 

Some dealers viewed the statements as evidence the U.S. is at odds with the Group of Seven's methods of pushing the dollar lower.
The Group of Seven, which includes the U.S., West Germany, Japan, France, Britain, Italy and Canada, recently has sold dollars in coordinated foreign exchange market operations. 

The conspicuous absence of the central banks from yesterday's trading reinforced the view that some central banks may now recognize they can't keep the dollar pinned down through unrelenting intervention. "At some point (the central banks) have to question their own effectiveness," said Tom Trettien of Banque Paribas in New York.
He said the banks may have lost a "golden opportunity" by not intervening more aggressively last week when many European nations raised key interest rates. 

Other analysts noted that Mr. Greenspan's comments helped the market shrug off fears the Fed planned to ease U.S. interest rates soon.
Since last week's round of credit-tightening by West Germany and other European nations, the market has been rife with speculation that the Fed will soon ease rates. 

The execution of matched sale-purchases by the Fed, which drain reserves from the banking system, also helped quell concern the Fed would relax rates immediately. 

In late New York trading, the dollar was quoted at 1.9080 marks, up from 1.8875 marks late Monday.
The U.S. currency was changing hands at 144.55 yen, up from 142.80 yen.
Sterling was trading at $1.5530, down from $1.5775. 

In Tokyo Wednesday, the dollar opened for trading at 144.90 yen, up from Monday's Tokyo close of 142.23 yen. 

With the Tokyo market closed Tuesday for a national holiday, early action focused on sterling's continued slide in Europe. 

The pound continued to sag despite four interventions by the Bank of England aimed at bolstering the beleaguered British currency. 

According to one New York trader, the Bank of England intervened in an effort to slow the pound's downward momentum and keep trading orderly.
But he said the British central bank has no illusions that it can reverse the pound's fall. 

Prime Minister Thatcher's Conservative Party annual conference got under way Tuesday.
Mrs. Thatcher told a preconference crowd Monday night that "the economy is stronger than ever, living standards are higher than ever." Some traders ventured that the conference could help tip the scales back in the pound's favor, but others predicted a continued sell-off in sterling. 

In U.S. dealings, the dollar opened slightly below Monday's levels but got a quick boost after Mr. Greenspan's comments were reported.
The dollar hit a peak of 1.9010 marks in about 10 minutes, slipping back temporarily before gaining the momentum to rise significantly above 1.90 marks. 

Some dealers were perplexed at the market's swift reaction to Mr. Greenspan's comments.
They credited the dollar's sharp gains to the currency's underlying firm tone and to the market's belief that monetary easing isn't on the horizon. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery fell $2.10 to $361 an ounce in moderate trading.
Estimated volume was 2.6 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Wednesday, gold was quoted at $361.44 an ounce. 

