.START 

McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. challenged the agreement between BellSouth Corp. and LIN Broadcasting Corp. to merge their cellular businesses by raising its $5.4 billion offer to buy LIN. 

McCaw offered to pay $125 a share for 22 million shares of LIN to get control of 50.3% of the New York-based cellular and broadcasting concern.
In addition, McCaw's revised tender offer would require McCaw to begin an auction process in July 1994 that would buy out remaining shareholders at a price per share roughly equivalent to what a third party might then have to pay for all of LIN. 

McCaw executives and the company's investment bankers, Morgan Stanley & Co. and Lazard Freres & Co., said the proposal is meant to appease institutional shareholders who want to remain owners of cellular stocks.
Many holders had objected to the McCaw cash tender offer of $110 a share for all of LIN because they believe cellular properties will be worth far more a few years from now. 

Analysts said the market appeared to value the McCaw offer for LIN at $113.25 a share, LIN's closing price yesterday, because McCaw is offering to buy only half of LIN's shares.
McCaw already owns about 5.1 million of LIN's 54 million shares outstanding.
LIN shares rose $3.375 in national over-the-counter trading yesterday on volume of 1.5 million shares. 

Estimates of the value of BellSouth's proposal vary depending on the value assigned to its cellular customer base, but many analysts cite a range of $95 to $110 a LIN share.
However, one analyst said the most compelling part of McCaw's bid is its offer to buy the rest of LIN in five years at a price that includes a control premium and numerous safeguards for the minority shareholders. 

John Bauer, an analyst with Kidder, Peabody & Co., said he believed McCaw's offer is just the start of an auction for LIN. McCaw valued its offer at $293 for each of LIN's potential customers, only $43 more than what cellular properties in Memphis, Tenn., recently sold for, he said.
LIN is perceived as having cellular properties worth more than those in small cities such as Memphis because it has interests in large, growing markets such as New York, Los Angeles and Houston. 

"People who assume this is the end {of the auction for LIN} are naive," said Mr. Bauer.
McCaw Chairman Craig McCaw "is playing hardball with BellSouth." 

BellSouth and LIN declined to comment.
But the McCaw proposal clearly will force the two companies to revise their agreement.
Under the BellSouth/LIN agreement, LIN would pay shareholders a $20-a-share dividend, spin off its broadcasting properties and merge its cellular properties with those of BellSouth.
Until yesterday, institutional holders had preferred that transaction to McCaw's all-cash deal because they want to continue to own equity in cellular properties currently owned by LIN. 

But analysts said that for BellSouth to continue in the running, it must increase its offer.
That would probably result in a dilution to BellSouth's earnings, which the Atlanta-based Bell company has in the past been very reluctant to accept. 

McCaw's offer "puts a lot of pressure on BellSouth to come up with a better package and still protect its dividend and its investment-grade bond rating," said Kenneth Leon, an analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co.
Although BellSouth will be under pressure to up the ante, said Piper Jaffray analyst Thomas Friedberg, doing so may be difficult because "their shareholder base is a lot more conservative than people who play cellular stocks." 

Yesterday's offer by McCaw was the Kirkland, Wash., company's second attempt to force BellSouth to add value to its LIN agreement and dilute its earnings.
Last month, McCaw agreed to buy for $1.9 billion the share of the New York cellular market owned by Metromedia Co.
Because LIN is Metromedia's partner in New York, LIN has right of first refusal on the property.
But exercising that right would make the BellSouth/LIN agreement more expensive. 

McCaw yesterday also tried to assuage critics who don't believe the company can finance its bold expansion in the cellular industry.
By offering cash for only half the LIN shares, McCaw has effectively reduced the amount of money it needs immediately. 

McCaw said it needs $4.8 billion to buy the 22 million LIN shares and to buy the Metromedia New York property.
It has $1.2 billion in cash and will get $1.3 billion from Contel Corp., the Atlanta company that has agreed to buy McCaw cellular properties in Alabama, Kentucky and Tennessee. 

McCaw said it has a letter from three of its banks, Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., Toronto-Dominion Bank and Provident National Bank, stating that they are "highly confident" of their ability to commit $4.5 billion in bank financing.
Additionally, McCaw has a "highly confident" letter from Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. that it can raise $2.5 billion for McCaw for its LIN and Metromedia deals. 

Analysts said they valued the current McCaw offer above the BellSouth agreement principally because of McCaw's commitment to value LIN shares it doesn't own in 1994.
Under terms of its offer, in July 1994, the three independent directors of LIN, who would represent minority shareholders, would hire appraisers to value LIN shares.
McCaw would also hire appraisers. 

Through a series of steps, the appraisers would fix a private value on the LIN shares as if all of LIN was to be sold to a third party.
McCaw would then have 45 days to decide if it would buy the remaining LIN shares at that price.
McCaw could pay cash, stock or debt securities.
Prior to the auction time, McCaw would be allowed to buy as much as 81% of LIN through open market transactions. 

If McCaw decides not to buy the rest of LIN, the entire company would be put up for sale, according to the offer. 

McCaw executives said it would initially nominate the three independent directors.
Mr. McCaw, the chairman, said McCaw would "seriously consider" nominating Donald A. Pels, LIN's president, as one of those directors. "We will look for ways to involve him in this," Mr. McCaw said. 

Assuming McCaw's offer is successful, McCaw executives said they intend to operate LIN and McCaw properties as one cellular network.
Certain transactions between the two companies would have to be approved by the directors representing minority shareholders.
But the companies could benefit through buying in bulk from cellular equipment makers or combining national sales forces. 

McCaw Ups the Ante For LIN 

*Pro-rated value of McCaw's offer for 22 million LIN shares, excluding LIN shares already owned by McCaw 

**McCaw plans to retain broadcast properties 

