.START 

Sun Microsystems Inc. sent a form letter to its 6,000 suppliers apologizing for failing to pay its bills on time. 

Late payment of bills is the latest problem to surface as a result of the desktop-computer maker's much publicized switch to a new system for providing its management with information. 

In June, Sun, based in Mountain View, Calif., disclosed that problems with its new computer system for getting information to management had resulted in lost customer orders and an inability to track inventory.
At the time, Scott McNealy, Sun's chief executive officer, said the firm's information system played "a significant part" in a slowdown of Sun's business, but that it was "screaming now." 

However, the letter, dated Sept. 13 and still being received by suppliers, blamed late payments on the faulty system. 

"I am aware of the problem and inconvenience this may have caused you and your company," wrote Terence Lenaghan, Sun's corporate controller. "I would also like to assure you that any delays that you might have experienced in receiving payments are in no way reflective of a deterioration of Sun's financial status." 

A spokeswoman for Sun said the company was late in sending out the letter and that it was paying suppliers on time now. "The letter really refers to a past period of time," said Carol Broadbent. 

Ms. Broadbent said that Sun "had extra-high payables at the end of June," but has since corrected the problem. 

In August, Sun acknowledged that the information system still hampered it, requiring the company to, among other things, finish some of its accounting work by hand.
Partly because of the problems, Sun reported a loss of $20.3 million on revenues of $431.2 million for its fourth quarter ended June 30. 

Mexico and its main foreign bankers have begun marketing the country's new debt-reduction package to creditor banks around the world-amid growing concern that the deal could collapse. 

The pessimism stems from worries that not enough banks will choose the new-money option to allow the deal to work and concern that the steering committee could fail to put together the crucial $1.2 billion short-term financing needed to bridge a shortfall on collateral for the deal's bond options. 

The Mexico deal, formally agreed to Sept. 13, covers $52.7 billion of the country's medium- and long-term commercial bank debt and offers banks three options.
They can swap their loans for 30-year bonds with a face value discounted by 35%, swap them for 30-year par bonds with 6.25% fixed interest rates or provide new money equal to 25% of their medium- and long-term exposure over four years. 

In a related development, a Japanese news service reported that Japan's Ministry of Finance will allow Japanese banks to take tax-free write-offs on losses on loans to Mexico if the banks participate in the Mexican government-bond exchange plan. 

South Korea will consider a U.S. demand to open its market for high-grade foreign beef as a first step toward lifting all restrictions on beef imports, a South Korean government official said.
U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills, now in Seoul with a U.S. delegation, had suggested that if Seoul had difficulty lifting all beef-import restrictions immediately, it should first allow unrestricted imports of high-quality foreign beef for use by hotels and restaurants.
South Korea now imposes quotas on beef imports to protect its weak farm industry. 

Michel Camdessus, head of the International Monetary Fund, held discussions with Frans Andriessen, the top foreign-affairs official of the 12-nation European Community, to discuss efforts to aid the struggling economies of Poland and Hungary.
An EC spokesman said the talks were intended to ensure cooperation between the IMF and the two-dozen Western nations putting together economic aid packages for the East European nations.
Poland has a foreign debt of about $39 billion.
Hungary's loans amount to about $18 billion, the highest per capita in Eastern Europe. 

Volkswagen AG said it will add 750 new jobs immediately to aid its production of cars for the Japanese market.
The new workers will join the main production facility in Wolfsburg, where about 62,000 people are employed.
In the first nine months of this year, VW sold 24,600 cars in Japan, up 24.3% from the year-earlier period. 

China has uncovered illegal trading in foreign currencies worth $112 million so far this year, the Economic Daily said.
One example of an illegal trade was a Beijing leasing firm's sale of $800,000 to a rural firm in Dalian for the apparent purpose of buying machinery; the Dalian firm resold the money for profit to eight other companies.
In China $1 fetches 3.7 yuan at state banks, about six at official exchange centers open to some firms, and about seven on the black market. 

Daimler-Benz AG said it hasn't reached agreement yet with the West German states of Hamburg and Bremen on the terms for its acquisition of a majority stake in Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm G.m.b.
H., or MBB.
The West German automobile and technology conglomerate won approval from the Economics Ministry to acquire 50.01% of MBB for about 1.7 billion West German marks ($3.21 billion) but has met resistance from the governments of the two northern German city-states, which fear a loss of jobs in the wake of the takeover. 

China's decision to suspend a decade-old agreement aimed at stemming the flow of illegal Chinese immigrants into Hong Kong has escalated into a diplomatic quarrel. 

The dispute centers on Yang Yang, a Chinese athlete who sought political asylum while visiting Hong Kong and was allowed to leave for the U.S. a week ago.
Chinese officials retaliated by refusing to readmit illegal Chinese immigrants being deported by Hong Kong. 

Some businessmen worry that China, while unperturbed by the colony's free-wheeling business ways, is fed up with Hong Kong's Western-style civil liberties. 

Another worry: that Beijing may try to overwhelm Hong Kong by unleashing a flood of illegal immigration into the territory. 

Mexico's ambassador to the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization resigned.
News reports in Mexico said Eduardo Pesqueira Olea's resignation followed a government comptroller's finding that he failed to report receiving a ranch while he was secretary of agriculture. . . . A Japanese Health Ministry survey shows that 10% of boys and almost 9% of girls in their late teens are overweight -- about double the levels of the early 1970s.
Nutritionists say the main culprit is increasing reliance on Western fast food. 

