.START 

Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan sent the Treasury a message all the way from Moscow: Stop trying to peg the dollar. 

Mr. Greenspan, in Russia at the request of the Soviet government, gave a long, academic lecture on the nature of central banking.
But comments in his speech were seen by some as criticism of the Treasury's recent policy of pushing down the dollar through massive sales of greenbacks in foreign-exchange markets.
The speech was distributed to reporters here. 

"Attempts to maintain unrealistic exchange rates," Mr. Greenspan said, "may lead to destabilizing international capital flows, and ultimately have to be abandoned." 

The Fed chairman also talked about the importance of having an independent central bank insulated from "political pressures that may ignore the long-run effects of monetary policy." 

Mr. Greenspan couldn't be reached for clarification, and some administration officials said they thought the Fed chairman wasn't actually referring to the Bush administration's dollar policies. "I read the speech, and it seemed to me people were taking his remarks out of context," said Michael Boskin, chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers. 

Officials also noted that Mr. Greenspan agreed last month to the decision of the finance ministers and central bankers of the seven leading industrial nations to try to cap the dollar's rise. 

Nevertheless, the Fed chairman's remarks added to perceptions of a growing rift between the Treasury and the Fed over dollar policy. 

"There's a clear disagreement between the Fed and the Treasury over exchange-rate levels," said Lawrence Kudlow, chief economist at Bear, Stearns & Co. "The Fed's principal target is domestic price stability and low inflation, and at the moment it would appear this is in conflict, at least superficially, with the Treasury's effort" to bring down the dollar, he added. 

There have been quiet rumblings of discord between the Treasury and the Fed over the dollar for weeks.
They came to the surface Friday, when the Fed disclosed that two of its members, Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson and Wayne Angell, had voted late last month against increasing the Fed's limit on dollar sales.
Such an increase was needed for the central bank to carry out a policy set by the Treasury of seeking to bring down the dollar. 

Mr. Greenspan's comments in Moscow suggest that he too may have some concerns about the Treasury's heavy emphasis on the dollar. 

"It is no secret that the Federal Reserve is intervening on the Treasury's behalf with some reluctance," said Rimmer DeVries, chief economist of Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. That's partly because Fed officials know "a somewhat stronger dollar helps in controlling inflation," he said. 

Mr. Greenspan acknowledged in his speech that "in some cases, great importance may be given to the short-run stabilization of domestic financial markets or foreign-exchange markets." But he said that such considerations "may ultimately be counterproductive if they are allowed to obscure or cause long delays in the achievement of price stability." 

The Bush administration has been urging the Fed to help bring down the dollar by lowering short-term interest rates.
But the Fed so far has resisted that move, arguing that its policies should focus on the threat of inflation, not on the dollar. 

Some analysts believe the Fed may be holding off lowering rates in part to show its independence from the Treasury. "They're dragging their feet," said Mr. DeVries. "The pressures from the administration have not been helpful" in getting the Fed to ease, he added. 

