.START 

Copper futures prices fell sharply on news that labor talks between a Canadian mine and its union had achieved a major breakthrough that may hasten the resumption of production. 

The December contract on the Commodity Exchange here finished 3.55 cents a pound lower at $1.2805.
The price dropped 5.80 cents from a life-of-contract high of $1.3370 early in the session to as low as $1.2790, before recovering slightly at the close. 

The development that caused the price plunge was a Reuter report quoting Highland Valley Chief Executive Officer Poul Hansen as saying that the issue of contracting out work by Highland Valley had been settled and that only wage and pension issues remained to be resolved. 

The agreement resulted from talks that were resumed over the weekend and lasted until early Monday morning, Mr. Hansen said.
Both sides had said that the question of contracting out work was the most critical issue in the strike, which has lasted more than three months.
The union had been concerned about possible loss of work, according to recent reports. 

Talks with a private mediator will continue after both sides have had a chance to rest, according to Mr. Hansen.
One analyst said that the wage and pension issues didn't appear to be as difficult to solve. 

While the agreement brings nearer the possible end of the Highland Valley strike, major production disruptions remain around the world.
As soon as one problem appears to be on the way to solution, another pops up, as if on cue. 

The latest problem is only a potential danger, but a big one, according to Fred Demler, metals economist for Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., New York. 

A former environmental minister in Papua New Guinea is seeking a court order to temporarily close the Ok Tedi mine in that country because of environmental concerns, Mr. Demler said.
The Bougainville mine, also in Papua New Guinea, has been shut for months and is likely to remain closed at least through the end of this year, according to analysts, because of terroristic activities by native landowners. 

"When you consider that the Cananea mine in Mexico is still out and there still are other mine production problems around the world, there remains a strong bullish element in this market," Mr. Demler said. "Currently, there is a loss of about 35,000 tons of production a month at the mine level, whose effect has only begun to be felt at the refineries." 

The loss of this mine production will be most strongly felt in the fourth quarter of this year and in the first quarter of 1990, Mr. Demler said. 

At the same time world demand for copper is strong and there has been a pickup in construction in the U.S., he said. 

Consumption of copper in the U.S. this year is up by as much as 5% as of Aug. 30 from a year earlier, he said.
Globally for the three-month period ended in July deliveries of copper rose 10% from a year earlier. 

In Japan, Mr. Demler said, inventories of copper were down 35% at the end of August from the end of the second quarter of this year.
Japan depends heavily on supplies from the strike-bound Highland Valley and Bougainville mines, as well as Cananea, and Ok Tedi is also a supplier.
Japan has already been aggressively seeking copper from other sources, he said. 

In Brazil, he said, deliveries of copper from domestic producers to Brazilian consumers have been falling short of needs by some 12,000 tons a month.
As a result, the government has lifted the ban on imports of copper, creating that much more demand on the world market, Mr. Demler said. 

In Europe, demand for copper is strong in West Germany and France, although it has dropped slightly in the U.K. and Italy, he said. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

ENERGY: Petroleum futures rose sharply, with gasoline prices helping to push crude oil higher.
Unleaded gasoline for November delivery was up one cent a gallon on the New York Mercantile Exchange to 55.99 cents.
Some traders said the advance may have been a technical rebound from a support level, as the November contract has been trading well below a life-of-contract high of 63 cents a gallon reached last month.
Crude oil futures rose for the second day in a row.
West Texas Intermediate crude for November delivery, which broke through the $20 level Monday, gained an additional 15 cents to settle at $20.17 a barrel.
December crude also was up 15 cents to $20, a contract high.
Heating oil futures were firm, with the November contract rising 0.87 of a cent to settle at 59.64 cents a gallon.
The American Petroleum Institute's weekly report on U.S. oil statistics, which often affects futures trading the day after its release, was postponed from late yesterday to today. 

GRAINS And SOYBEANS: Most futures prices fell in a continuation of Monday's slide as ideal harvest conditions in the Midwest weighed on the markets.
Analysts said that speculators were also liquidating their contracts in anticipation of a slight increase in the government's latest monthly estimate of this year's crop size, which will be released after the close of trading tomorrow.
Soybean futures for November delivery fell 4.5 cents a bushel to close at $5.5225 a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade.
December corn futures dropped 1.75 cents a bushel to close at $2.3325 a bushel. 

PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices eased, with gold for December delivery falling $2.20 an ounce to $365.20 and December silver off 2.3 cents an ounce to $5.10.
During the session, the silver price touched $5.08, a life-of-contract low.
January platinum declined $4.40 an ounce to $486.90.
Prices fell after drifting early in the session.
Selling was prompted by a rise in the dollar in response to comments by Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan.
The Fed chairman's statements were interpreted as meaning he is less concerned with the risk of a recession and more concerned about keeping inflation down, according to Bernard Savaiko, senior analyst for PaineWebber Inc., New York.
Traders concluded that a sharp reduction in interest rates now is unlikely, Mr. Savaiko said. "What he said undid much of the intervention efforts {by major central banks} last week," which attempted to send the dollar lower by selling the U.S. currency in the foreign exchange market and raising interest rates in Europe, Mr. Savaiko said. 

