.START 

MGM/UA Communications Co. said it terminated its $1.5 billion agreement to be acquired by Qintex Australia Ltd. MGM/UA also filed suit against the broadcaster and operator of resorts charging it with breach of contract and fraud. 

The movie studio said it terminated the pact because Qintex had failed to deliver a $50 million letter of credit by a Sept. 22 deadline under the September merger agreement.
But the termination follows longstanding fears at the studio about Qintex's ability to finance the acquisition. 

The suit, filed in federal court here, seeks $50 million in damages and charges that Qintex intentionally interfered with an earlier $1.4 billion offer for MGM/UA by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. last month. 

The termination of the Qintex agreement marks a major disappointment for Kirk Kerkorian, MGM/UA's controlling shareholder, who tried to sell the studio for more than a year.
In a statement Mr. Kerkorian said, "I am very disappointed.
We tried everything possible to hold the deal together.
It finally became clear to the board that Qintex couldn't perform as per the agreement." 

Qintex officials declined to comment.
But in a letter to the Brisbane Stock Exchange in Australia, Qintex said its negotiations with MGM/UA had reached "an impasse," and it claimed that MGM/UA had made additional demands including more letters of credit.
The letter claims the demands "shifted daily" and that MGM/UA acted in "bad faith." It also claims the studio "unlawfully" terminated the agreement. 

MGM/UA said it's considering its alternatives, including a possible sale of the company to other parties.
Before the MGM/UA announcement, Mr. Murdoch told News Corp. 's annual meeting that he was still interested in buying MGM/UA but wasn't prepared to raise his offering price.
Barry Diller, chairman of News Corp. 's Fox Inc. said there hadn't been any discussions between News Corp. and MGM/UA since the Qintex deal fell apart. 

Yesterday MGM/UA shares closed at $21.625, down 62.5 cents in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Analysts said termination of the Qintex agreement wasn't a big surprise because Qintex hadn't met the deadline for the letter of credit.
Hollywood has also been rife with rumors that Christopher Skase, the chairman of Qintex, was having trouble raising the financing.
However, Qintex has said it expected to complete the acquisiton. 

"I'm sure you're going to see a downtrend in MGM/UA shares back to $18 a share," said Jeffrey Logsdon, an analyst at Crowell Weedon & Co. "But one shouldn't underestimate Mr. Kerkorian's ability to find new buyers." Mr. Logsdon said he would expect any new bid to be between $20 and $25 a share. 

In March, Qintex agreed to pay $20 a share for the movie studio in a complicated deal in which Mr. Kerkorian would have bought back part of the assets, making the effective price $600 million.
But Mr. Kerkorian later approached News Corp. and indicated he was interested in selling the entire company.
So in September, News Corp. offered $23.16 a share, or $1.4 billion.
Qintex quickly topped that offer with its $25-a-share bid. 

The MGM/UA suit filed notes that under its agreement with Qintex the studio wasn't allowed to consider other bids.
And the suit says Qintex agreed to "promptly" deliver the irrevocable $50 million letter of credit as security in the transaction.
The suit charges that Qintex "induced and caused MGM/UA to reject the News Corp. offer." And it charges that the studio would have "benefited substantially" if it had accepted that offer. 

Mr. Kerkorian controls about 82% of MGM/UA and has already announced plans to spend about $700 million of his proceeds on a movie-themed amusement park and 5,000-room hotel in Las Vegas, Nev.
Jeffrey C. Barbakow, MGM/UA chairman and chief executive officer, said the termination of the Qintex agreement wouldn't affect those plans. 

Mr. Barbakow said MGM/UA had continued to talk with Qintex through yesterday but without success. "Almost every day, Qintex assured us that the letter of credit would be immediately forthcoming," he said. "We believe it is now clear that Qintex repeatedly misled us regarding its ability to furnish the letter of credit." 

Mr. Barbakow said Qintex's final proposal was to eliminate the letter of credit or any other security, eliminate minimum damages that MGM/UA might claim, postpone the Dec. 15 closing date of the transaction by two months, and require MGM/UA to invest in Qintex -- all without any confirmation from Qintex of its ability to perform. 

Mr. Barbakow added that, "MGM/UA has made every effort to cooperate with Qintex, including making proposals to reduce the letter of credit, accept substitute security, or accept an opinion from Qintex's investment bankers of Qintex's ability to finance the merger.
We also proposed that Qintex could proceed without a letter of credit if MGM/UA also had the opportunity to consider a better offer." 

Mr. Barbakow said Mr. Kerkorian's personal holding company, Tracinda Corp., had also indicated its willingness to finance as much as $135 million of the acquisition cost without getting voting rights in the surviving corporation. 

S. Karene Witcher in Australia contributed to this article. 

