.START 

Financial institutions may need more legal advice than ever to cope with the complex new thrift-rescue law. 

But they may end up getting less, and paying a lot more. 

Attorneys for banks and thrifts are worried about their own liability under the legislation, and that's likely to make them more guarded when they counsel clients.
Signed into law in August, the measure restructures and tightens federal regulation of the troubled savings and loan industry.
But it also singles out lawyers for special mention; they can be fined as much as $1 million a day for helping a client break the rules. 

Indeed, law firms are already taking steps to protect themselves.
Some say they're assigning extra attorneys to review complicated transactions.
Others are increasingly putting their concerns about particular deals in writing -- even if the client hasn't requested a written opinion.
The strategy: to create a record of the attorney's reservations in case regulators question the deal. 

Such play-it-safe moves may be only the beginning. "It's possible in some areas that lawyers will decline to give an opinion, or else give one so tightly worded that it doesn't provide the needed comfort to the client," says John Villa, an attorney with Williams & Connolly in Washington, D.C.
While that may make lawyers feel more secure, he says, it "chills" the attorney-client relationship. 

The more time lawyers invest in being cautious, the more it costs clients in legal fees.
And the trend toward higher charges could accelerate if insurers get worried and raise legal malpractice rates, as some expect. 

In the long run, rising costs will make it harder for smaller financial institutions to hire more experienced law firms, attorneys insist.
Smaller law firms, which lack the staff to do the extra precautionary work, may choose to drop their financial clients rather than assume the extra risk. 

The new law specifies that directors, officers and major stockholders aren't the only ones who are potentially liable for wrongdoing that damages a bank or thrift.
Also responsible, it states, is any attorney, appraiser or accountant who "knowingly or recklessly participates" in a violation of the law, in a breach of fiduciary duty or in an "unsafe and unsound" practice.
Depending on the magnitude of the misconduct, regulators can impose daily civil penalties of $5,000, $25,000 or $1 million. 

Not all legal experts think the provision is very significant.
Some insist it merely codifies a standard that lawyers are already expected to meet in representing financial clients.
Financial regulators are likely to use the law only against attorneys involved in serious wrongdoing, they say. "I think they're looking for situations where there are clear abuses or where glaring errors have been made," says Bruce LaBoon, an attorney with Liddell, Sapp, Zivley, Hill & LaBoon in Houston. 

Regulators agree. "We don't see this expanding our job into overseeing the bar," says Rosemary Stewart, the director of enforcement for the newly created Office of Thrift Supervision.
She says the provision merely enhances regulators' authority to deal with attorneys who "cross the line" and participate in management decisions that violate the law. "I don't think it's going to affect most attorneys who just offer legal advice," Ms. Stewart says. "This is a lot of hoopla over very little in my opinion." 

But industry lawyers insist the provision makes them more vulnerable in cases where a client's loan goes sour and regulators subsequently charge that it was an "unsafe and unsound" transaction. "It has added a new element of risk in an already risky business," says Michael Herrick, an attorney for Elias, Matz, Tiernan & Herrick in Washington, D.C. 

Given the potential fines, some experts believe lawyers will feel extra pressure to monitor and even second-guess a client's business decisions.
Financial attorneys generally resist that sort of "watchdog" role. 

"If attorneys are going to practice in a highly regulated area, they have to recognize that the scope of their involvement is an important issue," says Robert Tortoriello, an attorney with Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen & Hamilton in New York. 

Whether the new statute actually demands more from lawyers who represent banks and thrifts probably won't be clear for months, at least until regulators tip their hand.
Meanwhile, "everybody is going to have questions in the back of their mind," says Douglas M. Rawlings, an attorney in the Los Angeles office of McKenna, Conner & Cuneo. "They know that if there's a big hiccup in a company, the regulators are going to be looking for scapegoats, and lawyers are good scapegoats." 

