.START 

Journeys both physical and spiritual span the rich terrain of Bharati Mukherjee's third novel, "Jasmine" (Grove/Weidenfeld, 240 pages, $17.95).
On these trips, Jasmine herself goes by many names.
We meet her first as Jyoti (Light), a young girl scratching along in the meager village of Hanaspur in Punjab, India, "a dead-end corner of a flat, baked, violent land." Married at 14 to an ambitious student ("a modern man, a city man") who renames her Jasmine "to break off the past," she prepares to emigrate with him to America.
But her husband suddenly is murdered by Sikh revolutionaries, and Jasmine is left with few options.
She knows she cannot "crawl back to Hanaspur and feudalism.
That Jyoti is dead." 

Instead she embarks on a desperate journey by air and sea to America.
Her destination is the school in Florida her husband hoped to attend, and where she is thinking of burning herself on top of his clothes in a variant of suttee.
Waiting endlessly for another plane, she becomes one of those outcasts and deportees tourists rarely notice in the "shadow world" of airports. "We are dressed in shreds of national costumes, out of season, the wilted plumage of intercontinental vagabondage.
We ask only one thing: to be allowed to land, to pass through, to continue . . . I phantom my way through three continents." 

Jasmine's landing in the U.S. is an entry into hell.
Her first view of Florida is a nuclear power plant and floating garbage.
The first person she meets, a man with half a face, lures her into a motel room, where he rapes her.
Numb, she stabs him to death with a pen knife, before continuing her bizarre pilgrimage.
Rescued by a kindly eccentric, she proceeds to Manhattan as an au pair to Duff, the three-year-old daughter of a fashionable young couple named Taylor and Wylie Hayes.
The Hayeses give her yet another name, Jase.
They are delighted with their clever new employee, unaware of the horrors she has endured and unsurprised at her quick adaptability to their way of life. 

One day, several years later, in the park with Duff, Jase sees the Sikh who blew up her husband selling hot dogs.
She flees to dusty, rural Iowa and moves in with a banker named Bud Ripplemeyer, who rechristens her with the final, all-American new name of Jane.
Bud is shot by a distraught, bankrupt farmer. "I have grown accustomed to the extraordinary," says Jane with characteristic irony toward the end of the book. 

So has the reader long before Jane/Jase/Jasmine/Jyoti runs off with Taylor, who has tracked her down in the dustbowl.
But however wide-ranging and eventful Jasmine's physical wanderings are in this novel, it is nothing compared with the complexity of her spiritual journey.
Ms. Mukherjee is providing much more than a roller-coaster ride of a story.
In this small tale, she also comments wisely on India's disheveled move into modern life, on the refugee's plight and the quality of contemporary America, which often reminds the heroine of sorrier stretches in the Punjab. "The landscape was not unfamiliar," she says in her usual flat way, staring at some ditches along a Florida highway. 

Underlying "Jasmine's" superficial details is the suggestion that it is possible to be a number of people in one precarious lifetime.
The many names Ms. Mukherjee gives her title character are not just convenient plot devices; each signifies the death of a previous self as a different identity is created to cope with new, outlandish circumstances.
Reflecting on her life, Jasmine says: "Jyoti of Hanaspur was not Jasmine, Duff's day mummy and Taylor and Wylie's au pair in Manhattan; that Jasmine isn't this Jane Ripplemeyer having lunch with Mary Webb at the University Club today.
And which of us is the undetected murderer of a half-faced monster, which of us has held a dying husband, which of us was raped and raped and raped in boats and cars and motel rooms?" 

The process of manufacturing all these identities might seem at first to indicate an ongoing spiritual development or growth.
But Jasmine does not really undergo an evolution; her plucky 14-year-old self is just as equipped to survive grim circumstances as her later incarnations.
In changing but not growing she is trapped by what in Hinduism is called "maya," the sense that everything in our lives is illusory.
Maya keeps people suspended and spinning through time, like a stone hurtling, as Jasmine describes it, "through diaphanous mist, unable to grab hold, unable to slow myself, yet unwilling to abandon the ride I'm on." 

Ms. Mukherjee's prose throughout "Jasmine" is surprisingly spare for such a multilayered novel.
But it is richly suggestive as well, making the writing in her last book, the extravagantly praised "The Middleman and Other Stories" (1988), seem calculated and slick.
Yet the most extraordinary achievement is not the author's use of language.
Rather, it is her success in presenting a number of difficult ideas within the disguise of narrative fiction.
We thought we were just reading a novel, but in fact, without knowing it, we have participated in an exploration of what it means to be alive.
This is of course what the best novels always make us do, and Ms. Mukherjee's ability to elicit our participation in this philosophical exercise tips the book over from the realm of popular fiction into literature. 

Ms. Rifkind is a writer and editor living in New York. 

