.START 

In a case that attracted wide attention from legal-ethics experts, disciplinary proceedings have been dropped against two brothers who practiced law in rural Pennsylvania.
George and Walter Stenhach were accused of concealing a weapon used by a client they represented in a murder case. 

Their problems illustrated murky contradictions between lawyers' obligations to their clients and to the criminal-justice system. 

The Stenhachs' predicament overshadowed that of their client, who was convicted in 1982.
During the murder trial it was revealed that a rifle stock used in the crime was at the brothers' law office.
They complied with a judge's order to turn over the weapon but were later convicted of hindering prosecution and tampering with evidence. 

The Stenhachs maintained that they were presented with an ethical dilemma and little guidance from the courts or the Code of Professional Responsibility, the legal profession's ethical code. "There was no existing rules at the time we had to make the decision," says George Stenhach.
The brothers feared that if they turned over the weapon, it would be used against their client and they would be accused of providing ineffective counsel.
If they didn't, they risked criminal prosecution. 

The Stenhachs' conviction was overturned in 1987 after their case was taken on by lawyers at Kirkpatrick & Lockhart, a Pittsburgh law firm.
In a precedent-setting decision, Pennsylvania's Superior Court ruled that the laws under which the brothers were prosecuted were too broad.
Criminal-defense lawyers, the court decided, were entitled to collect physical evidence and then, after a reasonable amount of time, return it to where it was found or to prosecutors.
Also, prosecutors can't disclose the source of the evidence at trial. 

The Disciplinary Board of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania dismissed the charges against the brothers and opportunities for an appeal expired last month. 

Alan M. Dershowitz, a professor of criminal law at Harvard University law school, says the Stenhachs were made scapegoats and that ethical guidelines in criminal cases are murky. "Here's a problem where lawyers of good will just don't know what the answer is and there's no margin for error," he says. "The idea of punishing first and then coming up with what the right answer is, is anathema to the American legal process." 

George Stenhach says the brothers' are trying to restore their practice, which was "devastated" by seven years of criminal and disciplinary proceedings.
But the ordeal shows, he says, that "if lawyers competently make decions in good faith, where the law is uncertain, the system -- although cumbersome -- will work." 

BAHAMIAN PRIME MINISTER'S libel suit against NBC heads for reruns. 

A few days after National Broadcasting Co., a unit of General Electric Co., issued a news release announcing that Sir Lynden O. Pindling dropped his long-running suit, he is heading back to court. 

"NBC has struck again," Sir Lynden announced after NBC issued the statement, in which the network said it paid no money to Sir Lynden and made no apology for the broadcasts. 

Sir Lynden filed suit in Canada in 1984 alleging he was defamed by several programs that aired in 1983 and 1984.
The broadcasts linked the prime minister to drug smugglers who were allegedly paying off Bahamian officials. 

In court papers filed Oct. 6, Sir Lynden claims the news release violates the terms of the settlement, which were to be kept confidential. "We believe the release distorts the settlement," said Donald Houston, a lawyer for Sir Lynden.
He declined to comment further. 

Thomas Ross, senior vice president of NBC News, says the company didn't breach the settlement and stands by its statement. 

Sir Lynden has also cancelled plans to appear on NBC News today. 

GOOD FELLOWSHIP: Walter Annenberg, former U.S. ambassador to Britain, has endowed a $1 million public-service fellowships program at Harvard Law School in honor of Judge Irving R. Kaufman of the Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.
Judge Kaufman has spent 40 years on the federal bench.
Harvard Law School students and recent alumni who accept jobs with legal-services agencies, certain private nonprofit organizations or low-paying government agencies may be eligible for the awards.
The fellowships will provide $10,000 annually for one year to three years. "The award is designed to encourage people who are at the margin, who are faced with an $18,000 job in the D.A.'s office and $65,000 in a law firm and want to take the former," said Robert Clark, the Harvard law dean. 

ACLU SUES to block Illinois birth questionnaire: The American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois has filed a federal suit in Danville challenging the use of a form that requires new mothers in all maternity wards in the state to provide certain personal information.
The women are required to disclose the number of their previous live births, miscarriages and abortions as well as to answer questions about alcohol and tobacco use.
The ACLU says the forms are an invasion of privacy and a form of sex discrimination.
The Illinois Department of Public Health, the defendant in the suit, says the information is being gathered for medical and health researchers.
No statute mandated the questionnaire, which was ordered by the department. 

FLORIDA ABORTION BATTLE: Thousands of pro-choice and anti-abortion demonstrators marched on Florida's capitol in Tallahassee as the state Legislature opened a four-day special session to consider abortion controls.
State-capitol security officers ordered demonstrators on both sides to leave the main lobby as each shouted down the other with their chanting.
Gov. Bob Martinez, a strong opponent of abortion, called the special session in an effort to restrict abortions in Florida following a ruling this summer by the U.S. Supreme Court that suggested it would give states broad authority in regulating abortion.
While some pro-choice leaders had hoped for an immediate adjournment of the session, the Legislature began committee hearings.
Pro-choice advocates are apparently in the majority, and new restrictions seem unlikely. 

A FORMER CHIEF COUNSEL of the Internal Revenue Service is moving from Williams & Connolly, a Washington, D.C., law firm, to the New York office of Arnold & Porter, which is also based in Washington.
Stuart Seigel, who served at the IRS during the Carter administration, said he wanted to relocate in New York "for personal and professional reasons." Williams & Connolly doesn't have a New York office.
James Jones, Arnold & Porter's managing partner, said Mr. Seigel would be involved in the firm's mergers and acquisitions practice and other matters. 

