.START 

It would take far less pesticide to wipe out the South American coca crop than is currently used by growers to protect their plants, according to a confidential U.S. intelligence report. 

The report provides the first estimate of how much insecticide and herbicide are used by coca growers to protect their plants, which are the principal source of the cocaine in the U.S.
These chemicals are augmented by the tons of cocaine-processing chemicals, such as ether and sulfuric acid, that the "coke factories" in Colombia pour into the environment. 

The report is being prepared to counter objections by environmentalists to proposals to destroy the South American coca crop by aerial spraying with a herbicide. 

"We are trying to get the information to make a case for going in and eradicating the coca crop, allowing the land to heal and allowing the return of the rain forest," said a federal scientist involved in a research and testing program who declined to give his name for security reasons. 

An aerial spraying program to destroy the coca crop was first broached publicly in April 1988 by former Attorney General Edwin Meese during a visit to Peru.
The proposal brought an outcry from environmentalists, who charged that the herbicide to be used, Eli Lilly & Co. 's tebuthiuron, would destroy hundreds of other plant species and leach into the Amazon River.
They also charged that tebuthiuron would be a health threat to the South American farmers working in affected areas. 

In May 1988, Eli Lilly issued a short statement saying that, for "a number of practical and policy considerations," it wouldn't supply tebuthiuron for a U.S. State Department plan to spray the coca crop.
It declined to elaborate.
Yesterday, a Lilly spokesman in Indianapolis said, "Our position remains unchanged." 

The State Department's Bureau of International Narcotics Matters, nevertheless, has continued to test tebuthiuron in order to get evidence that would bolster its argument that the herbicide doesn't pose the danger that environmentalists claim. 

Without addressing that issue, the unpublished report forms the backbone of the new argument that tebuthiuron would be less damaging to the environment than coca growers' current practices. 

The report focuses on the Peruvian coca crop, the source of 60% to 70% of the cocaine produced in South America.
About 500,000 acres of coca are under cultivation in Peru.
Most of the harvest of coca leaves is sent to neighboring Colombia, where the cocaine is extracted and processed. 

If growers are treating all 200,000 hectares with weed and insect killers, then somewhere between 1.9 million and 3.4 million kilograms (4.2 million to 7.5 million pounds) of chemical pesticides are being sprayed on the coca crop each year. 

To destroy the total Peruvian coca crop would require about 672,000 kilograms of tebuthiuron, or only about one-third of the chemical pesticides Peruvian coca farmers currently use, the report says.
Even by the most conservative calculation of Peruvian chemical usage, the report notes, it would take 30% less herbicide to destroy the coca crop than farmers currently are using to treat only half the crop. 

The Peruvian government, which has conducted tests with tebuthiuron, hasn't made a final decision on proceeding with a spraying program. 

Tebuthiuron is normally used to control brush and is "almost selective" in killing the coca shrubs without doing too much damage to grasses, the U.S. researcher explained.
Range land in the U.S. Southwest is covered with grass within six months after tebuthiuron spraying, he said.
The land devoted to coca production is marginal for other agricultural uses, therefore tebuthiuron spraying would allow the land to eventually be reclaimed by the rain forests, the researcher argued. 

Paraquat is the weed killer most commonly used by the Peruvian growers, the report says.
Between 212,000 and 742,000 kilograms of paraquat are sprayed on the coca shrubs each year, depending on frequency and pattern of application. 

In addition to paraquat for weed control, the Peruvian coca growers are using a variety of insecticides to protect their plants from a gypsy moth-like insect known as malunya, the report notes.
The malunya larvae strip the leaves from the coca shrubs. 

About 70% of the coca acreage is treated with the insecticide carbaryl, the report estimates.
This insecticide is better known under such trade names as Sevin, Dicarban or SV-10.
The report calculates that at five applications a year, the coca farmers would be spraying 1,487,500 kilograms of carbaryl on the Peruvian crop.
At eight applications annually, carbaryl use would total 2.38 million kilograms. 

Other insecticides being used to a lesser extent include metamidophos, decametrina and monocrotophos, the report says. 

Total insecticide use ranges between 1,686,500 and 2,698,400 kilograms, depending on how many farmers are applying it five times annually and how many are using it eight times a year. 

