.START 

Hourly workers at Mazda Motor Corp. 's car assembly plant near here have agreed to work more overtime in exchange for a new policy on absenteeism that includes perfect-attendance bonuses of $1,500 -- almost triple the bonuses offered by the Big Three. 

The moves, approved in a plant-wide vote Monday, were part of a United Auto Workers union-company effort to resolve several conflicts that arose during the past year at the Flat Rock, Mich., plant.
These included managament concerns over absentee rates that reportedly averaged between 8% and 10% -- unusually high for Japanese -- owned or managed plants in the U.S. and complaints from workers about the company's attendance and temporary employee policies. 

Such conflicts are indicative of the evolving relationship between hourly workers and managers at the transplants, which have enjoyed a privileged status among U.S. auto-assembly facilities.
Several have kept out unions by paying competitive wages and allowing workers more autonomy on the factory floor.
Those with employees represented by the UAW have won contracts that are substantially less restrictive that traditional pacts with General Motors Corp., Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp., often in exchange for no-layoff policies. 

Still, "none of the transplants are the utopias they're often portrayed as," said Harley Shaiken, professor of work and technology at the University of California, San Diego. "This is a difficult industry with tough jobs and that doesn't change" because of who runs the plant. 

Mazda's new attendance policy gives workers 60% of their regular pay for the first four absences in a rolling 12-month period.
Workers are allowed 11 additional absences without pay and then are subject to dismissal.
Workers with no absences get a bonus of $1,500 at the end of the year.
Under the old policy, supervisors decided which absences would qualify for 60% pay -- a practice workers complained led to inconsistencies. 

As part of the negotiations, the union agreed to allow about 250 employees to work overtime until mid-November as Mazda launches a new car at the plant.
The results are significant because they allow the union to show how it can win victories for its workers without alienating management, says Mr. Shaiken. "Anything that happens in as visible a plant as Mazda will be watched and used in the nonunion transplants," he added.
A plant owned jointly by Isuzu Motors Ltd. and Fuji Heavy Industries Inc., and plants owned independently by Nissan Motor Co., Honda Motor Co. and Toyota Motor Corp. aren't unionized. 

