.START 

In a further consolidation of the record industry, N.V. Philips's Polygram Records unit is expected to announce this morning that it has acquired closely held A&M Records, according to individuals close to the transaction. 

Although Polygram officials declined to comment, an industry official estimated the price at about $500 million. 

The transaction will not include the real estate or publishing interests of A&M, which was started 27 years ago in a garage by trumpet player Herb Alpert and partner Jerry Moss.
In addition to the record company, A&M owns a studio lot in Hollywood, including Charlie Chaplin's old studio. 

The A&M deal is the second recent acquisition for Polygram.
In September, it acquired rap and reggae specialist Island Records Ltd. for about $300 million. 

A&M's annual sales are estimated to be $200 million to $300 million.
In its heyday, A&M boasted such artists as Mr. Alpert's group, the Tijuana Brass, as well as the Carpenters, Carole King, Peter Frampton and the Police. 

Lately, however, hits have eluded A&M, which accounts for less than a 2% chart share this year on Billboard magazine's Top Pop album chart.
To rebound somewhat, it has counted heavily on Janet Jackson's latest release, "Rhythm Nation." The record has performed well in its two weeks on the chart, landing at No. 7 for the week ending Oct. 14.
The only other A&M release on the top 100, however, is the group Tora Tora's album, "Surprise Attack," at No. 59, and on its way down after 14 weeks. 

A&M, which currently has 300 employees, is not expected to have a change in leadership.
Currently, Mr. Moss is chairman and Gil Friesen is president. 

A&M does not have a manufacturing and distribution arm.
Polygram distributes the product in Europe, while RCA Records, a unit of Bertelsmann AG, handles the distribution in the U.S. Polygram has been attempting to expand in the U.S.
On a world-wide basis, Polygram ranks third, and its Deutsche Grammophon, Decca and Philips Classics labels comprise more than half of the U.S. market in classical recordings.
But it is not strong in pop and rock and has openly sought to buy other labels. 

