.START 

Until recently, it seemed that things couldn't get much worse for Tucson Electric Power. 

Once highly profitable, the Arizona utility gained notoriety over the summer when its chairman resigned under pressure after selling most of his shares.
Then came announcements of impending losses and a 60% dividend cut. 

But things have gotten worse, and a host of bottom fishers hooked on the stock could be in for a surprise. "People think the worst is over; it's not," says Edward J. Tirello Jr. of Shearson Lehman Hutton. 

One problem is the company's $900 million Springerville 2 generating station now nearing completion.
Ordered when the company was riding high selling cheap, coal-fired power to its neighbors, Springerville 2 is coming on line in a region awash with generating capacity.
The Arizona Corporation Commission is unlikely to make rate payers pick up the plant's full tab, analysts say. 

Already the commission is considering the company's request for a 22% rate boost unrelated to the plant.
A hearing officer last month proposed an 11.6% increase.
Analysts believe the commission's final decision Oct. 18 will be around 9%. 

Next, Tucson Electric is expected to seek rate increases that would boost revenue 30% to 40% to cover the cost of the new generating station. "You can imagine how the commissioners are going to feel about that request," says Salomon Brothers analyst Gregory B. Enholme. 

Messrs.
Tirello and Enholme believe a prospective air pocket underlies the stock, which closed yesterday at 22 3/4. "Frankly, it should be trading at 16," says Mr. Tirello, adding that bargain hunters have propped up the stock. 

Assuming no further bad surprises, Mr. Enholme figures on a share price of 20 by year-end, noting that Tucson Electric's current dividend yield is 6% -- lower than the 7% average for utilities as a whole.
He argues that an 8% yield would be appropriate, given the risks at Tucson Electric. 

Confronted with the unneeded generating station and problems with other once-profitable investments, Mr. Tirello figures Tucson Electric must sell its billion-dollar portfolio of non-utility assets.
He also thinks the company might eliminate its quarterly dividend of 40 cents a share. 

Selling Springerville 2 is one possible out, but the market for such a plant is depressed.
Mr. Enholme figures the company might tolerate about a $150 million loss on the sale, or a $90 million loss after taxes, producing a charge of about $4 a share against its $34-a-share book value on June 

Thomas C. Weir, president and chief executive officer, says Tucson Electric has given "no thought at all" to selling the Springerville plant. "It hasn't even been discussed." He says, however, that the utility might liquidate some non-utility assets.
There aren't any plans to cut the dividend, adds Mr. Weir, cautioning that "obviously, if conditions change, we will have to reconsider that." 

In a recent application to the Arizona Corporation Commission, Tucson Electric suggests it may seek as much as $300 million in fresh cash from a variety of stock or debt offerings.
About $77 million would go to refinance an adjustable-rate preferred stock whose auction failed recently. 

The end isn't in sight for losses at the company: The third-quarter report is likely to be full of one-time charges plus a negative impact from recent accounting changes.
Late last month, Tucson Electric said troubles at its Brookland Financial Corp. unit would force it to write off $15 million and perhaps much more.
The utility has $59 million invested in the unit, which finances auto installment sales and leases. 

Effective with the third quarter, Tucson Electric eliminated the accounting allowance for funds used during construction of the Springerville 2 plant.
Forgoing this allowance, which capitalizes outlays on new facilities while they're being built, will hurt the bottom line.
In the second quarter, the allowance accounted for $13.1 million of Tucson Electric's net income of $19.2 million. 

One analyst thinks Tucson Electric is a candidate for a merger down the line.
Among the possible candidates is SCECorp's Southern California Edison Co. unit, says Alfred G. Mazzorana, a bond analyst at UBS Securities Inc.
He suggests that Tucson Electric seek out a willing partner -- "the company is going to have to do something." But SCECorp says it has its hands full with its planned merger with San Diego Gas & Electric. 

Tucson Electric Power 

(NYSE; Symbol: TEP) 

Business: Electric utility 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: Revenue: $624.7 million 

Net Income: $128.9 million; $4.95 ashare 

Second quarter, June 30, 1989: 

Per-share earnings: 76 cents vs. $1.15 

Average daily trading volume: 

232,508 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 25.3 million 

