.START 

N W Ayer Inc. expects to announce today a joint venture that will vault it into television production on a world-wide basis -- a venture that will create TV movies and miniseries, aired both here and abroad, sponsored by Ayer clients. 

The venture is among the most ambitious efforts yet by an ad agency to tackle TV programming, an area advertisers dominated in the 1950s and are returning to in increasing numbers now.
It would allow Ayer's roster of big international clients -- including American Telephone & Telegraph, Gillette and General Motors -- to produce TV programs not just in the U.S., but in Europe and elsewhere.
It also would give Ayer's European clients a chance to produce TV movies for their home turf. 

The joint venture pairs Ayer with World International Network, known as WIN, an organization representing TV networks in 106 countries that has already co-produced a number of U.S. TV movies.
WIN, formed in 1988, has had a hand in TV movies including NBC's recent "In the Line of Duty: The FBI Murders"; CBS's "Day One," about the decision to drop the atomic bomb; and "The Final Days," chronicling the end of Richard Nixon's presidency, which is to air Oct. 22. 

The joint venture calls for Ayer clients to help finance and sponsor TV movies.
At the same time, WIN's member stations, none of which are in the U.S., would pay to air the movie in their countries.
Most of the TV movies would also air in the U.S. on network or cable stations.
The arrangement would spread production costs around, while guaranteeing that the movie would air both here and abroad. 

Advertisers disillusioned with the paltry fare on television have rediscovered TV production in the past few years; Ayer clients General Motors and AT&T, which co-produced "Day One," are just two that have gotten involved in programming.
But advertiser efforts so far have focused on the U.S. -- and the joint venture gives Ayer's clients the ability to sponsor programs in Europe and elsewhere, too. 

"Even clients in European countries who couldn't otherwise have afforded programming now will have access to it.
The bottom line is, it offers access to more programming for our clients," says Marcella Rosen, Ayer executive vice president and managing director for media services.
Besides, she adds, the venture would allow Ayer clients to pick movies "that stand out . . . that aren't your standard bad tear-jerkers." 

For WIN, the venture gives its member TV stations more programming, with the cost defrayed by the advertisers.
Because of deregulation in Europe, TV stations are proliferating at breakneck speed.
Europe "needs good product, and needs tons of programs," says Larry Gershman, WIN's chairman and chief executive officer. 

According to Mr. Gershman, the venture expects in its first year to create about three movies sponsored by Ayer clients.
It plans to grow quickly after that, with perhaps eight to nine productions the following year, he says. 

The joint venture also gives Ayer's clients a way to circumvent last week's edict by the European Community that the majority of European programming be produced in Europe.
Even for movies geared primarily to a U.S. audience, WIN/Ayer hopes to find some projects that can be filmed at least in part abroad, qualifying the movies as home-grown European programs.
Other projects might focus primarily on Europe, backed by some of Ayer's Europe-based clients. 

Ayer joins a number of other agencies that have gotten involved in TV programming, but it is among the front-runners in cracking the European market.
Earlier this year, Interpublic Group of Cos. became Europe's largest supplier of game shows by buying a 49% stake in Fremantle International, a distributor of 43 game shows produced in nine European countries.
And Foote, Cone & Belding's FCB/Telecom has created programming for 11 years for Foote Cone clients.
It says it plans to expand aggressively into Europe next year. 

Mullen Gets the Juice 

Veryfine Products Inc. selected Mullen Inc. to handle advertising for its juice products.
The account bills about $8 million to $10 million annually. 

The Wenham, Mass., agency, which has billings of $63 million, beat out New York heavyweights Scali, McCabe, Sloves, a unit of Ogilvy and Mather, and Cliff Freeman & Partners, a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi.
Veryfine, based in Westford, Mass., dropped Chiat/Day, New York, earlier this year because of a client conflict. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

COKE ON CASSETTE: Coca-Cola Co. will be the sole sponsor in the second issue of Persona Video, a celebrity-oriented "magazine" on videotape that will be sold at checkout stands next week in Colorado and Indiana. 

NEW ACCOUNT: Cleveland's Wyse Advertising is named agency of record for Integra Financial Corp., a Pittsburgh-based banking firm.
The account bills about $5 million. 

