.START 

The auto industry has won the support of key lawmakers for a substantial weakening of the requirement that it produce and sell cars that can run on fuel other than gasoline. 

Under an amendment to be offered to the president's plan, auto makers would have to be able to demonstrate to the Environmental Protection Agency that they have the capacity to build such vehicles, but they wouldn't actually have to make or sell them. "We think it's a great idea," said Timothy McCarthy, a spokesman for the Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association. 

The amendment may be offered as early as today to the House Energy subcommittee that has been voting on clean-air amendments. 

The Bush plan calls for Detroit to produce, by 1997, one million cars capable of running on a clean-burning fuel and to sell them in the dirtiest cities.
The oil industry would have to supply the fuel, either an 85% methanol blend or another that yielded the same pollution benefits.
After the year 2000, the cars would have to be able to run on a fuel that burns as cleanly as 100% methanol. 

Although the auto industry has supported the president's proposal, auto and oil industry lobbyists have been working hard against the production and sales requirements in the alternative-fuels provision. 

The amendment, which is being offered by two Texans, Democratic Rep. Ralph Hall and Republican Rep. Jack Fields, would impose a performance standard based on an 85% methanol fuel in 1997.
There would be no further standard required.
Supporters of the proposal, including two sponsors of the administration's proposal, Rep. John Dingell (D., Mich.) and Rep. Norman Lent (R., N.Y.), contend this would make the bill fuel-neutral, rather than favoring methanol.
Oil companies are likely to favor the proposal because they could use reformulated gasoline.
But EPA officials object to the proposal because they say the oil industry wouldn't have any incentive to develop alternative fuels to gasoline. 

After being criticized by environmental groups and congressional staff members for not fighting hard enough for the alternative-fuels proposal, Bush administration officials met into the evening with congressional supporters of the amendment.
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the administration would continue to push for its proposal, which he said represents "an innovative and new approach to the problem." 

Environmentalists charged that the plan was an attempt to appease the oil industry, which has been virulent in its opposition to the alternative-fuels proposal, as well as the auto industry. 

The subcommittee already has voted to tighten tailpipe standards beyond the administration proposal, to require auto makers to install on-board canisters to collect vapors released during refueling and to reject an administration proposal to allow auto makers to switch to an averaging system to measure emissions. 

