.START 

Micron Technology Inc. 's plummeting profits illustrate the perils that the small Boise, Idaho, company faces in battling the world's electronics behemoths in the semiconductor industry's most volatile market. 

Micron's net income fell 63% to $16 million in its fiscal fourth quarter ended Aug. 31, down from a heady $43.3 million a year ago.
Sales fell 9.5% from the year-ago quarter.
Wall Street has started pounding its stock, which closed at $13, down 87.5 cents in national over-the-counter trading; Micron's stock has fallen 50% since June. 

What a contrast to September 1988.
Micron was riding high on fat profits because the world was starved for Micron's specialty, the dynamic random access memories, or DRAMs, that store data in everything from computers to videotape machines.
Micron had emerged intact from the semiconductor recession of the mid-1980s that forced most U.S. makers out of the DRAM market, and it earned $98 million on $300.5 million in sales in 1988. 

But its earnings have slid from quarter to quarter in every period since September 1988, and analysts say earnings will fall further in the coming quarters as the electronics markets slow down and chip prices fall.
Micron, says analyst Michael Gumport of Drexel Burnham Lambert, "is being brought down to reality." 

The reality for Micron is that prices on DRAMs are dropping.
Tumbling chip prices and sluggish demand are hurting other chip makers too, but prices on general-purpose DRAMs are falling more quickly than prices on other chips.
Micron sold its 256-kilobit chip, which accounts for about 70% of sales, for about $4 last quarter, says Drexel's Mr. Gumport; the chip will probably sell for only $3 this quarter, he says. 

What's more, Micron is caught in the downward price swing just as it is switching its factory lines from older 256-kilobit chips to higher-capacity, one-megabit DRAMs.
Although Micron made its name by becoming the lowest-cost producer of 64-kilobit and 256-kilobit DRAMs, it has lagged behind the Japanese in turning out volumes of one-megabit chips, now the industry's mainstay, and the chip is less profitable. "The margin is obviously less" on one-megabit chips, concedes Kipp Bidard, Micron's investor-relations manager. "It gets squeezed until the learning-curve effect is under way." 

Micron says that a new chip plant, which is now running at 40% capacity, could bring better profit margins when it is up to full tilt next summer.
But meanwhile Micron is having trouble producing good yields on the chip.
Micron won't elaborate, but Drexel's Mr. Gumport estimates that Micron spends $6 making a one-megabit chip that it will sell for about $10; the 256-kilobit chip costs about a dollar to make and sells for more than $3, he says. "They're accelerating a transition to a less profitable product," he says. 

Chip prices will keep falling this year and next, analysts say, and Micron may not be able to drive down its costs fast enough to keep up.
Micron concurs. "The big question," says Micron's Mr. Bidard, "is will our new facility, as it ramps up, make up for that price decline." 

Micron also blames the profit drop on a corporate tax rate that went to 36.5% in fiscal 1989 from 17% in 1988, and on an increase in shares outstanding.
Micron sold a 9.8% stake, in newly created shares, to Amstrad PLC of Britain last October.
Micron's net income for fiscal 1989 was up 8.2% to $106.1 million on a 49% rise in revenue to $446.4 million. 

Micron is accustomed to swings in fortunes.
Founded in 1978 in the basement of a dentist's office in Boise, Idaho, by brothers Ward D. and Joseph Parkinson, the company posted losses in 1982 and 1983 when it brought its first products to market.
The company swung into profitability in 1984, the same year it was lauded in a book by neoconservative economist George Gilder as proof of the indomitable powers of U.S. entrepreneurship. 

Then Micron had a $33.9 million loss in 1986.
Micron and Texas Instruments Inc. were the only two U.S. chip vendors to stay in the market for DRAMs after the Japanese forced the others out by flooding the market with cut-rate chips. 

The payoff came late in 1987, after the U.S. began setting floor prices for Japanese DRAM chips as part of the 1986 U.S.Japan semiconductor pact.
The floor prices, and a surge in demand from computer makers, sparked a vast DRAM shortage in 1988, sending prices soaring to as much as $14 for a 256-kilobit DRAM that now sells for something over $3. 

After that, Wall Street was high on Micron.
And in an unusual show of confidence earlier this year, octogenarian potato king J.R. Simplot, who bankrolled the company early on and is its biggest shareholder, urged his employees at potato-supplier J.R. Simplot Co. to buy Micron stock.
The multimillionaire, who reaped a fortune selling potatoes to McDonald's Corp., promised to make up any losses on Micron shares bought at prices as high as $25 apiece. 

But the company lost luster after chip prices began falling late last year just as a new supply of chips from Japanese and South Korean factories began hitting the market. 

Micron is trying to cure swings by diversifying into other types of memories, like the ones it started making last year for use in computer video displays, and into boards that go into computers, which make up 10% of its sales. "We need to grow these other products to help weather the downside," says Mr. Bidard. 

But for the time being, Micron's swinging history has given investors a rollercoaster ride.
The stock fell Tuesday after Montgomery Securities and others reduced their projections for Micron's next quarters. "It's a volatile stock," said analyst Philip Sancken of Piper Jaffray & Hopwood. "Given the nature of the business they're in, it's probably going to continue to be." 

