.START 

Squibb Corp. bought marketing rights to a family of experimental drugs that, its developer claims, hold promise for treating acne, skin wrinkling and baldness. 

Squibb is buying the rights, for an amount that wasn't disclosed, from Chantal Pharmaceutical Corp., a small Los Angeles company that discovered and has been testing the drugs.
Chantal said it is in advanced stages of testing one of the drugs, Cyoctol, as a topical treatment for mild to severe acne.
Another chemically related drug, called Ethocyn, is being tested as an anti-wrinkling cream. 

The acquisition is expected to generate wide interest because there has been much publicity in recent years over drugs which are being touted as hair-growing or wrinkle-fighting treatments.
Sales of Johnson & Johnson's Retin-A acne drug have increased sharply since reports were released that it can smooth some wrinkles. 

Upjohn Co. last year received the first government approval to sell a drug, Rogaine, for hair loss. 

The Chantal drugs are different from these compounds in that they are so-called anti-androgens.
The drugs apparently block the action of male hormones that, when released by the body in excessive amounts, are believed to cause such problems as acne and baldness.
Many drug companies have searched in vain for years for safe anti-androgen drugs.
The first compound which led to the development of the Chantal drugs was discovered by the company's chairman and chief executive officer, Chantal Burnison, in 1978.
The company, formed in 1979, began clinical trials of the drugs about four years ago, but has yet to release any results publicly. 

"We have data that indicate that the drugs are working, that they are very safe and effective," Ms. Burnison said in a telephone interview. "We showed the studies to Squibb and that's why they agreed to sign a deal." 

Ms. Burnison said the company didn't want to release the studies, performed by outside researchers, until it had received patent protection and had found a marketing partner.
She said a study of the drug's use in treating baldness would be released at a medical meeting in December.
In over-the-counter trading, Chantal shares were trading at $3.1875, down 18.75 cents. 

In Princeton, N.J., a spokeswoman for Squibb declined to release details of the drugs' studies, but said that "there was sufficient data to support our interest in this opportunity." Ms. Burnison said Squibb was especially interested in the acne treatment. 

She said the drug would compete against Accutane, the anti-acne drug sold by Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., the U.S. unit of the Swiss company, F. Hoffmann-LaRoche & Co. Accutane, while very effective, is restricted to very severe acne cases because it can cause birth defects when taken by pregnant women. 

Ms. Burnison said Chantal wanted to sign on with Squibb because of that company's pending merger with Bristol-Myers Co., New York.
Chantal believes the drugs, which are being developed for the prescription market, may be safe enough to sell eventually as non-prescription products.
Bristol-Myers has a large non-prescription business. 

Chantal said the agreement "brings solid financial resources to the company." 

