.START 

Wall Street is up to its neck in bridge loans -- about $7 billion worth. 

Bridge financing -- in which investment banking firms make big temporary loans to clients involved in corporate takeovers -- has ballooned in just a few years into a giant business for Wall Street. 

But recent turmoil in the junk-bond market has raised fears once again about whether Wall Street firms may get stuck with big bridge loans that will be difficult to refinance. 

Investment banks make bridge loans -- of as much as $1 billion -- so that a client can complete a major takeover quickly, without waiting for the sometimes lengthy process of raising money by selling high-yield, high-risk junk bonds. 

The business has grown rapidly because it can generate huge profits.
Bridge loans pay interest rates that are as much as four percentage points above the prime rate, and as much as five percentage points above the investment bank's own cost of borrowing.
More importantly, investment banks that are willing to risk their capital in bridge lending can rake in a host of takeover-related fees -- including tens of millions of dollars in separate fees for arranging the acquisitions, making the bridge loans and then selling the junk bonds that repay the bridge loans. 

But like any business with big rewards, there are big risks.
For bridge lending, the main risk is that a junk-market slump will make the junk bonds tougher to sell.
In that case, the Wall Street firm will end up with what is known in the trade as a "hung bridge" -- a bridge loan that the borrower can't refinance. 

Salomon Brothers Inc. and Goldman, Sachs & Co. learned this lesson the hard way after the October 1987 stock market crash forced them to postpone a big junk-bond offering for a group that had acquired Southland Corp. 

First Boston Corp. and two other investment banks learned it last year when they tried to sell $1.15 billion of junk bonds for the Federated Stores unit of Campeau Corp., but could only sell $750 million worth.
The three firms, including PaineWebber Inc. and Dillon, Read & Co., still hold a $400 million bridge loan to Federated, and last week received a 7% stake in Federated as compensation for Federated's most recent failure to refinance it. 

Officials at all of the Wall Street firms with big bridge-lending exposure acknowledge that junk-bond buyers have become pickier about the quality of bonds they will buy.
But the investment bankers say they aren't worried about refinancing their bridge loans. 

For example, Garrett Moran, manager of the high-yield bond department at Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp., says, "We expect to be in the market with both of our larger bridge-loan transactions in October." 

But analysts point to another First Boston deal that could be troublesome.
First Boston tried, and failed, to sell a $475 million junk-bond issue last month to refinance a $450 million bridge loan to a group that bought Ohio Mattress Corp. in a leveraged buy-out. 

First Boston officials say they plan to restructure the Ohio Mattress offering and bring it back to market, and they are confident that they can sell it.
Junk-bond analysts, however, are skeptical, noting that the LBO group paid a seemingly steep $980 million for the company, almost 30 times its earnings in its last fiscal year ended Nov. 30. 

The Ohio Mattress price is about 14 times the company's earnings before interest and taxes, and 11 times its earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation.
That indicates that the company could have difficulty making its interest payments unless its rapid growth continues.
In other LBOs, typical prices have been seven to 10 times a company's earnings before interest and taxes. 

Some analysts fear that Wall Street firms may be lured into making bridge loans that are too risky by the prospect of generating big fees that will help pump up the investment banks' own earnings. 

"This activity has been very lucrative for these firms," says Jeffrey Bowman, a Standard & Poor's Corp. credit analyst who follows securities firms. "The fees they've generated from these types of transactions have allowed the firms to offset the loss of revenue from their retail (brokerage) and other businesses," he says. 

"The pressure on each firm to generate earnings may lead them to finance transactions that may not have been acceptable six months or a year ago," Mr. Bowman adds. 

Investment bankers say most bridge loans are structured in ways that protect the bridge lenders if the loans can't be refinanced quickly.
Interest rates often escalate every six months, and if the loan remains outstanding too long, the Wall Street lender can end up with more collateral or a big equity stake in the company, as Salomon Brothers did with TVX Broadcast Group, a television station owner. 

In addition, most firms sell off chunks of their bridge loans to institutional investors, sometimes retaining as little as 25% of the loan amount. 

Still, such maneuvers can't eliminate risk. "They're helpful, but they're not a bulletproof vest against credit or market risks," said John J. Kriz, the senior securities-industry analyst at Moody's Investors Service Inc. 

The Securities and Exchange Commission, meanwhile, is moving to force securities firms to disclose data on their bridge loans.
Currently, the agency doesn't have the power to demand much of the basic information, because bridge loans are made through affiliates of brokerage firms, rather than through the firms themselves. 

House and Senate committees, at the SEC's request, are discussing legislation that would allow the SEC to demand bridge-loan data from Wall Street firms. 

It's not always the biggest bridge loans that cause the most trouble.
Junk-bond analysts expect First Boston to be able to refinance its $1 billion bridge loan for the acquisition of the Petrolane unit of Texas Eastern Corp. without difficulty.
And Time Warner Inc. now plans to refinance its $2 billion bridge loan from Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. and Merrill Lynch & Co. with bank borrowings, rather than through the sale of junk bonds.
The bank borrowings are expected to be cheaper for Time Warner and won't depend on conditions in the junk-bond market. 

One of the worst problems in the brief history of bridge lending has had a somewhat happy ending.
Salomon, which had sunk a total of $345 million in bridge loans into TVX Broadcasting and ended up owning 79% of its equity, recently agreed to sell its interest to Paramount Communications Inc. for $110 million in cash and the assumption of $30 million in debt.
That should complete repayment of Salomon's loans. "We're going to get out whole," said Michael Zimmerman, Salomon's head of merchant banking. 

Kevin G. Salwen in Washington contributed to this article. 

