.START 

Doskocil Cos. said its planned sale of Wilson Foods Corp. 's fresh and retail meats business to an affiliate of Peck Foods Corp. of Milwaukee has been terminated. 

The $140 million transaction was to have been completed Sept. 30.
But David S. Smoak, president and chief executive officer of Doskocil, said that WFC Acquisition Corp., the Peck affiliate, had informed him that its planned financing had fallen through.
He said he received no "substantive" reason for the loss of financing. 

Doskocil makes pizza toppings and sausage. 

"It's hurt us a lot," said Mr. Smoak, who added that nearly three months of uncertainty about the sale had been "just devastating to our business." Partly as a result, he added, "we expect terrible results in the third quarter, and we expect to spend the next quarter getting back to doing business and not doing asset sales." 

Mr. Smoak said he doesn't know how bad the third quarter results will be, other than "pretty bad." 

In the third quarter of 1988, the company earned $440,000, or eight cents a share, on sales of $44.8 million. 

In a related development, Moody's Investors Service Inc. downgraded Doskocil's senior subordinated debt, due 1999, to single-B-3 from single-B-1 and the subordinated notes, due 1993, to single-B-2 from single-B-3. 

Doskocil has $144 million in long-term debt, of which $90 million remains from its purchase last year of Wilson's stock outstanding.
The sale of Wilson's fresh and retail meat business would have retired that portion of the debt, which includes a $65 million paydown due Dec. 31. 

WFC Acquisition, created specifically to acquire the Wilson properties, is controlled by George N. Gillett Jr., who also owns the Vail, Colo., ski resort and numerous broadcast and food processing properties.
Recently, however, Mr. Gillett has run into financial problems with his 55% share of SCI Television Inc., for which he and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. paid $1.2 billion in a 1987 leveraged buy-out -- a purchase price that was 14.7 times operating cash flow. 

Mr. Gillett couldn't be reached for comment. 

About the same time that SCI began having difficulty meeting debt payments, WFC agreed to pay $140 million in cash for the Wilson properties, according to Mr. Smoak.
But on Aug. 8, he said, WFC signed an amended agreement to pay $150 million (plus warrants) for the property -- $110 million in cash and $40 million in subordinated notes.
Yesterday, the entire package fell through. 

Doskocil would have retained Wilson's delicatessen and food service businesses had the sale gone through.
It closed in national over-the-counter trading yesterday at $8, down $1.625. 

