.START 

Voyager's detailed pictures of Neptune and Triton were so remarkable that the stunning engineering achievement of getting the information back across some three billion miles with a minuscule radio transmitter, and the lesson that could be taken from it, tended to get lost like a fainter light in the presence of the sun. 

Scientists said that the Voyager transmitter used about as much power as the light bulb in a refrigerator -- 22 watts, and by the time the signal reached any point on Earth it amounted to about one quadrillionth of a watt, or about 20 billion times less energy than a digital watch uses.
To read the strings of numbers from which the computers created the pictures, the scientists needed an antenna surface equal to several football fields. 

But there is another factor, known in communications as the signal-to-noise ratio.
Old-timers will recall the effort they made -- and the thrill they got -- when they were able to pick up music from a distant source through the crash of static from thunderstorms and the hiss of the electrons in the vacuum-tube circuits of their own receivers, not to mention the sparks from electric motors and automobile engines. 

Technology has done a lot to suppress circuit noise since those days, but this old radio ham wonders how the engineers were able to differentiate Voyager's small voice from the glow left by the Big Bang and the synchotron radiation that Karl Jansky and Grote Reber found streaming in from all directions of the sky in the 1930s and 1940s as they pioneered radio astronomy.
The sky is "hot." 

In the same sense we live in a "hot" society in which we are being continually deluged with messages by radio, television, cellular phone and every other means of communication. (At least a few old-time Catholics even think their liturgy had a better signal-to-noise ratio pre-Vatican II, before guitars and frenetic activity.
Contemplation was downgraded in preference to social activism.
So far, no cellular phones at Mass, as far as I know.) 

The computer, no doubt a great boon to productivity (and to Voyager's small voice), has made it possible to make or lose money at the speed of light, and become a factor in a proliferation of information that threatens to over-stress the human neurological circuits if not the electronic networks.
It was ironic, in a way, that John Sculley, the president and CEO of Apple Computer, felt he needed several months off a year or so ago to find time to think about the future of the company.
And the centennial edition of this newspaper documented the fact that more and more managers and executives are "getting off the fast track" to have more time with their families.
Among my young neighbors who would qualify as yuppies I find a disposition to work only a few years for the same company and then go into something else, such as teaching. 

Voyager has shown us what marvelous messages can get through when we suppress the noise and let a small voice have its say.
What wonders would result if everyone took a little quiet time away from the drumbeat of modern life to think?
Probably a huge segment of the population would just go to sleep from fatigue, and that could be a good thing, too. 

Mr. Barrett, a retired columnist for the San Jose Mercury News, thought about this during a wakeful night. 

