.START 

Quantum Pharmics Ltd., a generic drug unit of American Home Products Corp., has stopped shipping products and suspended operations because of a federal investigation into information the company supplied to obtain three drug approvals. 

The Food and Drug Administration didn't identify the drugs in question, but said "some data appears to have been misrepresented to the agency during the approval process." 

An American Home spokeswoman confirmed that Quantum has temporarily closed because of an internal investigation that began last month as well as the FDA's ongoing inquiry. 

Earlier this summer, Quantum was described in testimony before a congressional subcommittee headed by Rep. John Dingell as having a "cozy relationship" with an ex-FDA official who speeded up drug approvals for some companies while penalizing others. 

Rep. Dingell, a Michigan Democrat, indicated that his investigators plan to further investigate Quantum, including its acquisition by American Home.
In a letter yesterday to American Home's chief executive officer, Rep. Dingell asked for copies of reports and analysis related to the Quantum transaction, as well as other internal documents. 

The Quantum shutdown marks the third generic drug maker to at least temporarily halt some production in the wake of beefed up FDA industry surveillance.
Par Pharmaceutical Inc., Spring Valley, N.Y., and Vitarine Pharmaceutical Co., Springfield Gardens, N.Y., each stopped making some products as a result of FDA scrutiny of manufacturing facilities and drug approvals. 

An American Home spokeswoman described the Quantum shutdown as "a voluntary and temporary suspension.
Nothing has come to our attention about the safety and efficacy of our products," she added. 

Quantum, based in Amityville, N.Y., makes about 20 products.
About half of Quantum's 100 employees were laid off as a result of the closing, the spokeswoman said. 

American Home, involved in anti-generic drug campaigns over the years, surprised some industry executives when it acquired controlling interest in Quantum in 1986.
The company then was only three years old. 

New York-based American Home has interests in prescription and over-the-counter drugs, medical supplies and food and household products. 

Quantum was among a handful of companies cited for enjoying special treatment from former FDA reviewer Charles Y. Chang in House subcommittee testimony from Dr. Marvin Seife, former head of the FDA's generic division. 

Dr. Seife testified that he began diverting Quantum's drug applications away from Mr. Chang in 1986 to avoid any appearance of conflict of interest or favoritism.
Dr. Seife said he became suspicious of Mr. Chang's ties to Quantum because one of the company's former officers, Jin-Shung Chang, spoke in Chinese with Charles Chang. 

Dr. Seife also testified that he wouldn't have promoted Charles Chang to supervisor over seven other reviewers had he been informed that Jin-Shung Chang, while working at another drug company, gave Charles Chang a case of wine and a fur coat for his wife in 1980.
Dr. Seife testified that he didn't know such allegations to be true until he was read a report this past year by a Dingell subcommittee investigator. 

Mr. Chang was allowed to return those items, saying he didn't realize that accepting such gifts violated FDA guidelines, Dr. Seife testified. "I think he was given a letter of admonition and the matter dropped." 

Charles Chang is one of three FDA employees who resigned from the agency and pleaded guilty to criminal charges related to helping certain generic drug companies obtain approvals to market generic versions of brand-name drugs.
He pleaded guilty in a Baltimore federal court to two counts of interstate travel in aid of racketeering. 

Mr. Chang's charges involve accepting a paid, round-the-world trip that cost more than $3,000 from a consultant at the direction of the president of American Therapeutics Inc. of Bohemia, N.Y. ATI's president also purchased furniture and computer equipment for Mr. Chang totaling almost $8,000.
Neither ATI nor its officers have been charged with any crime, and the company has denied any wrongdoing. 

Jin-Shung Chang couldn't be reached for comment. 

American Home stock rose 25 cents yesterday to close at $100.375 a share in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. 

