.START 

The Senate, overturning a five-year policy begun under the Reagan administration, voted to resume U.S. contributions to a United Nations population fund long-opposed by anti-abortionists. 

Final approval came on a simple voice vote, but only after the Democratic leadership narrowly succeeded in tabling a conservative amendment seeking to withhold aid because of U.N. activities in China, where the government has been accused of coercive abortions.
The tabling motion first split the chamber evenly, 49-49, but Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) quickly forced a second attempt, where he prevailed 52-48. 

The action came as a bipartisan majority approved increased military aid of $90 million for El Salvador after rejecting efforts to impose conditions on the release of the funds to the new Cristiani government.
On a 67-33 roll call, a coalition of younger, often liberal Democrats joined GOP conservatives in opposing the restrictions, and the final $90 million package won approval by a 82-18 margin. 

The Bush administration was helped by its alliance with Connecticut Sen. Christopher Dodd, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee overseeing Central America.
The voting pattern illustrated an almost generational divide as younger Democrats split with the party's older, more entrenched liberal camp opposed to unrestricted military aid. 

Among those joining Mr. Dodd were Mr. Mitchell and Massachusetts Sen. John Kerry as well as Nebraska freshman Sen. Bob Kerrey.
By comparison, on the opposite side were such familiar old guard Democrats as New York Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Sens.
Daniel Inouye of Hawaii and Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts.
Both the U.N. funds and El Salvador aid are part of a larger fiscal 1990 spending bill, allocating more than $14.4 billion for foreign-aid accounts in the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1. 

The measure would significantly increase U.S. aid to Poland beyond what the Bush administration has so far proposed, and it incorporates new provisions relaxing current limits on the refinancing of U.S. loans by such major recipients of military aid as Israel and Egypt. 

An estimated $5.5 billion is provided altogether for military assistance -- a modest reduction from current funding, but less severe in its makeup than the appropriations approved by the House. 

The Senate bill would restore $50 million of the Bush administration's request for contributions to the World Bank.
But, elsewhere, the measure rejects all of the $150 million approved by the House for a new International Monetary Fund facility to ease the debt and credit problems of poor countries, largely in sub-Saharan Africa. 

Small by comparison, the $15 million approved yesterday for the U.N. population fund has political importance at home as well as abroad.
No money would be provided for activities in China, but the contribution would be the first new funding since the Reagan administration began to withhold assistance in 1985. 

The Bush administration remains opposed to any change in the current policy.
But it faces a new aggressiveness by those opposed to restrictions imposed by the anti-abortion movement during the past decade. 

The Senate's two women members, Sens.
Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas and Barbara Mikulski of Maryland, both supported renewal of aid.
And in the Senate Appropriations Committee and again yesterday on the floor, proponents won because of support from the panel's ranking Republican, Sen. Mark Hatfield of Oregon. 

Meanwhile, Senate negotiators further narrowed their differences over the level of federal spending for law enforcement and anti-drug programs.
But they showed no progress in resolving the question of how to finance the added appropriations of $3 billion to $3.2 billion above current levels of $5.7 billion. 

Democrats are proposing an across-the-board cut of 0.425% from defense and domestic programs, but the result would be to cut almost $1.3 billion from the military -- more than the GOP and White House are now willing to accept. 

Unless the impasse is broken today, lawmakers in both parties say the issue may be forced to a floor fight.
President Bush told Senate Republicans yesterday that he already is wary of how far the proposals have gone beyond his initial $2.2 billion package. 

The promise of increased funds has already begun to draw competing interests, and the new drug war may prove as vulnerable to pork-barrel politics as Pentagon bills have in the past. 

A House-Senate conference, for example, tentatively approved yesterday a more than 50% increase in the administration's request for the Customs Service air-interdiction program.
The additional funds, estimated at $68 million, include money to buy five Citation II aircraft built by Cessna and supported by Kansas senators, including Minority Leader Robert Dole of Kansas, the manufacturer's home state. 

Another $28 million is allocated for the administration's planned stepped-up inspections of cargo containers.
And within the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the conference approved most of the president's May request to beef up a program to track career criminals who carry firearms and have often proved to be involved in drug-trafficking. 

In contrast to the priority now given to drug programs, the underlying foreign-aid bill before the Senate reflects severe constraints imposed by the budget.
Democrats on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee yesterday approved ambitious goals of $375 million in annual assistance for Poland and Hungary, but the appropriation bill would provide less than a third of this total. 

An estimated $5 million is promised to Hungary and a near $100 million package of aid and guarantees -- from the Overseas Private Investment Corp. -- is set aside for Poland.
The mix of assistance isn't as generous as the sponsors had first hoped, but the package goes well beyond the administration's initial request. 

John E. Yang contributed to this article. 

