.START 

When Mustafa Boulroud hustled his first tourist 25 years ago, his only competition was a snake charmer who draped serpents around visitors' necks, then left the vipers there until paid to take them away. 

"Times were good then; I had the dollars and francs all to me," says Mr. Boulroud, swooping onto a visiting American like a vulture spotting carrion -- and shooing away a dozen others who sense fresh meat as well. "There are so many in the business now, I think I must start a union." 

Mr. Boulroud calls himself a "guide" and his turf is Marrakesh's central square, the Djemaa el-Fna, which translates as "Assembly of the Dead." The macabre name dates from several centuries ago, when the square was used to display criminals' severed heads. 

These days it is tourists who get clipped, separated from their dollars rather than their necks.
Marrakesh isn't the oldest tourist trap in the Arab world, but it is easily the most aggressive.
Con men and charlatans are so thick and so persistent that they make camel drivers at the Pyramids look like Swiss maitres d'. 

Typically, the hustle begins with a line reminiscent of the pickpocket in the movie "Casablanca," who warns a bar patron, "This is a dangerous place, full of vultures" -- just as he's relieving the mark of his wallet. 

"Mister, Djemaa is a crazy place for you," insists the first of many young men, clutching a visitor's sleeve. "If you not hire guide, you will be hassled." 

"But you're hassling me." 

"I not hassle, I show you Berber casbah.
Very nice carpets.
Very interesting price." 

Interesting, yes, because the price is 20 times the carpet's value.
Guides get a 5% cut for every customer they dragoon. 

"Guides" aren't the only vultures in Marrakesh and tourists aren't the only prey.
Desert herdsmen and mountain peasants flock here for services unavailable in remote oases and villages.
The Djemaa, an unkempt triangle bordered by salmon-colored stucco buildings and no-star hotels, is a crowded circus offering all that country folk might need. 

Dr. Lahan Oubati, for instance, wrenches out molars for the modest sum of 10 dirhams, about 85 cents.
He hasn't got a dentistry degree, but he does have pliers and a pile of extracted teeth displayed on the small table that serves as his open-air office. 

Dr. Oubati is one of the few Djemaa denizens who doesn't traffic in magic.
Built in the 11th century, Marrakesh lies on an ancient caravan route from Timbuktu, and black African healers still come here to learn new tricks, and to share a few of their own. 

Illiterate peasants pay a scribe to write letters or to fill out forms with a sharpened bamboo quill.
When not writing letters, though, the scribe makes amulets to ward off the evil eye, or to keep the attention of straying spouses. 

At "the Sahara pharmacy," a desert druggist named Abdullah Zawia has whatever an ailing person requires: herbs, incense, whale bones, ostrich eggs and lizards -- live and dead.
Waving a bone, he recites a Berber incantation and steps over the live, though somnolent, iguana. "This will make your headache go away," he says.
He also offers to cut the lizard's throat so a patient can drink the reptile's blood, a cure for chest pains. 

Nearby, a Berber woman sits beneath an umbrella, telling fortunes with a deck of Tarot-like cards.
Her words, a mix of pidgin English and French, are muffled by the veil drawn tightly beneath her nose. 

Turning the first card, she predicts, "You will make much money in your life" -- some of which is about to be shared with her. 

Turning over another, she adds, "But you will have much trouble finding a wife." 

The tourist protests. "I'm married.
Happily." "Well, you will have trouble finding second wife." 

When the tourist refuses to pay more to continue the fortune, she flips over a card, and reveals a skeleton. "Oh, I am so sorry for you," she says. "The card of death." 

Some hustlers make money simply by making a spectacle of themselves.
One man sits smoking "kif," Moroccan marijuana, and reciting the strange and wonderful visions that come to him, for a sum.
Another crouches with closed eyes and a pained expression, beneath photographs showing backs and thighs covered in lesions.
The box beside him suggests that he suffers from a terrible disease that only your coins can soothe.
Of course there is no way to confirm this; he keeps his clothes on at all times. 

Then there's entertainment: acrobats, puppeteers, contortionists and storytellers.
The snake charmers are the most common, and the least charming.
They have become such vipers for the tourist dollar that even a photo costs; point a camera at a cobra and its keeper will instantly toss a tambourine over the snake.
Pay five dirhams and the charmer will bang the tambourine while a companion tootles on a horn, and the snake slithers and pokes its forked black tongue. 

Veteran guides such as Mustafa Boulroud will show you all this, then navigate the narrow alleys of the casbah, past brass makers and spice sellers and weavers, and straight to a carpet shop. "This man has very beautiful rugs," he says. "And very big teeth." Meaning, he's greedy.
Pricing a carpet in Morocco is like visiting your local used car lot; there is no simple answer to the simple question, "How much?" Unfurling a rug from the High Atlas Mountains, Nezhari Mohamed -- he of the big teeth -- exposes a tag labeled 6000 dirhams, about $700. "This is tourist price," he says. "But you come with Mustafa.
So for you we have special price.
A price 'tres interessant'." "How much?" "How much do you offer?" he responds. 

The tourist says 1500 and the merchant laughs. "This is not an interesting price." Mint tea is served.
A pad and pencil appear.
Mr. Mohamed extols the virtues of this rug above all other rugs, then scribbles 4000.
The tourist heads for the door. 

"Monsieur, what is your last price?" 

"No more than 1750." 

"Your very last price?" 

"Maybe I can pay 1800." 

"Your very very last price?" 

The tourist, inching upward while Mr. Mohamed hasn't budged, heads again for the door. "Okay, okay," Mr. Mohamed says, clapping his hands. "I accept 2000." 

He has a snake-charmer's guile, and seduces the tourist into paying 2000 for a rug that is doubtless available down the street at a quarter the price. 

Finally, retreating through the bazaar, there is the matter of Mr. Boulroud's "tip." After all, he has warded off other guides, "and I have taught you how to bargain like a Berber," he says. 

"How much do I owe you?" 

Mr. Boulroud smiles. "How much do you offer?" Pocketing $10 for his labor, he spies a busload of German tourists, and hurries off. 

Mr. Horwitz, a free-lance writer based in London, has written extensively on the Mideast. 

