.START 

It's an old lesson that investors in junk-bond mutual funds are learning the hard way: You can't pocket a fat payout without taking a big risk. 

Many small investors are appalled by this year's suddenly weak returns on many of the nation's 90 junk funds, which hold about $40 billion of high-yield, high-risk bonds.
So who's to blame for funneling all that money into a disappointment? 

Some investors point the finger at brokers, complaining that the risks weren't fully explained.
But brokers reply that investors were greedy, allowing their ardor for double-digit yields to obscure Rule One of investing: a higher yield generally means an investment is less safe. 

"To buy on pure yield is one of the classic, all-time investment errors, " said Lewis Walker of Walker Capital Management Corp. 

The junk-bond funds continue to rake in enormous interest payments.
What has eroded their value to fund shareholders is this year's weakness in junk-bond prices, especially the past week's tremors caused by Campeau Corp. 's brief cash squeeze. 

Investors have racked up a measly 5.7% total return, or price changes plus interest payments, for a Merrill Lynch junk-bond index in the year to date.
And many junk-bond funds have done worse than that. 

"This shows the need for people to pick up the bloody prospectus and at least read the paragraph on risks," said Kathryn McGrath, head of investment management at the Securities and Exchange Commission. 

But brokers, who by far sell the bulk of all junk funds, also are to blame, some financial planners said. 

"The guy on the phone who's churning and burning may not understand what he's selling," Mr. Walker said.
When that broker meets a naive customer scrounging for steep yields, he said, it spells trouble. 

The funds' names and advertising don't help.
They typically include the words "high yield," "high income" or "extra income." Promotional materials may include little or no mention of high risks. "They're not called 'low credit-quality funds' or 'junk funds, '" noted Donald Gould of Huntington Advisers Inc., Pasadena, Calif. 

Some investors claim they never were told their funds held junk bonds.
Consider Al Frisch, a former cameraman for the "Late Night With David Letterman" television show.
Looking to live off monthly distribution checks, Mr. Frisch last year put $200,000 of his $310,000 retirement stash into the Dean Witter High Yield Securities Fund. 

Mr. Frisch, who conceded he knows little about the markets, said his former broker, Pia Hieber, misled him about the fund's risks. "She told me it was perfectly safe," he contended, and "never told me it was junk bonds." 

Hogwash, replied Ms. Hieber, now a broker for Gruntal Inc.
She said she clearly pointed out the risks to Mr. Frisch and even recommended that he buy tax-deferred annuities instead.
But "he had to have the highest payout," she said. "He's probably upset because {the fund's} value has slumped." 

Ms. Hieber added that the Dean Witter portfolio isn't "a 'junk-junk' fund. . . . It's got some pretty-good-rated bonds." But as for putting in so much of Mr. Frisch's retirement money, she said, "We probably shouldn't have let him do it." 

Dozens of funds that aren't labeled "high yield" also hold sizable chunks of junk bonds.
These include several of the industry's most respected funds such as Fidelity Puritan, Strong Income Fund, Nicholas Income Fund and Lindner Dividend Fund. 

Such funds in some cases have been pressured into investing in junk to compete with the yields offered by high-flying junk funds, said Lori Lucas, an analyst at Mutual Fund Values, a Chicago publication that tracks mutual funds. 

But some managers have sharply pared back junk holdings.
Richard Strong said, for instance, the Strong Income Fund has about 35% of its portfolio in junk bonds, sharply below the 90% held late last year. 

There "has been a huge tornado swirling over" the junk market, Mr. Strong said.
And "there might be some pretty good gems in the trash heap if you sort through it." But analyzing junk bonds takes time, and a slower economy doesn't bode well for many junk credits.
So Mr. Strong said he's unlikely to hunt for any gems right now. 

Fidelity Puritan, for its part, now has about 11% of its portfolio in junk bonds, less than half the level held a year ago, a Fidelity spokesman said. 

National Bond Fund has trimmed its junk-bond holdings to about 55% of the portfolio from about 75% two months ago.
Ole Dial, the fund's new manager, said the portfolio was too risky. 

The $600 million fund, which is sold through brokers, has had about $1 million a day withdrawn by investors since Mr. Dial took over two months ago.
But he blames the outflow on the fund's previous weak performance record rather than the recent junk-market turmoil.
He notes that outflows haven't accelerated in recent days. 

So far, withdrawals of money from junk funds have come primarily from a few big funds sold directly to investors, fund executives said.
People who buy these no-load funds typically are much more active and sophisticated traders than those who buy through brokers.
And many broker-sold funds charge exit fees, discouraging investors from redeeming their shares. 

But if the junk market sours further, some investment advisers say the broker-sold funds could see significant outflows too.
Investors in many government-securities funds sold through brokers bailed out long after the returns on these funds started to sour in 1987. 

"If junk-bond returns stay crummy for a period of time, it will be like the {San Francisco} 49ers all trying to get through the same door at one time," said Kurt Brouwer, a San Francisco investment adviser. 

