.START 

The Canadian government is expected to revise its planned 9% consumption tax because of growing criticism, political analysts said. 

Business and consumer groups are complaining that the proposed value-added tax is too high and has too many exemptions.
It is to take effect Jan. 1, 1991. 

Critics of the tax are "pushing the government in the direction it probably wants to go anyway," said John Evans, president of the Trust Companies Association, a trade group.
He predicted the government will revise its tax plan before it introduces legislation later this year to implement it. 

The government proposed various exemptions to the tax to win support for it.
But the exemptions, which include "basic groceries," have provoked criticism because of their alleged complexities and inequities. 

At parliamentary hearings on the tax, restaurant-industry critics displayed various food items.
They included a $641 tin of Iranian caviar that they said would be tax-free, and a 72 cent carton of milk that would be taxable if purchased at a fast-food restaurant. 

A public-opinion poll said 75% of Canadians consider the proposed tax "unfair" and 67% believe it will hurt the economy. 

The Consumers Association of Canada has proposed that the rate be reduced to 5% from 9%, without exemptions, but that "generous" credits be provided for low-income Canadians to offset the tax's impact. 

The planned tax would replace an outmoded federal sales tax that is applied at the manufacturers' level.
Under the new levy, businesses throughout the production and distribution chain would collect the new tax on their sales.
They could claim a credit for any tax paid on goods and services purchased for their business.
The ultimate burden of the tax would fall on the consumer. 

The new tax would be in addition to sales taxes in all Canadian provinces, except Alberta.
Provincial sales taxes range up to 12%. 

Two levels of sales tax will cause "the ultimate compliance nightmare for small businesses," said John Bulloch, president of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, which represents small and medium-sized businesses.
The federal government tried unsuccessfully to get the provinces to participate in a national sales tax that would incorporate federal and provincial sales taxes. 

The Conference Board of Canada said the proposed value-added tax, by replacing the existing outmoded manufacturers' sales tax, would eventually benefit Canada.
But the research group said the new tax would be a blow to the economy during its first year, slowing growth and pushing up consumer prices by 2.7%.
It said the government could "still reap all the benefits" of the tax if the rate were reduced to 7%. 

The government is awaiting the outcome of current parliamentary hearings on the levy before announcing what changes it is prepared to make in the tax, known as the Goods and Services Tax. 

