.START 

The New York Stock Exchange, in an unprecedented request, is seeking permission to trade 205 Nasdaq and American Stock Exchange stocks. 

The Big Board, in what it called a "technicality" connected with its controversial stock-basket product, asked the Securities and Exchange Commission for permission to trade the seven Amex and 31 Nasdaq stocks that are part of Standard & Poor's Corp. 's 500-stock index, on which the basket will be based.
It also wants permission to trade 167 stocks that the Big Board said are "likely candidates" for future substitution in the S&P 500. 

In a letter to the SEC, the Big Board said it will use the privileges to trade the 205 non-Big Board securities "only for the purpose of trading Exchange Stock Portfolios, and only to the extent required by changes" to the S&P 500. 

The American Stock Exchange, however, isn't so sure of what the Big Board has in mind. 

Amex President Kenneth Liebler said that at first glance, the Big Board filing "raises a lot of questions." He said his exchange won't be that concerned if the trading privileges are exclusively geared to accommodating basket trading.
But Mr. Liebler questioned the large number of Amex stocks -- more than 100 issues -- that the Big Board wants the flexibility to trade just in case S&P ever includes them in the S&P 500. "That's something we wouldn't necessarily give our blessing to," Mr. Liebler said. 

Nasdaq President Joseph Hardiman said he isn't concerned that the Big Board might use the basket as a means of trying to steal away Nasdaq stocks.
Competition between the Nasdaq and Big Board has been fierce in recent years for listings of hot stocks. 

"They view those 31 stocks as stocks they'd love to have," he said.
But "I don't think they're going to use this as a platform to go after some of our stocks." 

For its part, the Big Board insists it's not trying to horn in on other exchanges' prized issues. "We are proposing to trade a product that involves stocks not listed on the NYSE, and we are taking the necessary steps to trade that product," the exchange said in a statement. 

This is the first time the Big Board has sought permission to trade a stock that trades on another exchange, according to Howard Kramer, assistant director for the SEC's division of market regulation. 

The exchange considers the stock basket one of its most important new forays in many years.
The product, announced in June and awaiting regulatory approval, is designed to give big investors a new way to trade a broad cross section of the market. 

The Big Board product would enable big institutional investors to buy and sell, in $5 million blocks, all the stocks in the S&P 500.
The product isn't expected to begin trading until late October at the earliest. 

When the Big Board announced its basket product, it considered matching the basket to the 462 stocks in the S&P 500 that are traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
But big investors argued that the missing 38 stocks would have too great an impact on the trading. 

The latest move doesn't mean that investors will be flocking to the Big Board to trade such big-name Nasdaq issues as Apple Computer Inc. and MCI Communications Corp., the Big Board said.
It added that the stocks will be available only as part of the basket. 

What the Big Board is seeking is "unlisted trading privileges" in the 205 stocks.
That would allow the Big Board to trade the issues in a way similar to the Midwest or Pacific exchanges' trading in many stocks. 

The matter is the latest in a series of thorny issues raised since the Big Board announced its new product in June.
Traders wonder whether this is a one-time foray into OTC and Amex stocks, or whether the Big Board will seek permission to trade a host of baskets and even more trading privileges in unlisted stocks. 

