.START 

The Federal Aviation Administration proposed fining Pan American World Airways $630,000 for alleged security violations involving six flights, including Flight 103, which crashed in Lockerbie, Scotland, in what investigators believe was a terrorist bombing. 

The infractions, the FAA said, involved security breaches in the methods used to screen passengers and baggage before the boarding of flights at London's Heathrow and West Germany's Frankfurt airports. 

The FAA didn't charge that the lapses contributed to the Dec. 21, 1988, disaster over Lockerbie, in which 270 people were killed.
However, a criminal investigation into the disaster, involving the Federal Bureau of Investigation and European authorities, is continuing. 

Pan Am, a subsidiary of Pan Am Corp., must respond to the FAA within 30 days.
Thomas Plaskett, Pan Am's chairman and chief executive officer, portrayed the alleged breaches as being "of an administrative, rather than substantive, nature." 

Privately, FAA senior officials scoffed at Mr. Plaskett's description. "They don't look like administrative violations to me," one official said. 

Investigators believe that Flight 103, which took off from Heathrow en route to New York, blew apart after the detonation of a bomb disguised as a radio-cassette recorder.
The device apparently was put aboard in a suitcase in Frankfurt, where the flight originated.
A leading suspect in the case is a terrorist group known as the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, according to investigators. 

The FAA investigation began the day after the bombing, and ended Jan. 31, 1989.
The agency said that Pan Am has since corrected the security problems. 

In proposing the $630,000 fine, the aviation agency said a number of violations involved Flight 103.
For example, 31 passengers at Heathrow fit the FAA's profile of people who should have been screened more than once before boarding.
Pan Am failed to identify the passengers, the FAA said, and thus didn't conduct the required additional screening of them or their baggage. 

Similarly, five people who boarded the flight in Frankfurt should have been screened more than once, the agency said.
Another five people got off the plane in Frankfurt because one of the passengers was sick, but their checked baggage wasn't taken off the flight. 

Pan Am also was cited for security violations involving three other flights at Heathrow and two more at Frankfurt, including the improper screening of carry-on luggage and the alleged failure to search an aircraft's cargo area.
The proposed fine includes $480,000 for violations in London and $150,000 in Frankfurt. 

Separately, the House passed legislation authorizing $100 million from the Aviation Trust Fund for the purchase and installation of devices to detect explosives at high-risk airports.
The legislation also authorizes $170 million for airports to set up computer-controlled access systems to better guard secured areas. 

Last month, the FAA issued a rule requiring U.S. airlines to install bomb-detection machines to screen checked luggage at about 40 airports in the U.S. and abroad.
Although the agency didn't specify which detection systems the airlines must use, it strongly endorsed thermal neutron analysis devices, which detect nitrogen compounds found in explosives. 

