.START 

Campeau Corp. got its $250 million in refinancing from Olympia & York and the junk-bond market is OK again -- right?
Well, not quite. 

No doubt Campeau's troubles served as a trigger for the September swoon of high-yield bonds, and no doubt its new deal helped arrest the fall.
But after all, not even the biggest enthusiast for the bonds ever argued that every deal financed by them would succeed, or that excesses were impossible.
None denied that the bonds of growing ventures were more risky than those of industrial behemoths.
But as Chase Manhattan's $1.31 billion charge against earnings yesterday proved, there also are a lot of risks outside the junk-bond market, some obviously larger than those inside.
Michael Milken's original insight was that added risk of junk bonds was more than offset by the higher yield, and on this insight much of seven years of economic expansion was financed. 

Now our government is devoting its resources to putting Mr. Milken in jail.
And, faced with a savings-and-loan crisis, Congress decided not to forsake its own meddling or reform deposit insurance, but to force the S&Ls to sell their considerable holdings of high-yield bonds.
Lo and behold, the high-yield bond market is showing signs of more sellers than buyers.
And the critics who coined the word "junk" and fomented these Washington decisions are claiming vindication. 

It is of course true that "junk" has helped finance that economic phenomenon of the 1980s, the hostile takeover, and thus helped upset the big-business status quo.
Of course, it also financed the friendly mergers and management buy-outs to which corporate leaders don't object.
It also financed a good many young growth enterprises.
But politicians, wanting to "protect" businesses in their districts and their campaign contributions, have mostly sided with today's management, not tomorrow's. 

Congress's first major attempted assault on the junk-LBO business helped bring about the 1987 Wall Street crash.
Ways and Means Democrats inserted a "corporate raider" tax into that year's tax bill to make stock run-ups during takeover attempts less profitable.
They also wanted to cap interest deductions for LBO borrowing.
The resulting slump in takeover stocks no doubt contributed to the crash because a lot of the market activity at that time was in such stocks.
Chastened by the crash, Congress dropped the anti-takeover measures. 

But with memories of the crash dimming, new attacks are afoot.
The thrift-bailout bill will force thrifts to dispose of their junk-bond holdings by July 1, 1994.
Considering the fact that high-yields have been the second most profitable banking investment -- after credit cards -- and the Congressional Budget Office absolved junk of any role in the thrift debacle, that provision made no sense.
But this is politics, not economics. 

Last week, Ways and Means in its latest tax bill slipped back cautiously to the scene of its 1987 crime.
No more "corporate raider" taxes, but there is a provision that limits refunds of prior-year taxes for companies that show losses because of high LBO interest costs. 

None of these things are sufficient to wreck the high-yield bond business, but they don't do it any good either.
Neither is it helpful to the high-yield market to have Drexel Burnham Lambert, which pioneered the business, under attack from the SEC.
Or to have Mr. Milken under federal indictment for practices that, even if they occurred, were the sort of thing normally dealt with through SEC administrative penalties. 

What does any of this have to do with the economy?
For one thing, a serious jolt to the high-yield bond market could make it more difficult for start-up and growth companies to receive financing.
High-yield bonds are nothing more mysterious than bonds that do not receive the top "investment grade" marks of rating agencies.
Investment-grade bonds are relatively rare.
How could we have ever financed seven years of economic advance without high-yield bonds? 

And what about LBOs?
Campeau proves that heavy leveraging has dangers.
It also proves, however, that there usually is another buyer waiting in the wings to take over the assets of a distressed corporation and turn a profit on them.
There was never much danger that Bloomingdale's would fall into a pothole in Lexington Avenue.
Indeed, Michael C. Jensen of Harvard Business School argues that having to service a large debt is a far more stringent discipline for managers than the minimal pressures applied by a broad and diffuse group of shareholders.
The Campeau failure looks like the transfer of assets into stronger hands. 

Finally, if the political assault on junk becomes severe, it could encourage a further "flight to quality," that is, buying Treasury bills not because the Washington spending they finance is productive but because the government owns the printing press.
Laws forcing investors to pull in their horns are not a recipe for growth but a recipe for recession.
Is it necessary for Washington to have to learn the lessons of October 1987 all over again? 

