.START 

Heavy buying by Japanese investors sent the shares of Spain Fund soaring more than 32%, yesterday's biggest rise for any stock on any exchange. 

But analysts and money managers, baffled at the fund's huge run-up in a down market for Spanish shares, cautioned that the publicly traded stock fund is ripe for a fall. 

"Invest in Spain and you may go down the drain," analyst Steve Cress wrote in an international strategy weekly publication for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. 

Yesterday's closing price of $28.75, up $7, left the closed-end fund trading at an astounding 100% premium over the value of its underlying portfolio of Spanish companies' shares.
That's the largest premium of any fund now trading in a market that doesn't restrict direct investment by foreigners.
Volume in the Spain Fund yesterday exceeded 1.1 million shares, 10 times the normal turnover. 

(Closed-end funds issue a fixed number of shares that trade publicly at a premium or discount to the market value of their portfolio holdings.
Open-end mutual funds continuously issue and redeem shares, always at net asset value.) 

Yesterday's run-up stemmed from extraordinarily large orders from Japanese investors executed through Nomura Securities Co., traders said.
Those orders triggered a wave of buying by investors and speculators who were caught in a squeeze because they had earlier bet the stock would fall.
Instead, the sharp price rise left them scrambling to cut their losses.
That buying, in turn, fueled further price rises. 

P.J. Johnson, a spokesman for Nomura's U.S. unit in New York, said: "As a matter of policy, we never comment on customer transactions." 

Officials at Alliance Capital Management Corp., the fund's adviser, said "there are no fundamental developments" to have caused such a price jump.
Dave Williams, Alliance's chairman, declined to comment on reports of a short squeeze.
The market action followed a delayed opening on the New York Stock Exchange caused by overly large buy orders that couldn't immediately be filled. 

For weeks the market has been rife with rumors about massive Japanese interest in the $140 million asset fund. "The money flows on the retail side have increased enormously in the past two months," said John A. Conlon Jr., an executive vice president at the U.S. unit of Nikko Securities Co. in New York. 

An executive at one of Japan's big life insurance companies said that the firm had bought the fund, but not in large amounts.
Instead, executives at several Japanese securities firms said, the major interest was coming from individual Japanese investors.
One added that some traders might mistakenly have interpreted large orders from wealthy customers as institutional purchases.
Nonetheless, Mr. Conlon said, the interest in the Spain Fund was widespread, coming from more than just the Japanese. 

Despite the heavy buying, analysts said, investors looking for exposure to Spanish stocks can find much better buys elsewhere.
The First Iberian Fund -- a smaller fund traded on the American Stock Exchange with a portfolio of mostly Spanish securities -- currently trades at about a 22% premium to its net asset value.
First Iberian rose $1.375, to $12.375, on heavy volume of 565,000 shares. 

The First Spanish Investment Trust trades on the London Stock Exchange at a slight discount.
U.S. investors can also buy American Depositary Receipts on several of the big Spanish stocks in the fund.
These so-called ADRs represent shares of foreign companies traded in the U.S. 

Analysts said it's probably worth paying some premium for the professional management of stocks in foreign countries.
But only the Korea Fund trades as far above the value of its underlying holdings as Spain Fund does now.
And the Korea Fund -- unlike the Spain Fund -- invests in a market that is otherwise closed to American and other non-Korean investors. 

Moreover, investors buying any fund for more than its portfolio value can easily get hurt.
Nearly everything has to go right for investors to make money: Even if the underlying markets surge, the fund's own stock price can fall. 

Nonetheless, Japanese investors are seemingly comfortable paying what Americans consider inflated prices for stock.
That's because they are used to share prices in the Tokyo market that average about 65 times company earnings and can sometimes be well over 100 times earnings. 

Japanese investors have been buying shares in all the West European country funds, says an executive at a Japanese securities firm.
A key reason: the planned abolition of trade barriers among the 12 countries of the European Community in 

Nikko's Mr. Conlon noted that many investors consider Spain "to be at the vanguard" of the scheduled 1992 European unification.
Brokers also said that Spain's specific allure related to the 1992 Olympic games scheduled for Barcelona. 

"Everybody wants to put their money into Europe because of 1992," said a Japanese broker. "Country funds are the easiest way without having to analyze individual companies." He added that country funds are also appealing because their net asset value is clearly evident, even though the stock is trading far above the value of the underlying portfolio. 

Japanese investors are also used to investing in so-called themes, such as the development of the Tokyo waterfront.
And one broker said that Japanese firms have been pushing the pending 1992 unification of Europe as one such theme. 

"The Japanese have a lot of money, -- but they're sure not subtle," said George Foot, managing partner of Newgate Management Associates in Northampton, Mass., who has sold the Spain Fund short. 

