.START 

A congressional subcommittee voted to subpoena former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Samuel Pierce, who abruptly canceled his scheduled appearance last week before the panel investigating allegations of fraud and mismanagement at the agency. 

With a series of unanimous roll-call votes yesterday, the House Government Operations Employment and Housing subcommittee directed Mr. Pierce to appear before it on three separate dates -- next Tuesday, and on Oct. 27 and Nov. 3. 

Rep. Thomas Lantos (D., Calif.), chairman of the subcommittee, said the panel "had no option" but to order Mr. Pierce's appearance after he canceled his Sept. 15 testimony. 

Robert Plotkin, one of Mr. Pierce's lawyers, said his client will obey the subpoena. "We definitely will be there Tuesday," he said. "We have a subpoena, and we will obey it." 

Separately, Mr. Lantos released a letter from the Justice Department that says criminal investigations involving HUD "are under way in virtually all the {Justice} Department's judicial districts.
Eighty-three of the 93 U.S. attorneys have initiated over 700 criminal matters, with the potential to evolve into over 1,000 individual cases." 

Most of the investigations concern alleged fraud in mortgage-insurance and rent-subsidy programs, according to the letter from Carol Crawford, an assistant attorney general for legislative affairs.
The letter stated: "A large number involve investigations of corruption (e.g. bribery or embezzlement) committed by local HUD employees who administered HUD funds or by local officials who were in receipt of HUD grants." 

Subcommittee members had been critical of the slow pace of the Justice Department's criminal investigations, and some panel members have called for the appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the HUD scandals.
Although Mr. Lantos said he hadn't made a decision about the need for a special prosecutor, he indicated that he wasn't satisfied with the information the Justice Department provided in the letter. 

"We really are not informed in any meaningful and analytical fashion on what's happening," he told reporters after the panel's meeting yesterday. 

The former HUD secretary voluntarily testified before the subcommittee on May 25.
Since then, conflicts have arisen between his statements and the testimony of other witnesses.
There also were news accounts indicating that his involvement in certain HUD projects may have resulted in favored treatment for his associates. 

Mr. Pierce agreed to testify again on Aug. 3, but according to Mr. Lantos, asked for a postponement because the former secretary said he had difficulty securing a lawyer.
That hearing was rescheduled for last Friday, when Mr. Pierce refused to appear. 

Mr. Pierce's lawyer said yesterday that his client always intended to cooperate with the subcommittee, but needed adequate time to prepare. "We continue to be concerned that the committee promotes speed over fairness, accuracy and truth," he added.
Mr. Plotkin wouldn't say if Mr. Pierce would invoke his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination and decline to testify. 

Voluntary agreements between congressional committees and witnesses "are not social engagements to be broken at the last minute on a unilateral basis," Mr. Lantos said before the subpoena votes were taken. 

Rep. Ted Weiss (D., N.Y.), a panel member, accused Mr. Pierce of "toying with the subcommittee" in an attempt to evade his responsibility. 

Because Mr. Pierce broke the agreement to appear, Mr. Lantos said he no longer feels bound by an understanding he had with Mr. Pierce about what topics would be covered at the hearing.
The earlier agreement was that questioning would be limited to topics discussed in Mr. Pierce's May testimony; his role in providing funds for a Durham, N.C., housing project for the elderly; and Mr. Pierce's decision to lift restrictions on a HUD co-insurance lender who was represented by former HUD Secretary Carla Hills, now the U.S. trade representative. 

