.START 

The dollar slid against other major currencies as news reports and rumors inflamed concerns about the possibility of an interest rate increase in Germany and about a weekend meeting of finance chiefs from the Group of Seven industrialized countries. 

Reports of another surprising intervention by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York also disturbed the market.
The Fed first caught participants off guard the day before by selling dollars even though the U.S. currency wasn't exhibiting particular strength. 

Although many foreign-exchange traders still voiced skepticism that today's meeting of the Bundesbank's central bank council will raise interest rates, the traders said participants aren't ready to buy dollars until the issue has been put to rest. 

And, a report in a German financial newspaper indicated that the country's closely watched money supply figure grew faster than its target rate in August, heightening perceptions that the Bundesbank must soon raise rates to clamp down on inflation pressures. 

In addition, an unconfirmed story carried on a business news service quoted an unidentified Bank of Japan official saying that a new plan to curb the dollar's rise will be discussed at Saturday's meeting of G-7 finance officials in Washington.
Traders greeted the report with much skepticism, but they said it helped raise tensions about the gathering's outcome. 

"Most of the things that could happen would hurt the dollar," said Graham Broyd, vice president at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. in New York. 

In late afternoon New York trading yesterday, the dollar was at 1.9395 marks, down from 1.9545 marks late Tuesday, and at 145.13 yen, down from 145.85 yen.
Sterling was at $1.5835, up from $1.5700. 

In Tokyo Thursday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 144.90 yen, down from Wednesday's Tokyo close of 146.25 yen. 

The dollar held steady through most of Wednesday's Asian trading, aided by the absence of the Bank of Japan, whose interventions had in recent weeks become a daily fixture of Tokyo trading.
But the U.S. currency lost ground as European trading began and participants focused on prospects for the next day's Bundesbank meeting. 

Traders' attention also was drawn early in European trading to the G-7 gathering, when Japan's Kyodo News Service reported from Tokyo that the finance ministers of Germany and Japan agreed the dollar's rise is "troublesome." They were meeting in Tokyo for discussions ahead of the weekend's meeting. 

The dollar slipped further when the West German business daily Boersen-Zeitung said the Bundesbank will announce that the nation's M3 money supply measure rose in August to an annualized rate of 5.25% from 4.9% in July.
The August rate would exceed the target set by the Bundesbank for this year at around 5%. 

Traders have long noted that inflationary pressures, not exchange rates, are the overriding factor in the Bundesbank's decision to raise rates, and the central bank is known to watch the M3 figures attentively for indications of overheating. 

So, the newspaper report, if borne out, increases the potential for German rates to rise today.
However, many traders said such an increase would be politically inopportune before the G-7 meeting.
Instead, the traders said, the Bundesbank is more likely to tighten credit later. 

Reports of Fed intervention whacked the dollar as the currency was lifting off its lows below 1.9400 marks and helped knock it to a new low of 1.9345 marks, traders said.
Though the Fed's actions weren't in keeping with the market's perceptions of its recent primary goal -- to stem excessive rises in the dollar -- because the dollar exhibited little vigor, traders said the Fed may have other motives. 

The most common theory is that the Fed both wants to be seen intervening and would like a lower dollar before the G-7 meeting in order to reassure its partners in the group that the dollar is manageable and intervention coordination is effective. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $364.90 an ounce, up $3.70.
Estimated volume was heavy at five million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Thursday, gold was quoted at $363.15 an ounce. 

