.START 

Ford Motor Co. 's surprise strike for a minority stake in Jaguar PLC well may turn into a bidding contest for Britain's leading luxury car maker. 

Jaguar's share price soared yesterday as investors speculated that others also may amass significant holdings.
Jaguar shares climbed 43 pence to 510 pence ($8), this year's highest level, after heavy trading on London's stock exchange.
The stock price "will continue to go bonkers," increasing pressure on any Jaguar predators "to be at the negotiating table as soon as possible," said Gavin Launder, an auto industry analyst at U.K. brokers Kleinwort Benson Securities. 

In a prelude to a possibly unfriendly offer, Ford said Tuesday that it intends to buy as much as 15% of Jaguar shares, the maximum allowed under current U.K. government restrictions.
Yesterday, Ford officials said they began buying Jaguar shares after hearing industry rumors that General Motors Corp. and other auto makers wanted to pursue Jaguar. 

It isn't clear whether GM actually is interested in Jaguar.
The No. 1 auto maker took a close look at Jaguar a few years ago, but decided then that Jaguar had too many problems to make it a good value.
GM also has a full plate already; it's struggling to turn around its sagging car market share in the U.S., and is pushing to boost earnings during Chairman Roger B. Smith's last year on the job.
Chrysler Corp., for its part, isn't interested in Jaguar, Robert A. Lutz, president of auto operations, said yesterday. 

Analysts, meanwhile, speculate that Ford's move may prompt the buying of Jaguar shares by other European auto makers -- including West Germany's Volkswagen AG, Sweden's AB Volvo and Peugeot S.A. of France.
Unlike Ford, Europeans aren't fettered by a U.S. law limiting the U.S. company's holding to about 1% for 30 days. 

"One could say Ford has taken all the heat and now they {auto rivals} can walk in because the door is open," said Bruce Blythe, business strategy vice president for Ford of Europe Inc. "Without a doubt, that would complicate things," he added in an interview at Ford of Europe's plush London office -- a block from a Jaguar dealership. 

Ford's European rivals "will come into the fray because the thought of Ford's financial muscle coming into {Jaguar} could significantly alter the balance of power" in the U.S. and European luxury car markets, said Stephen Reitman, European auto-industry analyst for the London brokerage firm UBS-Phillips & Drew.
Other car makers also may start buying Jaguar shares just to make Jaguar a more expensive target for Ford.
Analysts have put Jaguar's value in a takeover fight at between #6 ($9.42) and #10 a share, or between about #1 billion and #1.8 billion. 

Yesterday, VW and Volvo spokesmen denied speculation about their possible interest in Jaguar.
A Peugeot spokeswoman didn't return calls. 

Ford declines to say how many Jaguar shares it owns, but has indicated its purchases wouldn't have exceeded the $15 million limit set for 30 days by U.S. law.
Thus, Ford could have bought about two million Jaguar shares Tuesday, or about 1.1% of the 182 million outstanding.
The British government's anti-takeover measure prevents any outside investor from buying more than 15% of Jaguar shares without permission until Dec. 31, 1990. 

Ford is dangling access to cash and technological know-how in front of Jaguar.
But the fiercely proud British company prefers to remain independent and publicly held.
In months of recent talks, Jaguar Chairman Sir John Egan offered Ford and several other car makers a chance to become passive, small shareholders. "He hasn't found any takers for that {idea} from Ford or anyone else," Mr. Blythe said. "The terms he was seeking would give a very minority benefit to Ford in exchange for a big investment." 

Ford wants more.
Mr. Blythe hinted that the U.S. car producer ultimately might offer Jaguar a deal along the lines of its 1987 purchase of a 75% stake in Aston Martin Lagonda Ltd. Ford doesn't meddle with management decision-making, but "has brought tremendous security to a company that had for 20 years lived a very precarious life," said Victor Gauntlett, chairman of the tiny U.K. car maker. 

Jaguar isn't interested in an Aston Martin-type deal. "You don't own very much if you only own 25%," said a spokesman. 

Ford, meanwhile, is marshaling its forces for what could be a long and costly siege.
The company is courting British government officials, and hand-delivered letters to many Tuesday.
Ford officials also briefed London analysts late yesterday afternoon. 

"I don't think we'd use the government to pressure him {Sir John} into being cooperative," Mr. Blythe said.
But by promoting its role as Britain's biggest car maker, Ford hopes to convince the government that it shouldn't impose additional anti-takeover protections for Jaguar. 

Ford will raise its Jaguar stake to the maximum 15% after the 30-day waiting period expires, the Ford executive said. 

But Ford might withdraw if a bidding war inflated Jaguar's price too much. "There is a price above which Ford won't go," Mr. Blythe said, declining to specify that price. "We aren't interested in Jaguar at any price." 

Paul Ingrassia in Detroit contributed to this article. 

