.START 

Inflation rose to 4.4% last year from 1.1% in 1986 as measured by the consumer price index.
Though this rate of increase pales in comparison to the double-digit inflation of the mid-1970s and early 1980s, it is high enough to cause concern.
Among the various explanations for the recent acceleration is the decline in the value of the dollar from 1985 through 1988.
According to this view, depreciation raises the dollar price of goods and therefore the prices paid by U.S. citizens.
The consequence is inflation.
Or is it? 

It is indeed observable that inflation measures typically fall when the exchange rate is rising and rise when the exchange rate is falling.
When the exchange rate falls, foreign exporters will attempt to pass some or all of the depreciation-induced price increases on to their U.S. customers. 

As well, a falling exchange rate can raise import prices by inducing foreign suppliers to cut back shipments of goods to the U.S.
If the value of the dollar falls, the U.S. price received by the manufacturer in terms of his own currency falls too, unless he raises the dollar price.
That means he will reduce the supply of goods sent to the U.S. in order to slide down his marginal cost curve.
The effect of diminished supply will, of course, be a higher price level. 

But these arguments, however seductive their simplicity, are not correct.
Movements in exchange rates reflect relative economic conditions between countries.
These conditions, in turn, influence the demand for and supply of currencies.
Because exchange rates are forward-looking, their adjustments reflect changes in expectations about future economic conditions. 

And one key condition is the relative price level.
In other words, it may be that inflation doesn't go up because the dollar is going down -- the dollar goes down because inflation is going up. 

Exchange-rate movements may also reflect differences in the level of general economic activity.
Because increased demand for imported goods is often associated with a growing economy, countries experiencing faster growth may also find their currency is depreciating in foreign markets.
If the demand for imports is increasing, so will the demand for foreign currency.
So, contrary to some currently popular notions, a sinking dollar may be the consequence of a booming economy.
In that case, a falling dollar could be non-inflationary. 

Additionally, movements in exchange rates can also be caused by divergent interest rates.
Suppose that from an initial point of equality, the interest rate on British bonds rises while that on U.S. bonds remains unchanged.
Other things being equal, investors will prefer the British bond.
Pounds will come into more demand from bond purchasers, and the dollar will therefore fall against the pound. 

Because faster monetary growth can cause faster economic growth and lower nominal interest rates, it can cause the dollar to fall.
But an increase in the growth rate of the money supply also ultimately leads to heightened inflation.
In other words, the decline in the value of the dollar and the increase in inflation are both manifestations of the same thing -- the increase in the growth of the money supply. 

Only general price increases that persist over an extended period of time can be called "inflation." Inflation, it is widely agreed, is a monetary phenomenon.
Situations in which the price of one good, or a small set of goods -- like imports -- increases, are relative price shifts, not inflation.
Insisting on the inflationary effect of a declining dollar confuses relative and general price increases. 

Of course, it could be argued that if depreciation of the dollar raises certain prices then prices on items produced with those goods must also rise.
Since goods and services are more expensive, labor will demand higher wages, which, being another cost of production, will feed into even higher prices.
In this way, a sinking dollar could spark a bout of "cost-push" inflation. 

But the "cost-push" theory of inflation has little economic foundation.
If the money supply is not increased, individuals will not be able to obtain the funds to maintain their now more expensive purchasing patterns.
As a result, demand for goods and services should fall, alleviating the upward price pressure and returning the price level to that determined by the relative growth in the supply of and demand for money. 

The "cost-push" view of the depreciating dollar's effects on domestic inflation also assumes that consumers will not hesitate to purchase more expensive imports.
Economic theory-and common sensepredicts, however, that they will buy more domestically produced goods as foreign items become costlier.
And research does indicate that the falling dollar has brought about a decline in the ratio of imported consumer goods to total expenditures.
While a depreciating dollar may cause an increase in the dollar price of some imported goods and services, these relative price increases are not inflationary. 

Mr. Hafer, formerly a research officer at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, is professor of economics at Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville. 

