.START 

In "After the Ball," (Doubleday, 1989) Marshall Kirk and Hunter Madsen propose a radical departure from the traditional tactics of the gay rights movement: 

Gay life in America is hard, and promises little improvement unless something is done, and promptly, to transform society's anti-gay attitudes.
We have in mind a strategy as calculated and powerful as that which gays are accused of pursuing by their enemies -- or, if you prefer, a plan as manipulative as that which our enemies themselves employ.
It's time to learn from Madison Avenue. 

Some stalwart gay revolutionaries feel strongly that appealing for acceptance through advertising bespeaks groveling capitulation and conformitarianism.
It is the public's job, they insist, to disburden itself magically, on its own, of its massive sexual hang-ups; the homosexual's only duty is to "learn how to love" himself or herself.
Sooner or later, the public will be impressed by our gay pride, and come around. 

We think this radical argument is rubbish.
We are Americans, going nowhere, living cheek-by-jowl with our persecutors.
To gain straight tolerance and acceptance is not just a legitimate goal of gay activism.
It must be the principal goal. 

How is tolerance forged?
Not just through affirmative self-expression, but through communication.
Self-expression, like singing in the shower, is usually its own reward, but communication has failed unless one has persuaded the listener.
To date, most public acts by the gay community, ranging from eccentric modes of dress to rancorous mass demonstrations, have accomplished self-expression at the expense of communication. 

Every public message in our mass media campaign should be the result of gays having put themselves in the public's binding high-button shoes and asked: If I were straight and felt the hostility most straights feel toward gays, what would it take to get me to change my anti-gay feelings? 

Straights should hear that gays are victims of circumstances, that they no more choose their sexual orientation than straights chose theirs.
Gays must also be portrayed as victims of violence and humiliation, job and housing insecurities, loss of child custody and countless other miseries. 

Our campaign should not demand explicit support for homosexual practices per se.
It must focus, instead, on anti-discrimination and fundamental freedoms.
In practical terms, this means that cocky mustachioed leather-men, drag queens and bull dykes, who constitute a small minority within the gay community, would not appear in the first wave of gay commercials.
Rather, TV viewers would be introduced to conventional young people, middle-aged women, and older folks of all races, who happen to be gay. 

To confound bigoted stereotypes, strongly favorable images of gays must be set before the public.
We would summon history's eye-popping honor roll of prominent men and women who were homosexual or bisexual.
That roll is long enough to represent gay men and lesbians as a veritable pillar of Western civilization.
At the same time, we must make homo-hatred look bad by vilifying those -- Klansmen, neo-Nazis, gay-bashing punks -- who persecute gays. 

How can gays get their case before the public?
It will be easiest to approach the print media first, encouraging magazines and newspapers to accept gay money by showing them ads whose messages are pure white bread.
Straight Americans will begin to see them everywhere, small print ads (and, if the campaign has the funds, large billboards): 

"In Russia, they tell you what you have to be.
In America, we have the freedom to be ourselves.
The National Gay & Lesbian Community proudly joins America in celebrating July 4." 

"People Helping Instead of Hating -- That's What America is All About." 

And so forth.
Through a hailstorm of such brief messages, the public will become accustomed to gay commercial sponsorship.
Several years down the road, our salami tactics will have carved out, slice by slice, a large portion of access to mainstream media.
What next?
The campaign will launch media messages of open support for the civil rights of gay persons. 

Through such efforts over the next decade, we will gradually build a society in which gays are not set apart.
We want straights to revoke all laws criminalizing sex acts between consenting adults, as the abhorrently arrogant and invasive barbarisms they are.
We want straights to provide for us, by special legislation and affirmative action if need be, the same rights to public speech and assembly, to work, shelter, and public accommodations, to legal marriage and parenthood that straights have always enjoyed. 

To get there from here, however, it will be up to gays to clarify for the public what bigots have deliberately obscured: that we are not fighting merely for the right to look different or to have as many one-minute stands as we can possibly line up.
We're fighting for the right to love and marry.
We're not fighting to eliminate community ethics, to live like selfish libertines, narcissistically and meanly.
We're not fighting to eradicate Family; we're fighting for the right to be Family.
Once that message has struck home, we can all return to our regularly scheduled programming. 

