.START 

After studying the safety of the Galileo mission to Jupiter for six years as a member of a federal panel on nuclear safety, Richard Cuddihy has some urgent advice: Don't launch. 

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration currently plans to launch Galileo, which carries 50 pounds of radioactive plutonium for power, Oct. 12 on the space shuttle Atlantis.
Mr. Cuddihy, a leading expert on radiation poisoning, says NASA underestimates the risk of a launch disaster or that Galileo may crash back to Earth, and the cost and difficulty of cleaning up an accident. 

"Launching from Florida puts a large number of people at risk," Mr. Cuddihy says in a memo, dated Sept. 5. "A safer way to launch these types of missions would be from unmanned rockets at remote locations." 

Nuclear power is critical for space exploration.
Manned outposts on the moon or Mars would require nuclear reactors for power.
Unmanned probes to Jupiter and beyond also would need smaller plutonium-based power sources.
Safety questions dog the missions, however.
At least two groups vow actions aimed at stopping the Galileo launch.
But the warning by Mr. Cuddihy, made privately in a letter to President Bush, is the most significant opposition yet and could fan public fears about carrying nuclear payloads into space. 

"The images of Chernobyl and Challenger are connected in people's minds," says Bruce Murray, former head of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. "People have lost confidence in energy management in the U.S. and, with Challenger, they lost confidence in launch management, too." 

NASA and many independent space experts say the public has nothing to fear from Galileo.
The U.S. has spent $50 million testing the plutonium fuel cells, which provide energy for the spacecraft's scientific instruments and transmitters, for durability.
The Department of Energy has even fired bullets into the graphite shielding and then tried to burn the cells to simulate a launch-pad disaster.
In nearly all accidents, NASA calculates, the plutonium release would be so small it wouldn't cause even a single cancer death. 

"I'm convinced the launch is as safe as any human undertaking," says Thomas Rona, deputy director of the White House's Office of Science and Technology Policy, which approved the Galileo launch. 

Lt. Col. Robert Nelson, one of three coordinators of the interagency safety review, says that even if the incidence of bone cancer were greater, the overall number of expected cancer deaths wouldn't be any greater.
In addition, he says Mr. Cuddihy's projections of land cleanup would require a level of decontamination far higher than called for in regulations. "We're dealing with nuclear hysteria" among the public, he says. 

Richard Wilson, a Harvard University physicist who was asked by the White House to look into Mr. Cuddihy's complaints, says he would approve the launch, although he has qualms about the procedure used to evaluate safety.
He says the members of Mr. Cuddihy's panel on medical effects of an accident haven't yet signed off on the report, even though the White House science office has recommended that President Bush approve the launch. 

Overhanging the controversy is Mr. Cuddihy's physical condition.
He suffered a stroke in April 1988, which left him with a greatly impaired ability to speak, although his mental capacity isn't diminished.
Col. Nelson, the Pentagon safety official, says he suspects some of Mr. Cuddihy's criticism may result from his inability to keep up with panel activities.
Contacted by telephone in Albuquerque, N.M., Mr. Cuddihy says he feels he has had sufficient time to review the material and still hasn't changed his opinion that the launch should be scrubbed. 

Mr. Cuddihy, a scientist at the Inhalation Toxicology Research Center in Albuquerque, is a member of an independent federal panel, the Interagency Nuclear Safety Review Panel, that reviews space launches involving nuclear power.
Mr. Rona calls him a "very reputable scientist" who was intimately involved in assessing the environmental damage from radiation leaks at the defense plant at Rocky Flats, Colo., outside Denver. 

In the September memo, Mr. Cuddihy, who was apparently the only member of the panel to dissent, says the panel miscalculated what kinds of cancer a Galileo accident would cause and the amount of land that would have to be cleaned up. "The contaminated areas of potential future concern are much larger than those considered in the {panel's} Galileo report," he says. 

In the case of a launch accident, he says, the U.S. might have to clean up areas farther than 50 miles from the accident, partly because of public pressure, "and may even range beyond the state of Florida." Adding to cleanup costs, he says, would be suits from those whose property had been contaminated with plutonium. 

Apart from the cleanup question, Mr. Cuddihy says an accident would result in more bone cancers than the panel envisions.
Moreover, he says the panel assumed that only very fine particles, about the size of cigarette smoke, could cause damage.
Larger particles, which would be more likely in case of an accident, could cause radiation problems for the liver and skeleton, he says. 

Mr. Cuddihy's criticism will add weight to other calls to stop the launch.
In Washington, D.C., the Christic Institute, a public-interest group funded by religious organizations, plans to seek a court injunction to stop the mission.
In Florida, a coalition of peace groups threatens to halt the launch by infiltrating the area around the launch pad at Cape Canaveral that must be clear of people before NASA approves a liftoff. 

NASA contends that the chances of an accident in which plutonium is released are remote -- no greater than 1-in-1,428.
But NASA officials acknowledge that the mission's tortuous history has increased its risk.
Galileo was originally planned in 1978 as a two-year flight to Jupiter, in which the unmanned probe would be launched from Earth on top of an unmanned Titan rocket.
But after a number of changes of direction, prompted by NASA's desire to sell the utility of the space shuttle, the agency placed Galileo aboard the shuttle instead. 

As a result, the Galileo probe is now nestled in the shuttle cargo area -- surrounded by explosive rocket boosters and an external fuel tank -- instead of riding high atop the explosive propellants in a nose cone. 

Even more important, the shuttle can't carry an engine powerful enough to launch Galileo directly to Jupiter.
Instead, the Galileo spacecraft must fly to Venus and then twice past the Earth, picking up a boost in speed from the planets' gravitational field each time, to gain enough speed to arrive six years later at Jupiter.
The greater flight time increases the possibilities that the craft's communications or rocket engines might fail, and means the craft would buzz past Earth at heights of 620 miles in December 1990 and 200 miles in December 1992. 

NASA estimates that the chances of Galileo crashing into the Earth and releasing plutonium are, at most, about one in two million, and that even then the worst accident would result in nine cancer deaths.
But that scenario assumes that the craft's plutonium cells don't crash into a city, don't disperse into the atmosphere and no more than six of the craft's 144 plutonium pellets crack open and are exposed to the atmosphere.
If any of those assumptions proved false, the death count might be higher. 

Even with the safety risks, NASA says it must rely on nuclear power for such deep-space missions as Galileo or the recently concluded Voyager exploration of Neptune, because solar collectors aren't powerful enough.
On Jupiter, sunlight is 25 times dimmer than on Earth; on Saturn, it's 100 times dimmer. "In space, nuclear power is the future," says Eugene Levy, head of the University of Arizona's planetary-science department. 

