.START 

CBS Inc. says it will overhaul its primetime series development process, dumping the traditional "pilot season" and inaugurating a year-round system. 

Top CBS executives hosted about 70 production executives in Los Angeles to unveil a plan it had floated for about a month: Rather than picking virtually all its new programs in the usual cycle ending in early May, CBS will order pilots, or sample episodes of series, to be produced each trimester. 

The plan, executives say, will enable the network to attract better writers, producers, actors and facilities because it won't be competing head-to-head with the other networks at the same time.
This may lower costs as well, they say.
Moreover, it will give executives more time to evaluate potential new shows, and on occasion to view several episodes before making the decision to schedule them. 

The traditional pilot season gears up about now, when networks order scripts for possible programs.
By mid-October, the networks begin deciding which scripts will be produced as pilots.
In January, each network frantically begins supervising the making of about 30 pilots for delivery in late April.
Then weary executives view all the pilots and choose which will go on the fall schedule. 

"It's like the Hungarian border, with the East Germans all trying to get over at the last minute," says CBS Broadcast Group President Howard Stringer. "By the time you screen the 30th pilot your eyes are in jeopardy and so is your judgment." 

Under the new plan, CBS will commission about nine pilots each trimester, two of which will occur at times when program suppliers aren't busy with the other networks. "When everyone else is on down time, our doors will be open," says CBS Entertainment President Kim LeMasters. 

The plan won't change the traditional premiering of shows in September.
Networks have long talked about a 52-week season, and already debut some new shows in January and April, though generally not in the summer.
The CBS plan is not a drastic change, then, but the announcement serves as an olive branch to the producers, among whom the No. 3 network needs to inspire confidence. 

"I admire any attempt to change the archaic development season," says Paramount Network Television President John Pike. "This is a good first step.
The networks have to understand that it's a 12-month business, and the advances made this summer by Fox and basic cable are another indication of it." 

