.START 

The photograph made the front pages of the London papers.
There he stood, Charles, Prince of Wales, peering down at a small black object on the floor near his feet, a look of revulsion on his royal visage. 

His highness had stepped on a leech. 

It was bad news for the prince: The British press made merry over the event ("Oh Sucks]" was one headline).
But it was hardly a setback for the leech, which easily survived the royal trodding. 

In fact, things are looking up for leeches these days.
Long the objects of ridicule and the stuff of nightmares, the bloodsucking worms are crawling back into respectability -- enough respectability to bring the next king of England to a grimy, former steel mill for a tour of the world's largest, and probably the world's only, leech farm. 

Biopharm Ltd., which runs the farm, is spearheading a leech boom.
This year it expects to breed and sell 50,000 medicinal leeches, or "Hirudo medicinalis." Less than five years old, Biopharm has made a profit in the past three years and had sales of $377,620 in the year ended March 31.
Its three-inch-long brown and green leeches go for $6 in the U.S. 

Who would want to buy a leech?
Hospitals, mainly in the U.S. and Britain.
Surgeons are turning to one of their profession's oldest -- and most discredited -- tools to help restore blood circulation to grafted tissue and surgically reattached fingers, toes and even ears. 

"People tell me, 'Yuk, leeches] They're crude, medieval and barbaric, '" says Felix Freshwater, a plastic surgeon and chief of surgery at Cedars Medical Center, Miami. "In fact, they're painless and humane -- and they do the job." Just last month Dr. Freshwater used several Biopharm leeches to save the reattached finger of a 68-year-old man who had mangled his hand with an electric saw. 

In the past year or so, the slimy parasite also has become a hot item among bioengineers, who are attempting to replicate, through gene-splicing technology, enzymes and other proteins from leech saliva that could be used to treat heart attacks, strokes, embolisms, arthritis and glaucoma.
Well over half of Biopharm's revenue now comes from the manufacture and sale of leech biochemicals and from research grants from drug companies to study the animal. 

All this newfound attention is being lavished on a sucker that until recently has never been given an even break. "If there's anything in the world I hate, it's leeches -- the filthy little devils]" cried Humphrey Bogart while hauling the African Queen through the swamps. 

Many healthy people would agree.
But Dr. Freshwater of Miami says that his patients have never turned down a leech.
Nurses, on the other hand, who often have to apply the leeches, sometimes get squeamish.
Cedars Medical Center has recently begun some gentle questioning of nurses during job interviews. "We first ask them if they like animals," the physician says. "Then we work up to leeches." 

One man who needs no convincing is Roy T. Sawyer, managing director and founder of Biopharm, whom many scientists consider the world's foremost authority on the critters.
A self-confessed leech fanatic, he wrote his first scientific paper on leeches at age 14, back in his native South Carolina.
He has lived in Wales the past 22 years and obtained a doctorate in zoology at the University of Wales at Swansea. 

Mr. Sawyer's goal is to bioengineer the leech. "The leech is a living pharmacy.
We've only begun to find out what it offers," Mr. Sawyer says enthusiastically.
Among the nine or so leech compounds under study are an anticoagulant (which the leech uses to keep the blood from clotting when it bites), a local anesthetic (which prevents the bitee from knowing the leech is there), a vasodilator (which increases the blood flow) and an antibiotic (which keeps the blood from spoiling during the leech's months-long digestion period and which also, presumably, keeps the host healthy so the leech can return for a second meal). 

Mr. Sawyer, a friendly, soft-spoken man of 46, likens the raising of leeches to growing orchids. "Leeches are very temperamental creatures," he says, requiring exact conditions of light and temperature to breed and mature. 

In the course of their brief lives, Biopharm's medicinal leeches move from the "cold room," a dimly lighted place where they swim about in water at 50 degrees Fahrenheit, to the "warm room," at 86 degrees, where the mature leeches are bred.
Cocoons form, filling with tiny leeches that soon emerge hungry for their first meal. 

Not surprisingly, that meal is blood: fresh cow's blood, to be exact, purchased from the slaughterhouse down the road.
Biopharm staffers pour the blood into pig intestines, producing a quite-literal blood sausage that the leeches fasten upon for the 15 to 20 minutes they need to fill up.
The leeches are fed three times in the 12 weeks it takes them to reach salable size, increasing in weight four or five times at each feeding.
They are mailed -- hungry, of course -- to hospitals in cloth bags inside cardboard boxes.
Biopharm believes it may be the only legal source of medicinal leeches left in the world.
Once abundant in most European countries, medicinal leeches are protected as endangered species throughout their original range.
In 1802, William Wordsworth wrote a poem, "The Leech Gatherer," which poignantly tells of the overharvesting of medicinal leeches. 

During the first half of the 19th century, France alone used over a billion leeches for bloodletting, according to medical historians.
One French doctor routinely applied 50 at a time to his patients' abdomens.
On the theory that leeches drained out bad blood, or "humors," and left good blood behind, they became "cures" for everything from headaches to hemorrhoids.
Physicians eventually came to their senses, however, and leech use dropped sharply in the late 1800s, although Sargent's Drug Store, in downtown Chicago within shouting distance of Marshall Field's, has been selling leeches on and off for some 40 years as ways to get rid of bruises and black eyes. 

Credit for bringing the leech out of medicine's dark ages goes to a few French doctors who, in the early 1980s, began employing them in the fast-developing specialty of microsurgery.
Then, in 1985, Joseph Upton, a surgeon at Harvard Medical School's Children's Hospital in Boston, got national attention when he used two dozen leeches to save the ear of a five-year-old boy that had been bitten off by a dog. 

Dr. Upton managed to resew the arteries feeding blood into the boy's ear, but he couldn't repair many of the extremely tiny veins.
Blood flowed into the ear then became blocked, unable to circulate back into the body.
Leeches supplied by Biopharm sucked the blood through the boy's ear.
More important, their anticoagulants kept the blood draining for hours after the leeches themselves had fallen off.
This bought time for the boy's body to reweave the delicate tapestry of veins, thus re-establishing normal circulation. 

"Nothing keeps the blood oozing out as well as leeches," Dr. Upton says. "They've salvaged a lot of fingers and tissue in this country in the past four years." 

At Biopharm, Mr. Sawyer refers to the medicinal leeches as his "cash flow," but he makes it clear that his pride and joy is another leech species, "Haementeria ghilianii," the giant Amazon leech, which grows to a length of 18 inches.
Though they were long thought to be extinct, 35 of them were discovered by Mr. Sawyer a few years ago during an arduous expedition to the swamps of French Guiana.
Some 13,000 descendants of those 35 giant leeches now swim in Biopharm tubs. 

The Amazon leech isn't used on humans, which is just as well since it feeds by inserting into its victim a needlelike proboscis up to two inches long. (The medicinal leech, by contrast, saws through the skin with a three-part set of tiny jaws; its distinctive bite mark looks exactly like the Mercedes-Benz symbol.) What excites Mr. Sawyer about the Amazon leech is an enzyme in its saliva called hemetin, one of several patented biochemicals Biopharm sells to pharmaceutical labs.
While the anticoagulant produced by the medicinal leech prevents blood clots from forming, hemetin actually dissolves clots already formed, and thus has much promise in treating cardiovascular diseases. 

All the upbeat news about leeches has done little to deter Britain's more zealous animal-rights activists, some of whom even campaign against the use of earthworms as fish bait.
Not long ago, 40 or 50 placard-carrying anti-vivisectionists paraded noisily around Biopharm's building.
They had been aroused by a small item in a local newspaper that said Biopharm was "selling animals to hospitals." After a while, Mr. Sawyer and his wife invited in a few demonstrators and showed them a tub filled with writhing leeches.
Lorna Sawyer recalls one woman who took a look at the leeches and exclaimed, "Those aren't animals]" The demonstrators left speedily. 

