.START 

Let's play a game of chance.
You can win some real cash.
We're talking in the billions.
Each year.
Interested?
Good.
Here's how it works. 

I'm the bank.
I have about $25 billion in prize money I give away every year.
But not randomly -- you've got to buy a lottery ticket to win.
There are various game categories, and the whole system is too complicated for most people to understand.
But if your number is called, you can win B-I-G.
In fact, hundreds of thousands already have.
Sound like a good deal? 

It isn't.
Did you see the catch?
It's the ticket scam.
You've got to ante up to play -- only the liquor stores aren't where you go to buy these stakes.
To get into this dollar giveaway you've got to get title to farm land, or to some crop quotas (which generally go with the land).
And these are in sharply limited supply. 

It's the guys who hold the tickets when the game starts who win.
Let's just call them "farmers." Because if we were to call them "landlords," the bank wouldn't be able to hand out nearly so much money.
Nobody would stand for it.
But call them farmers and the only way you could get a bigger pot together would be to dress them up as furry animals. 

Such is the simple economics behind the huge drain on the federal treasury known as agricultural policy.
While justified as aid to farmers, it actually makes farming more difficult by raising the entry fee.
Massive subsidies drive up the price of land, without making farm margins any fatter. "The Farm Fiasco" (ICS Press, 356 pages, $18.95) by journalist James Bovard describes how the level of waste keeps rising with the level of spending. 

The C&W "artistas" at Farm Aid concerts are crooning up the wrong equalizer.
Payments to keep farmers farming just keep the old subsidy cycle rolling along.
If you really wanted to help farmers, you'd pay a percentage of them to get out of farming every year.
Instead, a virtually unnavigable swamp of federal policies sinks billions (a) keeping farmers in farming; (b) lending "cheap" money so farmers can pay ever more for farm land; (c) clearing the land and transporting the water for ever greater acres of cultivation; (d) and then pouring billions more into programs paying farmers not to produce. 

And through it all, the farmers -- those who actually work the land -- are ever close to the margin.
The crucial economic distinction lies in the returns to farming vs. the returns to owning farm land; as the latter becomes more lucrative, the former gets squeezed.
So, it's the landowners who reap the benefits of government subsidy.
And these folks typically are rich Republican country clubbers who regularly denounce welfare handouts over gin-and-tonics.
To support such lavish life styles is expensive. "In 1987 the entire corn harvest was worth only $12.1 billion," writes Mr. Bovard, "yet the USDA spent $12 billion on corn subsidies -- the same amount government spent on food stamps for 20 million Americans." 

But follow the money. "In 1983 net farm income was $12.7 billion.
Federal outlays for agriculture were $23 billion, and . . . consumers paid $13 billion more than they would have for American food had federal subsidies and trade barriers not existed." 

In the days of Gramm-Rudman-Hollings and the great deficit crisis, it remains mysterious why the Treasury hemorrhage called ag spending should continue unstanched.
But such spending actually spurted after Ronald Reagan's ride to Washington; ag subsidies had fallen to just $4 billion annually under Carter, but have totaled $260 billion in the '80s. 

Despite strident congressional support, there is little that's democratic about agricultural policy.
Mr. Bovard makes this plain: "Since 1980, the federal sugar policy has cost the equivalent of over $2 million for each sugar grower, and the USDA has spent over $1 million for each full-time rice grower since 1985." 

Moreover, the specific aim of recent Republican reforms is to shift the subsidies off-budget, imposing supply controls in USDA-sponsored cartels to raise commodity prices without direct subsidies.
Consider the 1983-84 PIK (payment-in-kind) program that "successfully" idled nearly 80 million acres of U.S. crop land.
President Reagan's Secretary of Agriculture John Block boasted, "Never in the history of agriculture has there been a farm program more successful than PIK." 

In fact, the PIK program helped devastate the rural economy.
Why?
Because idle farm land decimated the demand for labor, fertilizer, farm equipment and other ag inputs.
As many as 250,000 jobs were lost because of the program.
But ironically, since PIK was not used to permanently shift resources out of agriculture, the farmers stayed put, encouraged to wait around for more subsidies in the future. 

Unfortunately, while Mr. Bovard's energy and research skills are impressive, his focus is not.
Better editing might have produced a far more valuable (and readable) text.
I wish he'd offered a richer portrait of the politics shaping farm policy, and spared us the incessant ravings about the craziness of farm programs. 

What sweetness, exactly, are congressional leaders getting from those sugar producers (to take just one boondoggle) in return for keeping U.S. prices pegged at some multiple of international sugar prices?
There is a perfect political logic to each and every tax subsidy or price support.
It is this linkage Mr. Bovard fails to explore in this often admirable book. 

Mr. Hazlett is an assistant professor of agricultural economics at the University of California, Davis. 

