.START 

Rep. Barney Frank's personal difficulties have caused this society once again to consider the limits to its tolerance for the public expression of homosexuality.
Barriers to such behavior seem to be falling with gathering speed. 

Twenty years ago this summer, New York City police battled with patrons outside a gay bar named the Stonewall, and only the Village Voice reported it prominently.
In April, the mayor of New York renamed the site where the riot occurred, "Stonewall Place." But despite the claims often made for it, the Gay Liberation movement that began after the riot scored few advances until recently. 

Statutes and ordinances prohibiting discrimination on the basis of "sexual orientation" or "sexual preference" are still comparatively rare.
San Francisco was the first jurisdiction to adopt one, in 1972. 

Los Angeles enacted a similar law in 1979, as did Austin, Tex., in 1982.
Berkeley, West Hollywood, Sacramento and Santa Cruz, Calif., all adopted gay rights laws early.
But the slow amelioration of the legal status of homosexuals has dramatically accelerated since 1986 -- and credit for the acceleration must go to the thing that gay activists feared would hamper their progress most: the AIDS virus.
As Cleve Jones, a gay lobbyist from San Francisco, told the fifth annual conference on AIDS research -- which met in Montreal in April -- "In spite of the horror of the epidemic, in many ways the cause was advanced by it." 

New York City Council approved an ordinance forbidding discrimination against homosexuals in employment, housing and access to public accommodations in March 1986.
The Canadian province of Ontario did the same later that year.
Gay city employees in Hartford, Conn., were extended special protections in May 1988. 

Last January, Colorado Gov. Roy Romer issued an executive order adding "persons perceived to be at risk from HIV infection" to the list of persons protected against discrimination by the state's human rights code.
A bill to add sexual preference to the list of complaints that can be brought to the Massachusetts Commission against Discrimination has reached third reading in the state legislature.
Montgomery County, Md., approved special legislation to protect gays and lesbians against hate crimes Wednesday. 

AIDS has come to be considered a handicap for anti-discrimination purposes in almost every jurisdiction.
The federal handicapped rights bill that passed the Senate in August and that is now before the House would extend protection to AIDS victims.
Gay activists hailed the legislation as a milestone in their struggle for equality.
AIDS sufferers are explictly protected by special legislation in, among other jurisdictions, Los Angeles, Colorado, Illinois, Maryland, New Jersey and New York. 

And that is only the beginning of AIDS's contribution to the struggle for gay rights.
On Aug. 7, New York Mayor Ed Koch introduced Executive Order 123, creating the status of "domestic partner" for persons who have a "close and committed personal relationship" to a city employee.
At least eight other cities -- including Takoma Park, Md., Berkeley, Calif., Madison, Wis., Los Angeles, Seattle and San Francisco have put domestic partnership laws into effect. (Angry citizens have forced the San Francisco Board of Supervisors to put the order to a referendum that's still pending.) 

The most important consequence of these laws is to put responsibility for the medical bills of the lovers of homosexual city employees onto the city.
The pressure for domestic partnership laws is an obvious consequence of the AIDS crisis and the tremendous cost of treating AIDS. Unionized municipal employees confronting $300,000 in medical bills for a loved one are understandably eager to shift that cost. 

One effect of that cost-shifting, and presumably not an unintended one, is an extraordinary change in the legitimacy with which society regards homosexual relationships. 

Another legitimating effect of the AIDS crisis is even more pervasive and comes from the "AIDS education" that is now being conducted in the schools, on college campuses and in the mass media.
A young man sits on the edge of his bed, preparing to go out for the evening.
He will be ready for whatever happens because he is bringing condoms along.
He pulls on a sock: "It's as easy as that." That is a relatively inexplicit public service announcements that was broadcast in prime time in New York state this summer. 

In a more provocative version, made for the City of New York but not yet broadcast, a handsome man talks directly to the camera: "It was a perfect evening.
Candlelight, music, stars.
And then he asked me whether I enjoyed safer sex.
I've never felt so good about saying, 'Yes. '" 

In democratic societies, majoritarian habits of thinking elide the difference between what is common and what is normal.
These commercials although ostensibly meant only to tell people how to protect themselves if they do engage in homosexual activity, in fact carry a powerful legitimating message.
Perhaps that is why Cardinal John J. O'Connor of New York sent back to committee for re-examination a recent paper from four bishops on AIDS education.
The paper, "The Many Faces of AIDS: A Gospel Approach," called for teaching students about the use of condoms, despite the Catholic Church's opposition to artificial birth control.
Cardinal O'Connor described the paper as "a very grave mistake." 

But other institutions have proven more accommodating to the AIDS-inspired trend than the Catholic Church.
Trans World Airlines announced in July that homosexual couples could share frequent flier points.
A TWA official told a lawyer representing gay rights groups, "We are aware of the non-traditional lifestyles prevalent in our society and our sole interest is the promotion of travel, not social commentary." 

A New York state court held in July that a homosexual man who had shared a rent-controlled apartment for 11 years with a tenant who subsequently died of AIDS was entitled to inherit the apartment from his dead partner.
Richard Higgins, the Housing and Community Renewal Commissioner for the city of New York has said that he will enforce and extend the rights of gay "widowers." 

Whatever the symbolic importance of Barney Frank, the future of gay rights does not lie with the dramatic, but with the seemingly inevitable accommodations of city and state officials to AIDS and its sufferers.
Those officials may have begun by responding to a public health crisis; in the end, they will have sanctioned a transformation of North American moral attitudes. 

Mr. Muggeridge is a reporter with the Welland, Ont., Evening Tribune. 

