.START 

In the soft dawn light, laborers in worn blue work clothes gather in the fields to share a cucumber and yogurt breakfast before going off to chop cotton or pick grapes. 

The scene would be familiar to the Jewish socialists who invented the kibbutz, or communal farm, as a way of eking out an existence in the hostile terrain of 1920s Palestine.
But in an hour or two, when Tzora is in full swing, the early Zionists wouldn't recognize the place. 

By 7 a.m., the kibbutz computer center is spitting out work ordered by regional businesses.
At the office-furniture factory, an automated assembly line dunks desklegs into an electroplating bath.
At the fashion warehouse, a manager checks designs for the kibbutz-made line of women's apparel.
Meanwhile, commuting kibbutzniks cause a minor traffic jam heading off to city jobs. 

Behind all this bustle lies a big financial crisis.
In making the transition from farm to diversified conglomerate, Tzora, like most kibbutzim, went into debt.
Its borrowing during Israel's years of triple-digit inflation has left this settlement of about 800 people owing some $12 million. 

Only 127,000 Israelis -- 3% of the population -- live on kibbutzim, but among them they have accumulated a debt of $4 billion -- about 30 times that of Mexico on a per capita basis. "There are analogies between our lending to kibbutzim and American banks' lending to Latin America," says Ptachia Bar-Shavit, an economist at Bank Hapoalim, which took a bad-debt provision of $490 million in 1988, more than half of it on kibbutz loans. 

The failure of socialist economics and the switch to free-market fixes is apparent everywhere in Israel, not just on the kibbutz.
The state's largest industrial conglomerate, the trade union-owned Koor Industries Ltd., is sacking 25% of its work force in an effort to fend off insolvency.
The Labor Party leader and finance minister, Shimon Peres, is rapidly selling off state-owned companies such as El Al, the national airline, in a Margaret Thatcher-style privatization. 

Many trade-union and government-owned enterprises have come to grief because they put state-building above profit-making.
Kibbutzim sprang up to populate borders or guard strategic roads, not just in places where the soil was good.
Factories opened to employ new immigrants, rather than because transport or raw materials were accessible.
And management positions often rewarded a brilliant army record rather than business skills.
The result: economic stagnation and unemployment of nearly 10%. 

So capitalism -- a dirty word to the state's socialist founders -- is becoming increasingly respectable. "I tell my friends in the labor movement that if we want to spend money like socialists, we have to make money like capitalists," says Mr. Peres. "We live in a changing world -- we cannot stop the turn of it," he adds, ticking off economic reforms in the Soviet Union and China as examples of the growing world-wide trend toward freer economies. 

It is on the kibbutz that the change is most striking, because these communal settlements have long epitomized the state's socialist origins and ideals.
Although never more than 7% of the nation's population, kibbutzniks have exerted a disproportionate influence on Israeli society.
Even today, two cabinet ministers are kibbutzniks and many others, including Mr. Peres, have a kibbutz background.
Kibbutzniks are renowned for volunteering for the toughest combat units in the Israeli military, and they have given Israel some of its most famous generals, including Moshe Dayan. 

"Saving the kibbutz," says Mr. Peres, "isn't a lesser effort than privatization." A major reason he accepted the finance ministry after the 1988 election was, he says, to rescue the state's troubled cooperatives. "Without them, we'd be poorer socially.
So if we build the economy, we don't want to do it at the cost of destroying society." 

The early kibbutzim were crucial to the success of the infant state.
Perched in crudely built barracks on precarious borders and often influenced by young immigrants from revolutionary Russia, the first settlements were collective in the extreme.
Job rotation was strictly enforced: A member who managed the dairy one month would clean cow stalls the next. 

At one kibbutz, arguments raged over whether members were to get private mail.
The compromise: letters arriving from Russia could be opened by anyone because they might contain news of general interest from home.
At the even more extreme Bittania community, sexual intercourse was considered unacceptably selfish unless the lovers later shared their feelings in a community discussion. 

Until the early 1980s, the kibbutzim thrived.
The Tzora settlement, for example, where the food ration once had been half an egg, bread and some U.S.-donated powdered milk, replaced its drafty huts with landscaped apartments and built a swimming pool, tennis courts and offices designed by architects.
Diversification from argriculture to industry already was well under way, with kibbutz values dictating that each plant provide the very best in safety and comfort for workers. 

But much of the building was done with borrowed money -- a practice that seemed sensible with inflation running at more than 400%.
But when the government finally reined in inflation by sending interest rates soaring, the kibbutzim suddenly found themselves shockingly over-committed. (The inflation rate this year has been about 23%.
And the kibbutzim generally have been able to renegotiate their loans at lower interest rates.) 

The principles of rigid equality that had idealistic pioneers draining swamps and hauling rocks proved inadequate to modern challenge.
Management rotation often meant that an experienced factory manager had to hand over a business at the height of a crisis to someone who might then have to spend months learning the ropes.
Slow collective decision-making hampered flexibility. 

At Tzora, the furniture factory exemplifies some of the problems.
Its robotic devices could be manufacturing chairs and desks 24 hours a day, but marketing failure has left the kibbutz with only enough orders to justify a single shift. "Offices don't want this shiny chrome look anymore," says the kibbutz general secretary, Les Oshry, striding past a pile of electroplated desk-legs. "They want matte black.
What we have learned is that change in the outside world is so fast that we have to be able to alter a decision today that we made yesterday.
If we wait till tomorrow, we've missed the boat." 

To reverse their declining fortunes, kibbutzniks like Mr. Oshry are speaking a language unheard of on the kibbutz.
They use words like "profit center," "overtime pay" and even "unemployment." 

Yehuda Harel, a management consultant from a kibbutz in the Golan Heights, is the chief prophet of this new, heretical economic thinking. "Capitalism has proved itself the best way to solve the problems of production," says Mr. Harel.
What capitalism hasn't done, he believes, is solve the problems of society. "So we want to take the capitalist way in our businesses but continue to keep the socialist way -- our kibbutz way -- in our community." 

His own kibbutz, Merom Golan, is introducing sweeping changes.
Workers in the apple orchard were astonished the first time the kibbutz mechanic presented them with a bill for his services, including a $50 charge for time it took him to get from his workshop to the orchard. 

But Mr. Harel's idea is that each of the kibbutz businesses should act as a profit center and be responsible for all its own costs. "Next time, they tried to fix the tractor themselves before they called, and they're also free to use a mechanic from {the nearby town of} Kiryat Shemona if they think he'll do the work cheaper." The kibbutz mechanic, meanwhile, has found capitalism so much to his liking that he has expanded his business outside the kibbutz, opening a tire dealership to serve the northern region. 

Traditionally, kibbutz businesses got the labor of kibbutz members free.
Living allowances were paid out of profit, pooled from activities as diverse as guest houses and poultry farms, without any clear sense of which was a losing proposition and which a moneymaker.
Under Mr. Harel's system, each business must operate as a free-standing unit.
It must assign a value to each job, recognizing that a manager costs more than a laborer. 

"Salaries" aren't paid to the individuals, however, but to the community, which distributes the money equally, as before.
The motivation for the mechanic, Mr. Harel explains, is that he can now see his own efforts make an impact on profit and loss.
As a profitable performer, he earns prestige on the kibbutz.
And because each business gets a percentage of its own profit for reinvestment, he is able to finance his own business expansion. 

Now that each profit center has to pay "salaries," managers aren't so happy to take more workers than they need, just to give everyone something to do.
The new policy has exposed unemployment of 20% in the kibbutz.
While the jobless are being retrained, they still get the same food, housing and allowances as working members. "It's still a kibbutz," Mr. Harel says.
Indeed, the management consultant can be found, one Saturday a month, taking his turn washing dishes in the dining hall. 

In the two years since the kibbutz voted to try the new system, its annual income has risen to $10 million, from $8 million.
Last year, it repaid $1 million of its $15 million debt.
So far, Mr. Harel says, no one has left the kibbutz because of the changes.
Indeed, demand from would-be members is so strong that the kibbutz is planning, for the first time, to charge some newcomers two-thirds of what it costs to build their apartments. 

But change comes easier at a relatively new kibbutz such as Merom Golan, which was founded after the Six-Day War in 1967, than at longer-established settlements. 

Take the newspaper war at 41-year-old Kibbutz Tzora.
At the moment, everyone on the kibbutz gets a daily paper, paid for out of community funds. "I don't want a paper, I want Newsweek," complains Mr. Oshry, who figures the cost of the weekly magazine is about equivalent to the price of six days' papers.
But so far, the majority is insisting that a daily paper in the home is an essential educational resource that Mr. Oshry must have, like it or not. 

House paint is another touchy subject.
Members are entitled to have their apartments painted every 10 years.
When one member, an artist, wanted to forgo that and instead have a storeroom painted for use as a studio, other members vehemently opposed this departure from the system. "The automatic equality we have here can make grown people behave like small children," says Mr. Oshry.
He wants to give kibbutzniks more discretion in their spending by cutting down on what the kibbutz automatically supplies and increasing the cash allowance each member receives.
Only when people understand their household budget, he believes, will they grasp the broader economic issues at stake on the kibbutz. 

While changing the way business is run, kibbutzim also are doing new kinds of business.
Kibbutz Hagoshrim was among the country's most financially troubled settlements three years ago when an Israeli inventor approached it to manufacture his device for removing unwanted hair.
At the time, its factory was making levels for the building trades. 

"There was some debate about whether a kibbutz should be getting into cosmetics," says Menahem Baruch, who helped found the northern border settlement during the Independence War of 1948.
Kibbutzniks traditionally despised frivolities. "You used to have to look in the mirror to make sure your hair was uncombed," says Muki Tsur, general secretary of the United Kibbutz Movement. 

Mr. Baruch, who wears shorts and sandals to the office, has a noticeable bare patch on his brawny forearm. "That's where I test the new models," he explains.
He now is chairman of a company that racked up $80 million in export sales last year from Epilady, a hand-held device that uses a rotating wire coil to pluck hair out at the roots.
The machine even makes its way into displays at the Iran Trade Center at Frankfurt airport, its popularity among consumers surmounting the Iranian government's aversion to the "Made in Israel" label.
Mr. Baruch enjoys the irony that a gadget made by kibbutzniks, who rarely shave their legs, is selling to Iranians, who rarely show their legs. 

Mr. Baruch had an uphill battle convincing some of the cosmetics and appliance multinationals now marketing Epilady that doing business with a kibbutz wasn't going to mean having to wait for 300 farmers to vote on every little business decision.
In fact, Hagoshrim has given up a measure of its traditional democracy so as to allow Epilady managers to move quickly. "People often fail to look at the benefits of working with a kibbutz -- the tremendous motivation of 300 people and their kids when they're pushing an enterprise from which they'll all benefit equally," Mr. Baruch says. 

So far, the kibbutz hasn't let its new wealth affect its egalitarian principles.
Mr. Baruch continues to receive exactly the same income as a dishwasher in the dining hall. "When I go to New York, I don't wear sandals to a business meeting," he says.
But at home on Hagoshrim, the closest he gets to a power lunch is lining up with his tray in the dining hall for a daily menu he knows by heart. "Some things will never change," he says. "Friday lunch is still sausages, just as it's been for the last 40 years." 

