.START 

Centocor Inc. asked for federal marketing clearance of its drug to treat septic shock, marking another step along a closely watched race in biotechnology. 

Centocor filed with the Food and Drug Administration requesting approval to sell the drug, a monoclonal antibody that has been tested in the treatment of the often fatal shock due to infection by gram negative bacteria.
The filing follows by about six months a similar one from Xoma Corp., a Berkeley, Calif., company that like Centocor specializes in monoclonal antibodies. 

Until this week, it had been almost a foregone conclusion that Xoma would beat Centocor to market by several months, if the two companies get the go-ahead from the FDA.
But after the Centocor filing some analysts speculated that the race could get closer. 

Centocor itself had indicated that it would do enough clinical trials to ask for FDA approval by year end.
But until yesterday some analysts had doubted that projection, since the company had missed some of its own deadlines before. 

"Now the question is, 'Which will come out first? '" said Robert Kupor, an analyst at Kidder, Peabody & Co. 

In national over-the-counter trading yesterday, Centocor stock rose $2.25 to close at $22.25.
Xoma closed at $20, down 50 cents. 

The competition between Centocor and Xoma reflects a new phase in the use of monoclonal antibodies, which until now has been mostly limited to diagnosis rather than therapy.
Monoclonal antibodies are like the antibodies the body produces to fend off disease but are selected and produced by laboratory techniques to zoom in on chosen targets. 

Gram negative bacteria can get into the blood as a result of wounds, burns and surgery, among other routes.
The bacteria produce poisons called endotoxins, which can cause septic shock and death.
Unlike antibiotics, which target the bacteria and are the routine treatment today, monoclonal antibodies are meant to neutralize the endotoxins. 

Charles Sprung, chief of critical care medicine at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Miami, said estimates of annual cases of this type of infection in U.S. hospitals range from 100,000 to 300,000.
Mortality rates have ranged from 20% to 75%, he said, depending on the types of patient groups studied.
If monoclonal antibodies fulfill their promise, "this could revolutionize the way we treat patients with these infections," he said. 

Some analysts project the U.S. market for these antibodies could grow to between $200 million and $400 million by the early 1990s.
They say a single course of treatment is likely to cost $1,500 or more. 

The filing by Centocor led some analysts to surmise that the FDA might slow its consideration of the Xoma filing so as to compare them.
Centoxin, the Centocor product, is a human antibody, whereas Xomen-E5, the Xoma product, is a mouse antibody.
Whether the Centocor product will have a clear-cut clinical advantage has still to be resolved. 

In any case, Wall Street generally isn't looking for FDA approval of either product before mid-1990.
And the Xoma product is still expected to be backed by a larger sales force, since Xoma has reached a marketing pact with Pfizer Inc., the New York pharmaceutical company. 

