.START 

The Japanese government and the country's second-largest auto maker, acting separately, announced plans they said were intended to reduce trade frictions. 

Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, or MITI, said it is stepping up talks on a new tax incentive to encourage the importation of manufactured products.
And Nissan Motor Co., reacting to foreign pressure on Japanese auto makers, said it plans to slash annual vehicle exports in half by the late 1990s.
Japan's auto makers have frequently said they expect to trim exports, mainly by manufacturing abroad, but Nissan's announcement made it the first to declare a specific target. 

MITI officials explained their import-incentive tax plan to the foreign press yesterday and said they would begin talks with the Ministry of Finance.
Specifics of the tax haven't been decided.
If the idea is agreed upon, it might be proposed to the Diet, Japan's parliament, as early as next February, said Yuzuru Hatakeyama, director general of MITI's International Trade Policy bureau. 

MITI is under pressure to take action because the trade imbalance with the U.S. is hovering at about $50 billion and the rate of growth of Japan's imports of manufactured goods is slowing.
Manufactured imports from the U.S. increased by 33.2% in 1988 over the previous year to $23.5 billion.
In the first eight months of this year they increased by less than 20%. 

Meanwhile, the U.S. Commerce Department is pushing for "measurable results" on the trade deficit.
Recent U.S.-Japan trade talks seek to change deeply rooted business practices in both countries, but few experts expect them to yield rapid results.
One of the easiest items on the agenda is increasing imports to Japan, where an incentive tax could help.
The import tax initiative faces hitches.
The Finance Ministry could balk because it would reduce government revenue.
Also, the tax probably would require legislative action; but it could get lost in the tumult as the Diet debates a controversial consumption tax that was imposed in April. 

Some ruling party politicians favor more drastic action to cut the trade imbalance, such as imposing an export surcharge.
MITI's Mr. Hatakeyama says the ministry hasn't pursued the idea. "Since there was no request from the U.S. to that effect, even if we do it, it wouldn't be appreciated by the U.S. or others and maybe we'd be criticized for doing it." 

Nissan's announcement that it would scale back shipments abroad follows four years of declining exports since 1985, when they totaled a record 1.4 million cars and trucks.
Exports have declined because of rising overseas production and because of slack sales in some markets, particularly in the U.S. 

Hiroshi Nakajima, an analyst at the Yamaichi Research Institute of Securities and Economics, affiliated with Yamaichi Securities Co., said it isn't unusual for a Japanese auto maker to declare that exports will decline, but it is the first time such a specific commitment has been made.
Just as important, he said, the declaration makes it difficult for Nissan to try to offset a future decline in Japanese domestic demand by boosting exports. 

But an analyst with Daiwa Securities Co. didn't put much stock in the announcement since Nissan's exports already have been on the decline.
In the fiscal year ended March 31, Nissan exported 1.09 million units, down from 1.14 million units a year earlier.
Its exports are expected to further decline in the current fiscal year to around 1.03 million to 1.05 million units, the Daiwa analyst said. 

Nissan said it would aim at producing two vehicles overseas for every vehicle it exports in the next 10 years, a reversal of the current ratio.
The company produced 570,000 units at overseas plants during the last fiscal year.
As a first step, Nissan said it would slash its exports to one million units by early 1993.
Nissan has auto factories in the U.S., Britain, Spain, Mexico and Australia. 

The globalization effort also calls for the company to quadruple its auto-parts imports by the late 1990s, so that they account for 10% of the total value of its Japan-made autos.
Its imports in the year ended March 31 totaled $370 million. 

