.START 

Campeau Corp. 's financial problems are sending shock waves through the retailing industry -- and consumers are likely to benefit. 

Already, off-price apparel chains, which typically sell brand-name and designer goods for as much as 60% less than department stores, are trying to gain a competitive edge.
Some are snapping up goods once destined for such well-known Campeau divisions as Bloomingdale's, Abraham & Straus and Burdines.
Others are poised to pounce, waiting only for jittery manufacturers to offer them better deals. 

Healthy specialty stores and department stores such as Nordstrom Inc. and those under the far-flung May and Dillard umbrellas are expected to grow stronger during the all-important holiday season.
If Campeau inventories grow spotty, these competitors are likely to steal business from its Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores units as consumers turn elsewhere for wider assortments.
And these healthy competitors, which also include Limited Inc. and Gap Inc., might benefit by being able to extract concessions from suppliers. 

Executives throughout the industry, meanwhile, are raising the prospect of an impending price war.
Campeau, they say, could be desperate enough to slash prices in an attempt to pump up sales. "It's going to be as promotional a Christmas as we've seen in years," predicts Robert Kerson, president of Walter K. Levy Associates, a retail consulting and executive search firm in New York. 

Indeed, Carol Farmer, a retail consultant in Boca Raton, Fla., says she has seen "more prominent markdown racks" at Campeau's Jordan Marsh stores in Florida and Rich's stores in Atlanta in recent days, indicating "what appears to be a more heightened urgency to clear markdown merchandise." In Cincinnati, a Federated spokeswoman declined to comment. 

This much is clear: Despite Olympia & York Developments Ltd. 's rescue of Campeau with a $250 million loan this week, prompting many vendors to resume shipments to the stores, retail executives don't believe Campeau's financial woes are over. "It sounds to me like a spit in the ocean," says Norman Abramson, president and chief operating officer of Clothestime Inc., an off-price chain and one of many retailers that stands to gain from Campeau's problems and consumers' perceptions about the company. 

Campeau Chairman Robert Campeau "will need more money to fund his business," contends Howard Davidowitz, a retail consultant in New York. "Unless he can arrange a lot more financing, he won't be able to order and receive enough goods to make holiday sales." 

Officials of Campeau couldn't be reached for comment.
The company's problems stem from a liquidity crunch caused by high debt levels in the wake of the real estate concern's acquisitions of Federated and Allied. 

Clothestime hasn't yet bought any goods intended for Campeau stores, but Dress Barn Inc., Stamford, Conn., and Burlington Coat Factory Warehouse Corp., Burlington, N.J., have purchased some goods. "We're starting to buy clothes in all classifications," says Elliot Jaffe, chairman of Dress Barn, a women's apparel chain. 

Some apparel makers, meanwhile, are making contingency plans to sell through their own factory-outlet stores any goods they decide not to ship to Campeau stores.
Philips Van Heusen Corp., the men's shirt maker, for instance, won't sell to off-price stores, choosing instead to unload any surplus goods through its factory outlets, says President Bruce Klatsky. 

"The potential is there for retailers such as ourselves to benefit from the unfortunate adversity of others," says an executive at another chain, who requested anonymity. 

Some of the benefit might be purely psychological.
With talk of Campeau's financial problems and potential merchandise shortages turning up on the evening news in recent days, some industry consultants say, consumers may start thinking differently about the Campeau stores. "That sends a message to consumers, which is probably false, that we're talking about a markdown of whole companies," says Ms. Farmer, the consultant. 

The Campeau chains could appear so weak to consumers that healthy competitors could gain market share "by default," adds Mr. Abramson. 

But healthy chains might also be able to outmaneuver the Campeau units with flashier merchandise displays and advertising efforts, simply because many Campeau executives and middle-level managers are taking their eyes off the ball.
Instead of concentrating only on business, they may be placing calls to headhunters and fretting about their futures. 

"Our phones have been ringing off the hook," says Mr. Kerson of Walter K. Levy.
He says his firm has been contacted by dozens of senior Federated and Allied executives over the past two weeks.
Phyllis Tama of Thorndike Deland Associates says about 30 Campeau managers from all levels have called her search firm. "The advantage to competitors at this point is temporary and psychological," says one industry executive, who requested anonymity. "Campeau has unbalanced inventories and executives who are as nervous as a cat on a hot tin roof." 

Since most stores are now ordering spring merchandise and making plans for next year's promotional events, it may take months for Campeau to feel the sting of its staff's distraction.
And by then, industry observers say, Campeau could be in the midst of another cash crisis. 

Although Campeau plans to sell Bloomingdale's to pay off some of its staggering debt, several industry observers say that might not solve its problems. "Each time you sell something off to reduce debt, you reduce cash flow," says Douglas Tigert, a marketing professor at Babson College and a retailing expert. "You could have another cash flow crunch." 

For now, though, consumers look like the biggest winners. "There'll be a lot of goods available for low prices for Christmas," predicts Mr. Abramson. 

