.START 

A new, little-noticed savings-and-loan regulation is undercutting one benefit given to the financial-services industry in the S&L law enacted last month. 

The regulation, published the day before President Bush signed the S&L bill, makes it tougher for buyers of S&Ls to sell their products to thrift depositors.
Congress allowed this "cross-marketing" of products to entice such concerns as banks, securities firms and insurance companies to buy insolvent thrifts, industry analysts say. 

But the new regulation requires the thrift to obtain written permission from each depositor before the parent company or other affiliates may send out mailings targeted, say, to home owners with children or people with deposits over $50,000.
Depositors would have to give permission every two years.
Bank holding companies aren't subject to those restrictions. 

Mailing out permission letters and compiling responses is no cheap feat. "The government thinks it just means pushing a few buttons at computer central," said Karen Shaw of the Institute for Strategy Development, a Washington firm that monitors finance regulations. "But this is a real operational impediment." 

For example, there are 69,814 passbook accounts at Hill Financial Savings Association, an insolvent thrift in Red Hill, Pa., that has $2.6 billion in assets and is one of 10 big thrifts federal regulators are pushing hardest to sell.
Those depositors would have to submit written permission before a buyer of the thrift could sell them new products. "That's a lot of stamps to lick," said Patrick Forte, president of the Association of Thrift Holding Companies. "Using these deposit bases was one of the few ways left for a thrift to make money." 

By a margin of 155-1, the regulation was "overwhelmingly and vigorously opposed" by companies who commented to regulators on it, according to the Federal Register.
Customers' response to letters requesting permission, the company comments said, is rarely above 3%. "We never thought they would go through with this," said one industry official. "The reaction was so negative, and the bill seemed to address the question." 

But officials of the former Federal Home Loan Bank Board, now the Office of Thrift Supervision, said the regulation aims to protect the privacy of depositors.
They added that the restrictions aren't as onerous as in the past, when any disclosure of depositor information was prohibited. 

Under some interpretations of the regulation, for example, the affiliate might be able to give the thrift the material to be mailed, with instructions on the sorts of customers to receive it. 

But the rule may obstruct the intent of Congress to allow broader marketing of affiliate companies' products. "I think that is contrary to what our intent was," said Rep. Doug Barnard (D., Ga.). "It's not going to insure any greater safety and soundness {of the thrift insurance fund}, but it's sure going to restrict profitability." 

The new S&L law was passed to replenish the insolvent fund that insures deposits at S&Ls.
But it also laid out plans for the government to sell sick S&Ls, and included the cross-marketing provisions to attract bidders.
Even if thrift regulators were trying to protect the privacy of depositors, "it does seem quixotic at a time when you are trying to encourage the sale of thrifts," said Ms. Shaw. 

