.START 

The leader of an unsanctioned test of the experimental AIDS drug compound Q defended the study as safe despite three deaths and several instances of severe dementia. 

Moreover, Martin Delaney, executive director of Project Inform, who led the test, said he is encouraged by evidence of the agent's antiviral activity in patients, though he acknowledged such observations lack statistical significance, because the study lacks comparison with a control group. 

Mr. Delaney asserted he sees evidence of antiviral activity because 15 San Francisco patients who had had elevated levels of a viral protein called p 24 experienced a 50% reduction.
Of 34 patients in New York and San Francisco, levels of immune cells called T4 helper cells rose anywhere from 14% to 88% with the mean increase 28%. 

However, he conceded his observations of the uncontrolled experiment lack "the security and confidence" of a controlled study, and added he couldn't "project statistical significance." (His study, which uses imported extract of Chinese cucumber root, isn't connected with a simultaneous and official study by San Francisco General Hospital and Genelabs Inc. of Redwood City, Calif.) 

Mr. Delaney said seven of 51 patients nationwide suffered central nervous system disturbances ranging from coma and seizures, to "extreme temporary dementia" -- most occurring in patients who had evidence of some brain disorder from the virus, as seen in their brain scans. 

He maintained two of the three deaths were questionably drug-related, while a third definitely was unrelated.
One patient in San Francisco died after awakening from a coma, and then suffering an aspiration pneumonia when he vomited in his sleep.
Another patient in New York died after taking compound Q, amid conflicting reports about his state of health.
While others have said the patient was relatively well before taking compound Q, Mr. Delaney said the New York death followed a severe course of AIDS including three bouts of pneumonia and neuropathy.
A third man died after disconnecting his own life support -- a death "I don't think anyone believes was drug-related," he said. 

Mr. Delaney assailed the press for sensationalizing his drug test, and claimed his critics in academia merely "perpetuate the myth that there is greater safety in {official} trials" monitored by an institutional review board.
The purpose of such review boards is to track safety and ethics of a study, but Mr. Delaney said patients in official trials can die too. 

The Food and Drug Administration has asked the unsanctioned compound Q study be stopped, and is seeking a meeting with Mr. Delaney in October.
Critics in official drug trials said yesterday his results are not merely meaningless, but harmful. 

