.START 

Your Sept. 13 page-one article "Generic-Drug Scandal at the FDA Is Linked to Deregulation Drive" says, "The FDA's current problems are a legacy of the Reagan administration's push to deregulate." This turns the story precisely on its head.
Unlike most ventures in red-tape cutting, the deregulation of generic drugs was pushed by congressional Democrats and Ralph Nader groups and actively resisted by the Reagan administration. 

The facts are simply related.
Wider and speedier access to generic drugs has long been a goal of liberal reformers, who have hoped consumers would switch from the higher-priced offerings of the "research" drug companies.
The Carter administration launched an ambitious program to deregulate generics, but this move was fought bitterly by the research companies, which argued that it was unfair to wave generics through the gate when they themselves had been forced to spend millions of dollars on testing to get the same compounds approved earlier.
In its final days, the Carter FDA gave the go-ahead to the deregulation program. 

The incoming Reagan Health and Human Services secretary, Richard Schweiker, promptly yanked the deregulation program for reconsideration.
He came under ferocious attack, however, from Democratic Sen. Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee, who charged Mr. Schweiker with fronting for the research drug companies.
Two months later, amid every sign of reluctance, Mr. Schweiker bowed to the congressional pressure and let the deregulation go through. (A full account is in the May/June 1981 issue of the magazine Regulation.) Five years later, congressional Democrats pushed through another round of decontrol, again without signs of great enthusiasm from the Reagan people. 

And now Sidney Wolfe, whose Public Citizen Health Research Group led the fight to deregulate generics, turns around and tells the Journal that the scandal can be blamed on the Reagan crew's "atmosphere of lawlessness" and insufficiently adversary stance toward generic makers.
He is counting on the shortness of your readers' memories. 

The irony is that the position from which Mr. Wolfe is now running away with such celerity is actually quite a respectable one.
That FDA employees can obtain bribes from generic applicants through their power to sit on applications for years suggests that the problem is not too much deregulation but too little.
Whatever balance should be struck between consumers' interest in getting old drugs cheaply and their interest in seeing new drugs invented, it can be struck through patent policy rather than by forcing generic makers to jump through needless paper-work hoops.
That was true when Messrs.
Wolfe and Gore and Rep. Henry Waxman proclaimed it, and it is still true now. 

Walter Olson 

Senior Fellow 

Manhattan Institute for Policy Research 

New York 

