.START 

Rhone-Poulenc S.A., France's largest chemical and drug company, continued its expansion into the U.S. market by agreeing to pay about $1.3 billion for two acquisitions: a specialty chemical unit of GAF Corp. and the chemical subsidiary of RTZ Corp.
The proposed sales aren't linked but were announced together. 

Both units operate heavily in the U.S., and Rhone-Poulenc said the effect would be to increase its U.S. sales nearly 50% to more than $2 billion on an annual basis.
The state-owned French company said U.S. sales now will account for nearly 20% of its business, up from 13% before the acquisitions. 

In 1986, only 3% of Rhone-Poulenc's sales were in the U.S., and the expansion across the Atlantic has been one of the company's main goals since then.
Chairman Jean-Rene Fourtou implied that the expansion is likely to continue later, saying at one point that this marks just a "momentary" conclusion to his acquisitions. 

Because the RTZ unit does almost as much business in Britain as in the U.S., Rhone-Poulenc's British business also will mount, to 8% of total sales from 4% before the acquisitions. 

French chemical companies, almost all of which are state-controlled, are under government pressure to grow rapidly now to face mounting competition as the European Community prepares to reduce internal trade barriers in 1992.
In a few months, the government is expected to broadly reorganize France's chemical business, merging companies into two or three main groups, with Rhone-Poulenc as one of the major poles.
But Mr. Fourtou insisted that the restructuring plans hadn't played a role in his decision. 

Curiously, RTZ and Rhone-Poulenc disagreed on the price Rhone-Poulenc is paying for the RTZ subsidiary.
RTZ announced a price of #568 million ($892.6 million), including #56 million ($88 million) of debt to be assumed by Rhone-Poulenc.
Based on last year's earnings, it said that left Rhone-Poulenc paying a price 24 times the unit's after-tax profit. 

Rhone-Poulenc, however, said the true price is the #512 million it will pay in cash.
It said the debt shouldn't be considered part of the price.
And it said the price-earnings ratio should be 12 rather than 24, because it should be calculated on expected pretax operating earnings for this year, rather than last year's actual net, which was affected by other operations within the RTZ group. 

The controversy drew chuckles from London analysts, who said each side was exaggerating the benefits it was getting.
Regardless of the dispute, the analysts said both sides seemed likely to benefit from the sale. 

RTZ built up its non-mining business in the early 1980s, when the mining outlook seemed bleak, said Tim Read, director of mining research for Smith New Court PLC in London.
With the mining business looking promising again, RTZ has shed the non-mining units -- oil and gas, cement and now chemicals -- at a profit, he said. 

The sale helps replenish RTZ's warchest, and some analysts thought it could set the stage for the acquisitive mining giant to resume hunting for new purchases.
Though a fast-growing business, RTZ Chemicals went on the auction block this year partly to help pay for one of RTZ's biggest-ever buys: This year's $4.4 billion acquisition of British Petroleum Co. 's minerals division.
RTZ now claims to be the world's largest mining company. 

"I think this is an excellent deal for Rhone-Poulenc," said Martin Glen of Shearson Lehman Hutton's London office, who noted that the opportunity to buy specialty chemical companies is dwindling as more and more are acquired. "There are a lot of other chemical companies out there trying to do the same thing, and they aren't doing as well as Rhone-Poulenc." 

Mr. Fourtou acknowledged, however, that the GAF unit had been "expensive" at $480 million.
He said that was because its performance already is excellent. "It has an excellent management team, and we think they will want to stay with us," he said.
He said he expected the GAF unit to record $190 million in sales this year, at two plants in the U.S. and one in Canada.
GAF went private this year in a buy-out led by GAF executives, and Mr. Fourtou said the sale was part of GAF's effort to repay debt incurred by the buy-out. 

He said he considered the RTZ price, on the other hand, "the cheapest such purchase in years," because even by RTZ's calculations the price was less than the unit's projected sales for this year of #580 million.
The reason for that, Mr. Fourtou said, is that the unit is restructuring and closing factories.
He said Rhone-Poulenc would carry out RTZ's planned cutbacks.
Last year's sales at the RTZ chemical unit were #450 million, he said, but acquisitions by RTZ since then have increased the unit's size.
The acquisitions are the latest in a string of companies active in the U.S. that Rhone-Poulenc has bought since 1986.
Among the major purchases have been Union Carbide Corp. 's agro-chemicals activities, two Monsanto Co. subsidiaries and a basic chemicals unit of Stauffer Chemical Co. 

The two chemical units that Rhone-Poulenc agreed to purchase both specialize in chemicals that enhance the performance of other substances, such as paints, cosmetics or herbicides.
The GAF unit is almost entirely in this "performance chemical" business, while the RTZ unit is 52% in it.
Rhone-Poulenc, already strong in basic chemicals and in drugs, has been eager to extend into this higher added-value realm. 

Richard L. Hudson contributed to this article. 

