.START 

A House panel voted to strip from President Bush's clean-air bill a provision favored by auto makers, in a move the administration says will substantially raise the cost of building less-polluting cars. 

In Mr. Bush's first defeat as his bill begins moving through Congress, the Energy and Commerce subcommittee on health and the environment rejected on a voice vote his proposal to switch to an averaging system for car emissions.
An averaging system already is in place for fuel-efficiency standards. 

"We think this will add several hundred million dollars" annually to the cost of complying with stricter tailpipe-emissions standards being proposed for car makers, said William Rosenberg, chief of the Environmental Protection Agency's clean-air office. 

The Bush administration's proposal had been targeted by environmental groups as a loophole that would have led to an overall increase in pollution by new cars.
Currently, every new car must meet the same pollution limits on tailpipe exhaust.
The proposal would have let car makers build some dirtier-running cars, as long as their fleets on average met the tailpipe standards.
Auto makers believed they could save on engineering-design costs if they didn't have to make each engine family meet the pollution standards. 

Besides environmentalists, though, emissions averaging was opposed by cities and states that fear they won't be able to clean up their smog problems without tough nationwide standards on cars. 

The House panel's surprise rejection of emissions averaging also was a setback for Energy and Commerce Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.), a powerful auto-industry ally, who didn't rule out trying to resurrect the provision later in the lawmaking process.
Many observers, however, considered the subcommittee's action a death knell for the provision. 

The House panel will be working for several weeks on the complex legislation.
Congressional leaders said they might be able to send Mr. Bush a clean-air bill by early next year. 

