.START 

Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev ousted two hard-line conservative members of the ruling Politburo as part of a Kremlin reshuffling that appears to further consolidate his power. 

Vladimir Shcherbitsky, the 71-year-old Communist Party chief of the Ukraine, and Viktor Chebrikov, former head of the KGB secret police and head of a committee overseeing legal reform, both "retired" in the reshuffling, which was announced following a meeting of the party's policy-setting Central Committee. 

A third full Politburo member, Viktor Nikonov, who had been nominally in charge of agriculture, also was dropped, as were two candidates or nonvoting, members. 

Messrs.
Shcherbitsky and Chebrikov were both widely seen as opposing Mr. Gorbachev's reforms.
A friend and colleague of the now discredited former leader Leonid Brezhnev, Mr. Shcherbitsky battled to keep the Ukraine a bastion of "old thinking," resisting efforts to introduce contested elections in the republic and cracking down hard on nationalist groups. 

Mr. Chebrikov, 66 years old, lost his job as KGB chief in a reshuffling one year ago but used his continued power base to snipe at perestroika.
In recent weeks, he has made tough speeches urging drastic action to prevent the nation sliding into anarchy.
His ouster may have been hastened by an article in the weekly Moscow News this month that linked him to the brutal killing of demonstrators in Soviet Georgia last April. 

The reshuffling doesn't remove all the hard-liners from the Politburo.
Mr. Gorbachev's leading conservative critic, Yegor Ligachev, remains a powerful member, and Mr. Chebrikov's successor at the KGB, Vladimir Kryuchkov, was elevated to the ruling body.
Mr. Kryuchkov has been given the task of opening the secret police to greater public scrutiny, but his loyalty to Mr. Gorbachev isn't certain.
The head of the State Planning Commission, Yuri Maslyukov, was also promoted to full membership of the Politburo.
Many reform-minded Soviet economists say Mr. Maslyukov is a cautious advocate of change who believes that the rigid economic planning system shouldn't be dismantled too rapidly. 

Mr. Nikonov, 60 years old, appears to have lost a tussle with Mr. Ligachev over who should be in charge of overhauling the nation's beleaguered farming system.
Both men were officially supposed to run agriculture, with Mr. Ligachev setting policy and Mr. Nikonov implementing it.
The efforts of neither have yielded fruit, and consumers complain about worsening shortages of basic foodstuffs such as meat, cheese and sugar.
Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov hinted at an impending shake-up in July when he told a meeting of party leaders it was unnecessary to have two men in charge of agriculture in the Politburo. 

The reshuffling comes amid a growing sense of gloom and despondency in the nation as numerous problems such as ethnic unrest and economic decline have grown more acute.
Many Soviet reformers have expressed fears that Mr. Gorbachev himself may be in trouble unless he can seize the initiative, while conservatives have complained publicly that perestroika has already gone too far. 

As well as ousting the two hard-liners, the Soviet leader has been strongly advocating party unity and the restoration of national calm since his return from summer vacation earlier this month.
But so far, there are no signs of any major shift in his policies. 

He told the two-day Central Committee meeting that the Soviet leadership "shouldn't submit to those who would like to leave us in the past and put us into reverse gear, or to those who offer adventurist programs instead of serious policies." 

The two nonvoting members of the Politburo who were ousted are both marginal figures whose departure was expected.
Yuri Solovyov lost his job as head of the Leningrad party organization earlier this year after failing to be elected to the new Soviet parliament even though he ran unopposed; he was unable to get the required 50% of the votes.
And Nikolai Talyzin lost much of his power when he was succeeded by Mr. Maslyukov as head of the State Planning Commission. 

In their place, the Central Committee appointed Yevgeny Primakov, a reform-minded academic who heads one of the Soviet parliament's two chambers, and Boris Pugo, head of the party's Control Committee, to the posts of nonvoting Politburo members. 

