.START 

Ralph Ingersoll II is shedding his East Coast image for one that will play on Main Street. 

In recent months, the patrician chairman and chief executive officer of the Princeton, N.J.-based Ingersoll Publications Co. has dined frequently at the St. Louis Club, joined the businessman's Noonday Club and the St. Louis Press Club, and been asked to sit on the board of St. Louis's Webster University. 

By no coincidence, Mr. Ingersoll's burst of civic enthusiasm comes just in time for Monday's launch of the St. Louis Sun, his new daily newspaper.
The Sun, a color-glutted tabloid, aims to break the monopoly Pulitzer Publishing Co. 's St. Louis Post-Dispatch has had since the St. Louis Globe-Democrat folded in 1986.
St. Louis magazine has dubbed the 43-year-old publisher the "newest power in town." If he can become one of the few publishers to launch a successful metropolitan daily since World War II, he would challenge the long-held notion that big cities can't support two newspapers without joint operating agreements. 

Mr. Ingersoll's Sun faces tremendous odds.
Not only is the 111-year-old Post-Dispatch entrenched, but it is fighting back with more editorial pages, new columnists and a new advertising campaign. "The Sun has caused us to re-examine our business and we are ready," says Post-Dispatch publisher Nicholas Penniman.
And while Mr. Ingersoll hopes to win over readers the liberal Post-Dispatch has alienated in this Catholic, conservative city, he says his target is the "baby-boomers, active 25-to-44-year-olds" -- largely a video generation that industry research indicates aren't heavy subscribers to daily newspapers. 

"We aren't intending to be the second paper in St. Louis, we are a true alternative to the Post," says Mr. Ingersoll. "The reason we will work is because we will be a family-oriented, local, conservative newspaper." 

To guide him through the Sun's launch, Mr. Ingersoll took the unusual step of hiring Sawyer Miller Group, a New York political and media consulting firm that works often with clients in "crisis" situations, such as the government of Colombia and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. 

Scott Miller, senior partner, talks about his client as if he were handling a Congressman's campaign. "We've learned in democratic elections and with corporations what's important is to build a relationship of trust between product and the people," says Mr. Miller. 

Although Mr. Ingersoll has shied from big-city competitive markets, in the past five years acquisitions have stretched the empire started by his father a half century ago to 40 dailies and 150 weeklies with estimated revenue of $800 million in the U.S. and Europe.
He used $500 million from junk bonds underwritten by Drexel to finance the expansion. 

Mr. Ingersoll is known as a "smooth and good operator" of newspapers, says John Morton, analyst with Lynch, Jones & Ryan.
But, he adds, a highly leveraged company could "feel the squeeze" should there be a recession in the 1990s. 

Compared with some recent acquisitions, Mr. Ingersoll considers the $20 million launch of the St. Louis Sun a relatively low risk.
But it is the venture in which he appears to be most deeply involved; the Sun will be the first Ingersoll paper to carry his name as editor in chief. 

In recent months, Mr. Ingersoll has made himself and the Sun's snappy logo ubiquitous in St. Louis.
Nattily turned out in custom-made suits, suspenders, and aviator glasses, Mr. Ingersoll is in high demand on the city's civic-lunch circuit.
The Sun's $2.5 million promotion campaign includes prime-time TV spots and a Sun ski cap giveaway at nearby Busch Stadium. 

So far, Mr. Ingersoll has made few if any missteps.
Paul Cavalli, senior vice president of advertising and sales promotion at Famous-Barr, St. Louis's leading department store, has seen his sales pitch. "The Sun reflects his style: methodical and professional," said Mr. Cavalli. 

Mr. Ingersoll is betting the Sun can lure readers who have drifted away from the Post-Dispatch.
Only 35% of St. Louis households take the Post-Dispatch during the week, and 60% on Sunday.
In 1969, the total daily paid circulation of the Post-Dispatch and now-defunct St. Louis Globe-Democrat was 652,261; in 1989, the Post-Dispatch's daily circulation was 378,225. 

Mr. Ingersoll believes he can win over readers with a newspaper that is a cross between Gannett Co. 's USA Today and Times Mirror Co. 's serious-minded tabloid New York Newsday.
The Sun will carry two magazines for the weekend edition, a large sports-and-entertainment section, and a prime-time and cable TV grid in color across the centerfold of the paper. 

The Sun will enter the market with 100,000 circulation, about one-fourth the size of the Post-Dispatch but a level at which Mr. Ingersoll says he can make a profit.
He cut start-up costs by using Ingersoll's Suburban Journal chain of 43 giveaway newspapers in St. Louis suburbs to distribute the Sun's charter subscription offers.
A week before the Sun's first issue, Ingersoll has more than 46,000 paid home subscribers. 

The Sun's big innovations include a big weekly paper on Saturdays, not Sundays, and elimination of the rate differential between national and retail advertising. 

Mr. Ingersoll has hired away a number of the Post-Dispatch's top staffers, some who say they initially feared Mr. Ingersoll might publish a substandard tabloid.
But, says Kevin Horrigan, the popular Post-Dispatch sports columnist Mr. Ingersoll lured to be the Sun's lead columnist: "We will be journalistically respectable.
I've got his word on that." 

