.START 

The new Compton's MultiMedia Encyclopedia has an entry on Mozart, but it will also play his music, including some of "Don Giovanni." Anyone researching astronauts can listen to a recording of Neil Armstrong's first words on the moon. 

Introduced at a news conference yesterday, the new electronic encyclopedia compresses 26 volumes of the current Compton's Encyclopedia, along with music, speeches and animation, onto a single compact disk.
The high-tech CD-ROM disks -- for compact disk-read only memory -- will be available beginning next month to schools, libraries and corporations.
The cost: $795 per disk, several times the $195 price for the book version. 

The disks resemble standard audio disks, but can't be played on a compact disk player.
Their use requires an IBM personal computer or a computer compatible with machines made by International Business Machines Corp., plus a CD-ROM player and certain video and sound equipment. 

Stanley D. Frank, president of Britannica Software, says that only about a third of the schools in the U.S. currently have the hardware needed to play its new disk, but he said surveys show that another third hope to acquire the necessary equipment. 

Mr. Frank added that about 250 schools have already ordered disks.
Norman Bastin, executive director of planning and development for Britannica, said: "We believe this will be a publishing blockbuster, and we expect to make money." 

Compton's, which is owned by privately held Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc. of Chicago, said it managed to beat its rivals in the encyclopedia world by concentrating 70 people on this effort for the past 18 months. 

Grolier Inc., a unit of French publisher Hachette S.A., has had an electronic version of its encyclopedia on the market since 1986, but without sound or pictures.
Grolier is working on a multi-media version, too, but a spokesman said the company hopes to bring out its version next year, when more sophisticated hardware will be available.
World Book Inc., a unit of privately held Scott Fetzer Inc., said its electronic model is currently being tested in libraries and will be unveiled later this year. 

The disk encyclopedia is geared to children aged eight to 18, with special emphasis on history and geography, such as a special history time-line and a spinning globe that allows kids to zoom into a country or region. 

Typing skills aren't required, because desired items are pointed out by a roving arrow, controlled by a simple hand-held "mouse" device.
To hear sounds corresponding to an entry, the arrow is moved on top of a tiny drawing of earphones, while a tiny camera indicates a photograph is available. 

Should a child stumble over an unfamiliar word in the encyclopedia's descriptions, he merely squeezes the "mouse" with the pointer on top of the word: Its definition will instantly appear from the Merriam-Webster Intermediate Dictionary, whose 65,000 entries are also on the Compton's disk.
Students can take notes in a space at the bottom of the computer screen, and they can save whatever entries they wish and print them out later. 

Eventually, Britannica said, its multimedia encyclopedia will be sold to the home market, but the necessary hardware isn't expected to be widely marketed for home use for several years. 

Among those watching the demonstration yesterday was science fiction writer and futurist Isaac Asimov.
His reaction? "I wish I were a kid." 

