.START 

The over-the-counter market's Nasdaq Composite Index slipped less than the Dow Jones Industrial Average yesterday, but OTC traders said the session lacked highlights. 

The Nasdaq Composite Index finished down 0.07%, or 0.33, at 466.72, compared with a 0.13% decline for the industrial average. 

Yesterday's market "didn't attract my attention.
It isn't very compelling," said Jack A. Sullivan, a principal in the San Francisco OTC brokerage company of Van Kasper & Co. "The return to work after Labor Day has amounted to a collective yawn." 

"The bearish sentiment is balancing the bullish sentiment" while "a lot of cash is sitting on the sidelines," said William Rothe, managing director and head of OTC trading at Alex.
Brown & Sons in Baltimore. "I think the market is generally nervous," he added. 

However, in Memphis, Tenn., Reese Austin, a first vice president of Morgan Keegan & Co., said institutions are shifting funds to the OTC market. "Money managers are looking for returns where they can get them," he said, noting a drying of takeover activity among New York Stock Exchange issues. 

The Nasdaq 100 Index ran counter to the composite and added 0.17% to finish at 444.61, meaning that Nasdaq's biggest nonfinancial issues outperformed the broader market.
The Nasdaq Financial Index, however, lost 0.21% to finish at 

News that Ford Motor is interested in acquiring a stake in Jaguar drove the British luxury auto maker's American depositary receipts up 15/32 to 8 9/32 on turnover of 6.7 million shares.
The volume was almost 13 times greater than average. 

But the ADRs of another European auto maker, Volvo, finished down 1 at 70 1/4. 

Action Auto Rental plummeted 6 to 11 1/4 on almost 14 times its normal volume, following the company's late Tuesday announcement that it would report flat earnings for the third quarter and second half.
A spokesman for the company attributed the stock activity "specifically" to that announcement. 

The Solon, Ohio, company rents cars to insurance companies for clients who have had accidents in their own vehicles.
Action Auto said it has been hurt by higher operating costs resulting from liability and insurance claims.
The spokesman didn't know specifics of the claims, but said "the company is self-insured," which means it pays claims out of its own pocket. 

Campeau, in its first full day of trading this week, added 1 to close at 12 7/8.
About 245,500 shares changed hands.
Campeau, primarily an owner of retail stores, is now 38.4% held by Olympia & York Developments on a fully diluted basis.
That closely held developer injected $250 million into Campeau in exchange for stock-purchase warrants.
Campeau also trades on the Toronto Stock Exchange. 

In total on the OTC market, 137 million shares changed hands and declining stocks outnumbered advancing issues by 1,025 to 858.
About 2,400 issues were unchanged. 

Micron Technology fell 7/8 to 13 and was still reeling from the lower-than-expected earnings it reported earlier this week for the year ended Aug. 31.
Because of the disappointing results, at least three analysts downgraded their opinions of the stock yesterday, pushing volume to five times normal. 

On Tuesday, the maker of dynamic random access memory devices reported earnings of $2.85 a share, down sharply from fiscal 1988 earnings of $3.38 a share. 

Most computer-related stocks are represented in the Nasdaq Industrial Index, which added 0.06%, or 0.25, to 452.55. 

Stratus Computer dropped 1 1/2, almost 6%, to 24 1/4 yesterday, after The Wall Street Journal reported that three officials of the minicomputer maker sold hefty stakes in the company shortly before it announced disappointing earnings last month.
Stratus was among the most active issues on Nasdaq with 2.1 million shares trading. 

Sierra On-Line added 1 1/8 to 17.
It had traded as low as 15 3/4 yesterday.
The software developer agreed to supply International Business Machines with promotional software for packaging in IBM PS/2 computers for sale during the holiday season.
But that plan will leave it with flat to slightly lower earnings for the current quarter, compared with last year, because Sierra will supply IBM on a "priority" basis.
Sales of its regular product line will be affected.
Also, IBM's promotional revenue has lower profit margins associated with it.
Sierra added that it has had "tremendous success" with similar holiday promotional agreements with Tandy in the past. 

Apple Computer's 1 3/8 rise to 44 5/8, was partially attributed to the "buy" recommendation of Doug Van Dorsten, a Shearson Lehman Hutton analyst.
Mr. Van Dorsten was "neutral" on Apple previously. 

Nike leaped 2 1/4 to 61 3/4.
Following its stronger-than-expected first-quarter earnings announced Monday, analysts have raised earnings expectations for the shoe maker's fiscal 1990. 

Drexel Burnham Lambert analyst Todd Berko, for example, told Dow Jones Professional Investor Report that he raised his fiscal 1990 estimate for Nike to $6.05 a share from $5.55 and his 1991 projection to $7 from $5.95. 

Centocor jumped 2 1/4 to 22 1/4 after the company said it asked the Food and Drug Administration to approve its marketing of Centoxin, a monoclonal antibody it makes.
The antibody is used in the treatment of gram negative sepsis and endotoxin shock. 

That announcement was more bad news for Xoma, which is seeking approval for a similar product.
Xoma dropped 1/2 to 20, after falling 2 on Tuesday because of analysts' reports that data on its product were of "borderline quality." The Centocor antibody is human, while the Xoma E5 product is derived from mice. 

A new issue, Applebee's International, finished at 11 7/8, its initial offering price yesterday.
Applebee is a restaurant franchiser based in Kansas City, Mo.. 

On thin volume, Duty-Free International jumped 3 3/4 to 48, after the company said it has an option agreement to beef up its holdings of duty-free shops along the U.S.-Canada border with the purchase of a 16-store chain. 

Constellation Bancorp added 1 3/4 to 36.
The bank holding company said it completed the acquisition of New Brunswick Savings Bank on Tuesday.
With the acquisition, Constellation has $3 billion in consolidated assets. 

