.START 

Investors pulling their money out of junk-bond mutual funds helped push money-fund assets to a new high. 

Assets of the 390 money market mutual funds tracked by Donoghue's Money Fund Report rose $2.2 billion in the week ended Tuesday, to $341.7 billion. 

"In part, it's because of the Campeau situation.
People are leaving high-yield funds," said Brenda Malizia Negus, editor of the Holliston, Mass.-based newsletter. 

Small investors bailed out of a few large junk funds late last week after a cash crunch at Campeau Corp., the highly leveraged real estate and retailing company, pushed down junk-bond prices.
Fund groups said at the time that much of the money was going into other types of mutual funds. 

Money-fund yields were little changed from the week before.
The average seven-day compound yield declined just 1/100th of a percentage point to 8.60%, Donoghue's said.
Compound yields assume re-investment of dividends and that the current yield continues for a year. 

Money-fund yields have stayed within a narrow range for more than a month, remaining ahead of most comparable investments.
Three-month Treasury bill yields, for example, have fallen more than a third of a percentage point since mid-August.
The three-month T-bill sold at Monday's auction yielded 7.90%, compared with 8.29% on Aug. 14.
Banxquote Money Markets, a New York information service, reported that the average yield offered by major banks on a three-month certificate of deposit of less than $50,000 was 7.91% in the week ended Tuesday. 

Ms. Negus of Donoghue's Money Fund Report predicted that money-fund yields will decline a bit in coming weeks as they catch up with other recent dips in interest rates. 

The average maturity of the funds' investments -- Treasury securities, commercial paper, certificates of deposit and the like -- increased just slightly to 37 days from 36 days, staying within the range of recent weeks.
Average maturity is watched as an indicator of which way portfolio managers think rates are headed.
Longer maturities are considered a sign that lower rates are expected, because they permit fund managers to retain comparatively higher yields when rates are falling.
Shorter maturities, which allow fund managers to capture rising rates sooner, are taken as a sign that higher rates are expected. 

In the week ended Tuesday, the average seven-day simple yield slid to 8.26% from 8.27%.
The average 30-day yields were the same as the seven-day yields in the latest week, declining from an average 8.28% simple yield and an average compound yield of 8.63%. 

