.START 

Chase Manhattan Corp. sought to put the nagging issue of loans to developing countries behind it by boosting its reserves for possible losses on such loans by $1.15 billion, to the highest levels of any major U.S. bank. 

The move puts Chase's reserves for developing-country loans at 46% of its exposure and on a par with U.S. regional banks and British banks.
Most big U.S. banks' reserves for such loans hover near 30%. 

The nation's No. 2 banking company thereby joins Manufacturers Hanover Corp. this week in breaking ranks with other banks and acknowledging the inadequacy of its reserves. 

The move has ominous overtones for Mexico's chances of getting sufficient new bank loans to both grow economically and meet its interest payments on its debt.
The move, which is likely to be copied by other banks, gives Chase the flexibility to sharply reduce new loans to developing countries. 

Chase also announced plans for a $500 million new issue of common shares to replenish its capital base. 

The reserve increase, which will boost Chase's reserves for losses on loans to developing countries to $2.9 billion, or 46% of its $6.2 billion in such loans, will result in a third-quarter loss of $1.11 billion.
Analysts had anticipated third-quarter earnings of $120 million, or $1.10 a share.
Chase declined to project the loss for the full year.
For the first six months, Chase earned $269 million, or $2.59 a share. 

In addition to the reserve increase, Chase took charges of $126 million for real-estate loans held by its Arizona bank and $38 million for dropping its trading operations in British government debt and convertible securities in Europe and certain U.S. securities, including mortgage-backed securities.
Between 40 and 50 jobs in New York and London will be eliminated.
For the first six months, Chase had $25 million of after-tax losses in securities trading. 

Willard C. Butcher, chairman and chief executive officer of Chase, said the areas covered by the third-quarter charges had created a $200 million after-tax drag on Chase's annual earnings. 

"Our basic core earnings have been going very well but have been masked by these three problem areas," Mr. Butcher said. "We think that the amount we've provided not only gives us adequate protection but provides us with the ability to accelerate the reduction" of the bank's developing-country debt portfolio. 

In response to questions, the Chase chairman also indicated the bank is re-evaluating whether it wants to remain a primary dealer of U.S. government securities. "We have to see where that goes," Mr. Butcher said. "My patience with these losses is at an end." 

Mr. Butcher drew a distinction between Chase's move and the recapitalization Manufacturers Hanover announced Monday, which includes a $950 million reserve addition, a new stock issue and sale of control of its asset-based lending unit for $1.28 billion.
Mr. Butcher told analysts: "In strenghtening ourselves, we have sold no -- and plan to sell no -- strategic businesses." 

Norm Jaffe, an analyst with Fox-Pitt, Kelton Inc., said, "They're recognizing reality.
The market has been saying all along that there was a need for a second round of reserves." 

The move leaves Citicorp, BankAmerica Corp. and Chemical Banking Corp. as the only major banks with reserves below 30% of their medium- and long-term exposure to lesser-developed countries. 

Citicorp Chairman John S. Reed said last week that his bank has no plans to increase reserves from its 29% level.
He said a 50% reserve level would be appropriate for a bank that intended to drop out of sovereign lending but not for one such as his that intends to remain in the business. 

In the past, big U.S. banks have maintained that their developing-country debt reserves, which generally were under 30%, were adequate.
However, the debt question has continued to drag down stock prices of major banks. 

Mr. Butcher said, "One of the difficulties of this issue is that it's just not a matter of economics, it's a matter of politics." 

Analysts had speculated that Chase would make the move, since they already were expecting disappointing results for the third quarter. "They decided to trash the year," said one analyst. 

The announcement was made after the stock market closed.
Trading in Chase had been halted shortly before the close.
It ended at $39.50, up $1.625 from Tuesday, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

Chase's move and the one by Manufacturers Hanover on Monday raise concerns regarding possible problems for this summer's accord with Mexico to reduce its $54 billion of bank debt.
That accord allows banks three options on their debt: to make new loans over the next four years totaling 25% of their current exposure and take no charge against reserves, or to swap their loans for bonds that carry either a 35% discount in face value from the loan amount or a 6.25% interest rate. 

By boosting their reserves sharply, banks are giving themselves maneuvering room to take one of the two types of bonds and drop out of lending to sovereign governments.
However, for the Mexican accord to work, banks holding about 20% of the face amount of the outstanding debt must choose the new-loan option.
So far, Citicorp is the only bank that has announced its intention to make new loans. 

Mr. Butcher said at a news conference: "We have made no final judgment of what we will do.
We haven't ruled out any of the three options . . . However, it is our longer-term goal to reduce our vulnerability.
We see ourselves as a major international bank.
The question is how much of our capital are we willing to put behind these loans." 

Mr. Butcher said Chase expects to recoup about $583 million of the reserve addition through tax benefits through 1993.
He also expects Chase to continue to reduce its developing-country loan exposure by $1 billion a year.
The big reserve addition for developing-country loans also will allow Chase to reduce its quarterly provision for loan losses by $50 million. 

Moody's Investors Service Inc. placed Chase's and certain subsidiaries' debt obligations on review for possible upgrade.
Standard & Poor's Corp. affirmed its rating on the company. 

