.START 

Texas Air Corp. is negotiating to sell its System One computer-reservation subsidiary to a unit of General Motors Corp. 

The price under discussion with GM's Electronic Data Systems Corp. couldn't be immediately determined.
But System One is the third-ranked computer-reservation system in the airline industry, based on the number of travel agents who use it, and analysts estimate that it could fetch $300 million to $400 million if sold as a whole. 

Texas Air and EDS both declined to confirm or deny that they are talking. "We never comment on negotiations that may or may not be taking place," a Texas Air spokesman said.
But sources said the talks are advanced.
Barring a snag, a final agreement could come in several weeks. 

The possibility of a sale of System One to EDS comes amid signs of a possible shake-up in the structure of Texas Air and a shakeout in the computer-reservation industry. 

Texas Air's chairman, Frank Lorenzo, disclosed last month that the company is considering selling an interest in Continental Airlines, its main operating unit.
If Texas Air, once the nation's largest airline holding company, sheds System One and all or most of Continental, its major remaining operation would be Eastern Airlines, now in bankruptcy proceedings.
So far, the company has given no indication of what it might do with any proceeds from such sales. 

At the same time, the airline industry's computer-reservation business is going through its own restructuring.
Just this week, Delta Air Lines Inc. said it was discussing a merger of its reservation system with PARS, a system jointly owned by Trans World Airlines Inc. and NWA Inc. 's Northwest Airlines.
That transaction would produce a powerful new rival for System One and the two other systems that compete for travel agent bookings. 

Delta previously proposed a 50-50 joint venture with AMR Corp. 's lucrative Sabre reservation system, the industry leader, but the Justice Department quashed that on anti-competitive grounds.
Sabre since has been casting about for other partners. 

Alaska Airlines Group, the German carrier Lufthansa and Southwest Airlines have all expressed interest in buying a share of Sabre. 

Federal officials, meanwhile, have been examining the makeup of the entire computer-reservation business.
In the past, travel agents using a particular system tended to sell a disproportionately high number of tickets on the airline that owned the system. 

Though a series of government regulations since 1984 was supposed to eliminate such so-called "architectural bias" in the systems, airlines controlling them still have an advantage, specialists say.
In reviewing the proposed combination of Delta's and AMR's systems, the Department of Transportation advocated instead spinning off the system and operating it independently of any airline. 

If EDS takes control of the Texas Air reservation unit, it would become the first non-airline owner of a computer-reservation system.
That would presumably relieve government concerns about possible bias in the system.
Such a transaction would also probably win antitrust clearance from the Justice Department. 

It is unclear, however, what effect such independent ownership would have on Eastern and Continental, the Texas Air units that rely on the system -- especially if the rival systems continued to be owned and operated by airline parents. 

Though airlines view their systems in part as marketing tools, the units also generate important revenues and profits -- not only from fees paid for airline bookings, but also for car-rental and hotel reservations.
AMR's Sabre system, with about 40% of the market, had revenue of $495 million last year.
Delta's current Datas II system, the smallest in the industry, had revenue of $68 million. 

Texas Air doesn't break out results for System One, which has about 19% of the business.
In an interview last November, Mr. Lorenzo said, "It's basically a break-even business," though he predicted it "will be profitable over time." 

For EDS, the acquisition of System One would help to reduce its dependence on GM. Officials of EDS like to think of it as an independent company rather than an arm of GM, and they want to expand their outside business until it equals or exceeds the roughly $2.9 billion a year in work they do for 

In the past year, EDS has established links with computer makers Hewlett-Packard Co. and Hitachi Ltd. to gain access to hardware at costs comparable to big computer makers.
EDS is also using systems developed for use inside GM to lure non-GM business. 

Most of EDS's non-GM business has been health insurance, government and financial institution data processing.
Recently, the company has added some factory automation and telecommunications business. 

Joseph B. White in Detroit contributed to this article. 

