.START 

Bond prices and the dollar took a header in nervous trading while stock prices ended lower after waffling through most of the day. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 3.42 points to close at 2683.89 in another day of anemic trading.
But the Dow Jones Transportation Average rose again on the strength of continuing speculation in airline stocks. 

Worried currency traders, fearing stepped-up intervention after this coming weekend's meeting of central bankers and finance ministers, bid the dollar lower.
Long-term Treasury bonds sank in the wake of the weakening dollar. 

Currency traders said that besides a wariness of central bank action against the dollar, there also is a fear that West Germany will boost interest rates today.
Although the likelihood of such an increase isn't great, traders don't want to be holding dollars should the Bundesbank decide today that inflationary threats justify an interest rate increase. 

Bond traders, focusing on the dollar's weakness yesterday, failed to respond favorably to encouraging news on the inflation front.
The Federal Reserve's official summary of economic conditions in the Fed's 12 districts showed price pressures are moderating as the economy grows modestly. 

Stock market action was muted.
Argus Research in New York recommended yesterday that investors further reduce their exposure to stocks.
A.C. Moore, director of research at Argus, said the firm continues to foresee a recession beginning before the end of the year. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices slipped in thin trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 136.6 million shares.
Declining issues on the Big Board were ahead of advancers, 726-697. 

Bond prices fell.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond lost nearly seven-eighths of a point, or close to $8.75 for each $1,000 face amount. 

The dollar weakened against most major currencies.
In late New York trading the dollar was quoted at 1.9395 marks and 145.13 yen, compared with 1.9545 marks and 145.85 yen Tuesday. 

