.START 

Three-and-a-half years ago, Japan's leading computer whiz hit the skids. 

Kazuhiko Nishi, a flamboyant figure who popularized personal computers in Japan, and his Ascii Corp. were dumped by Microsoft Corp., the U.S. software company whose products had become the main system for running PCs in Japan.
Ascii lost one-eighth of its revenue source -- sales of Microsoft products -- and Mr. Nishi was half a million dollars in debt to Microsoft. "The guy's life is a mess," William Gates, Microsoft's chairman, said at the time. 

But today Ascii stock begins trading in Japan's over-the-counter market, highlighting the rebound of the company and Mr. Nishi, its president, who was pegged as one of the rising stars of the business world in The Wall Street Journal's special centennial edition.
Revenue has grown 70% over three years, to 24 billion yen ($164.6 million) in the year ended March 31.
Operating earnings, which have lagged in recent years because of heavy investments as the company pursued a controversial diversification, now are expected to jump 20% annually.
As for Mr. Nishi, now 33, his personal stake in the company will be worth about $30 million. 

"We suffered a lot our first year" after the breakup, says Mr. Nishi.
But, he adds, "our going public proves our strategy of horizontally diversifying was correct." That strategy contributed to the split with Microsoft, as did Mr. Nishi's sometimes unstructured management style. 

Despite the rebound, critics still abound. "It's not clear to me that there's a coherent strategy underlying" the company's activities, says Steven W. Myers, a technology analyst with Jardine Fleming Securities Ltd. in Tokyo. 

And success is coming as much from adapting and maturing as from defying. "We need some outside pressure to really get organized," Mr. Nishi acknowledges as a major reason for going public. 

Mr. Nishi and two friends founded Ascii in 1977 as a computer-magazine publisher.
Today, Ascii gets a third of its revenue from publishing.
It makes one-fifth of its revenue as Japan's largest seller of packaged software.
But its biggest growth comes from computer equipment, mainly semiconductors.
Ascii doesn't make the goods, but develops some, and markets some made by other companies.
This accounts for 40% of revenue. 

Ascii also is pushing into two new areas.
One is electronic publishing, which includes networks linking computers, and data transmission by satellite.
The other area, embraced in the past month, is the design of parts for advanced graphics and sound on PCs. 

Ascii's ventures often seem to stem as much from Mr. Nishi's whims and connections as from any grand strategy.
An avid computer-game player, his company started designing a joy stick for Nintendo Co. 's machines after he grew frustrated with the quality of Nintendo's equipment.
But Mr. Nishi insists there is a common theme to his scattered projects: to improve and spread personal computers. 

Mr. Nishi has many influential backers in Japan's technology and financial worlds.
Most of Japan's big computer companies hold a 1% stake in Ascii, and Mitsui & Co., one of Japan's largest trading companies, plans to boost its stake to 5%. 

Still, Ascii and Mr. Nishi have lost substantial influence.
Ascii's software packages once regularly had half the top 10 products in Japan, but now claim only one or two.
That's partly because new competitors have emerged.
But also, some of Mr. Nishi's theories have fallen flat in practice.
When he developed his MSX operating system for PCs six years ago, he hoped to make it the standard in Japan and possibly the U.S.
While several million MSX-run machines have been sold, the system has a small percentage of the market. 

Furthermore, some companies are relying less heavily on Ascii in Japan.
Chips & Technologies Inc., a leading U.S. chip-design company that accounts for a large chunk of Ascii's semiconductor sales, is planning to set up its own Japanese operations in addition to using Ascii. 

But Mr. Nishi and his backers say he is learning from his mistakes. "Kay once told me: 'People used to listen to me, now I listen to them, '" recalls Masahiro Morimoto, president of Digital Research Corp. 's Japan operations. "He's getting to be a good manager." 

