.START 

Food and Drug Administration investigators have reported that employees at Eli Lilly & Co. 's Indianapolis plant submitted false or incomplete data to the FDA on some of the drugs it made. 

In two instances, investigators wrote, the plant failed to report to the FDA that drugs failed tests for stability.
Such tests indicate a drug's ability to work as promised after a certain amount of time. 

Congressional investigators said they plan to examine those and other incidents cited by FDA investigators. "It's fair to say the committee is looking at that," said a staff member of the investigations subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. "That goes to the question of obfuscation." 

A Lilly spokesman said the incidents were "technical aberrations" and that the company is addressing them in its plan to fix the problems at the plant.
Lilly has said it's reviewing its manufacturing operations and its goal is to "address all of the issues raised by the FDA." Last week, it halted the distribution of all drugs made at the Indianapolis plant and recalled 10 drugs. 

In a related development, subcommittee Chairman John D. Dingell late yesterday asked Lilly for copies of company documents and records of inspections of its facilities from 1985 to the present, including a list of management at the Indianapolis plant.
In a letter to Lilly Chairman Richard D. Wood, Mr. Dingell said the FDA report "confirmed that callous and cavalier business practices were commonplace" in the plant. 

A Lilly spokesman said he couldn't comment because the company had not yet seen the letter. 

Last week, Mr. Dingell asked the FDA for inspection records of more than 50 Lilly manufacturing plants.
That request came in the wake of the investigators' findings of widespread problems at the Indianapolis plant, which makes drug tablets and capsules.
The examination of Lilly, one of the biggest makers of brand-name drugs, marked a broadening of the subcommittee's investigation.
It had been investigating alleged wrongdoing by makers of generic drugs. 

Although an FDA spokesman said the investigation found "a number of objectionable practices," he said they are different from those found in the investigation of generic drug makers.
For example, FDA officials said they have no evidence of fraud at Lilly. 

In the stability tests, investigators said that four lots of the antibiotic Ilotycin showed failures for moisture, but that reports to the FDA didn't mention that.
They also found that a 1985 Lilly report to the FDA extended the expiration date for the drug to four years from two even though stability for the marketed lots had those failures. 

Moisture is one of a number of tests to check stability.
Too much moisture, for example, can make a drug degrade more quickly and thus hurt its effectiveness.
A Lilly spokesman said Ilotycin wasn't recalled and that the company considers the drug safe. 

In a separate incident, the investigators said Lilly signed off on a validation for Darvon compound two years late and four days after the FDA started its investigation in April.
They said the sign-off was contrary to Lilly's standard operating procedures and was done even though the product had long since been recalled. 

Darvon compound is made up of the painkiller Darvon plus aspirin and caffeine. 

Lilly has said the report doesn't call into question the safety or effectiveness of any of its products. 

"They may be right," said Sidney Wolfe, who, as director of the Public Citizen Health Research Group, has been a vocal critic of drug companies. "But if the company continued such widespread violations of the way drugs should be manufactured . . . sooner or later they might cause a lot of injuries." 

The investigators also reported two instances when employees apparently signed records without seeing the processing steps they were verifying. 

One instance involved weighing a batch of Darvocet-N 50, another painkiller.
Accurate weights are such a vital part of the drug-making process that a second person is required to verify the weights. 

But the investigators said they talked with a supervisor after finding that verification steps weren't recorded for certain lots of the painkiller. 

"A few minutes later," the report states, " the supervisor was seen entering the tablet manufacturing room where {another lot} was being processed, and initialed the batch record without actually verifying the weights." 

Although Lilly wouldn't comment about individual incidents in the report, its response to the FDA's inspection says its training program will "reinforce" its policy that employees "initial only those steps or actions that they perform, verify or observe." 

The three FDA investigators spent four months examining the manufacturing and control systems of the plant.
The 90-page report, which is unusually long for such investigations, details problems the investigators said they found "in nearly every area inspected." 

