.START 

U.S. security officials expect the Colombian drug cartels to launch terrorist attacks against Americans and American interests to scare the U.S. away from its anti-cartel stand. 

Oliver "Buck" Revell, the third-ranking official at the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said in an interview, "I expect bombs." He said the likeliest targets of cartel terrorism, at least initially, would be U.S. government and business representatives in Latin America, rather than people and buildings within U.S. borders. 

Other top counterterror officials echoed Mr. Revell's concern, but wouldn't permit themselves to be identified or discuss any intelligence information. "We have to take it seriously," said one. "They certainly have the capabilities to do these things." 

Sen. David Boren (D., Okla.), chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said in an interview that "I think we're in for a long period of problems with the cartels, and potentially some terrorist retaliation.
I think we have to be very well prepared for it." 

Mr. Revell, in the interview and in testimony before the Senate Government Affairs Committee, said attempted attacks within the U.S. can't be ruled out, and would be extremely difficult to head off, because U.S. borders are "porous" and the cartels have shown in the past that they can carry out killings within the U.S. 

"We're not going to back off" from the anti-drug effort, even if attacks take place, he declared in the interview. "It'll simply increase our resolve.
But we're expecting them to try it down there" in Latin America. 

Over the past two weeks, Secret Service protection for President Bush's family has been stepped up, and U.S. embassies in Latin America have gone on alert against possible drug-cartel attacks.
In addition, federal marshals have increased security at courthouses within the U.S. Mr. Revell has conferred on the terrorism threat with the U.S. ambassador to Colombia and with some federal judges in whose courts drug trials may occur. 

No evidence of planned attacks has been gathered, U.S. officials say.
But two incidents in recent days have raised the level of concern.
Last week, four heavily armed Venezuelans were arrested in Edmunston, in the Canadian province of New Brunswick.
The town sits on the border with Maine, where the president and his family vacation and where his daughter, Dorothy, lives. 

U.S. and Canadian officials say they are assuming the four men were planning some violence within New Brunswick in connection with a pending drug trial there of two Colombians.
But the four were carrying a map of Maine as well as Canadian maps, authorities said, and some of their vehicles bore New York plates.
It isn't clear why they were in a border town rather than the provincial capital of Fredericton, where the Colombians are to be tried. 

Over the weekend, a homemade rocket struck the U.S. Embassy in Bogota, Colombia.
The device did only minimal damage, and seemed too crude for a weapon of the wealthy cartels.
But it was the first attack on the embassy since Mr. Bush came to the aid of the Colombian government in its war with the cartels. 

Asked this week if the U.S. knew whether the drug cartels had targeted specific Americans, including President Bush and his family, Mr. Bush said, "There is no hard intelligence evidence of such targeting." But he warned that "any such action would, I think, just bring down the total wrath of the American people and the American government." 

The U.S. is believed to have far better intelligence on the cartels than it does on terrorists in Lebanon.
But officials said they don't know of any way to protect all U.S. interests in such countries as Bolivia, Peru and Colombia, where the cartels' power is immense. 

Within the U.S., the FBI has been very successful in heading off terrorism.
But Mr. Revell told the Senate committee, "I don't believe that if there was an intent on the part of these cartels to have blood running on the streets of America that we would be in a position to preempt it to the same degree that we have against the domestic (terror) groups." 

He says the cartels are believed to have been behind the assassination in Louisiana of a U.S. citizen involved in drug smuggling who was preparing to testify against the cartels.
And officials suspect the cartels played a role in the attempted bombing of a motorcade carrying former Secretary of State George Shultz in Bolivia in August 1988. 

Separately, a senior U.S. official said that Colombia's recent crackdown on drug traffickers has seriously hindered the cocaine industry in that country and in Peru.
Clandestine airplane trips carrying coca paste from Peru to Colombia have fallen to two to three flights a week from five to six flights a day, the U.S. official said. 

The drop in demand for coca by Colombian traffickers has pushed the price of coca paste to $600 a kilogram from $1,200 a kilogram, the official said.
U.S. officials hope that the fall in coca prices will drive farmers to switch to other crops in Peru, which supplies coca for an estimated 60% of the world's cocaine market. 

