.START 

Mutual-fund investors trying to assess the damage from the recent junk-bond turmoil are focusing on the net asset value of their "high-yield" bond funds. 

In at least two cases, the net asset value has plunged more than 4% in the past 10 days.
Other funds are off less than 1%. 

But where junk bond funds are concerned, the published net asset value doesn't tell the whole story. "It's an indicator," not a scientific measurement, says A. Michael Lipper, whose Lipper Analytical Services Inc. tracks fund performance. 

The net asset value of a mutual fund is its published price per share, before taking into account any front-end sales charges or back-end exit fees.
It represents the market value of a fund's assets, minus any liabilities, divided by the total number of fund shares outstanding. 

The problem is that determining the market value of the assets in a junk bond fund is tricky.
Because the securities are traded privately, rather than on an exchange, there is no ticker tape to check for the latest junk bond prices. 

Some smaller issues change hands so rarely that funds have to use estimated prices, and the accuracy of those estimates isn't clear. "I almost think nobody knows," says Edward G. Webb Jr., portfolio manager of Bull & Bear High Yield Fund. 

Moreover, the net asset values are figured assuming a normal level of trading activity, not a fire sale.
If individual investors were to stage a massive exodus from junk bond funds, portfolio managers would end up selling holdings at prices far below their current carrying values, market participants say. 

Fund managers generally defend their pricing, saying they scrutinize price estimates and seek information from multiple sources.
Many also have concentrated their portfolios in larger, more liquid junk issues.
For example, about two-thirds of the junk issues held by Franklin AGE High Income Fund trade almost every day, a fund official says. 

The Securities and Exchange Commission took "a hard look" at junk bond fund pricing earlier this year and "did not see major problems," says Kathryn McGrath, director of the SEC division of investment management. 

Still, junk bond pricing continues to be an area of some concern and self-scrutiny within the fund business. 

For instance, the Vanguard Group of Investment Cos. asked its junk fund manager to review pricing procedures just a few weeks ago. "We wanted to be absolutely certain we had proper pricing going on at the end of the day," a Vanguard spokesman says. 

Bull and Bear's Mr. Webb says the pricing services funds use "make a very conscientious attempt to provide reasonable values.
But I think it's very tough to do." 

One complication, Mr. Webb says, is that a major source of pricing information may be the securities firm that underwrote an issue. "There is an inherent conflict there," in that it's unpleasant for an underwriter to admit problems with one of its issues, he says. "But then again, what choice is there?
They are the people who know the issue and the issuer better than anyone else." 

Reviewing the past week or so -- a period they would rather forget -- junk bond fund managers cite several factors to explain the variation in performance among funds. 

One key variable has been the degree to which funds hold debt issued by units of Campeau Corp., the highly leveraged retailer whose financial woes spurred the decline in the entire junk bond market. 

Campeau holdings clobbered two funds managed by Integrated Resources Inc., each of which had between 4% and 5% of assets in securities issued by Campeau's Federated and Allied units when the turmoil began.
The Integrated Income Plus Fund saw its net asset value plummet 4.5% between Sept. 8 and Sept. 19, while the price of Integrated High Yield Portfolio fell 4.1%. 

Meanwhile, large holdings of cash and non-junk bonds were a boon for other funds.
The Mid-America High Yield Fund was trading at the same net asset value on Sept. 19 as it was on Sept. 8, aided by having more than 50% of its assets in investment-grade utility bonds. 

Among the junk bond funds that looked relatively good in the past week are a few that have been laggards for a year or more.
These include the Bull & Bear fund, which dropped just 1% between Sept. 8 and Sept. 19, and Venture Income Plus Fund, which dropped 1.2%.
Both funds cite recent upgradings in the quality of the issues they own. 

In general, the higher quality and more liquid junk issues would be expected to fall less than other junk issues in a broad decline.
Still, that was not always the case in the past week or so, junk fund managers say. 

Some large high-quality junk issues tumbled in price last week precisely because so many fund managers moved to sell those easily liquidated issues in order to raise cash. 

Mr. Lipper suspects there are some riskier, less-liquid issues that should have been written down more than they were recently. "I would assume there is some pretty awful stuff that didn't go down much because nobody was stupid enough to try to sell it," he says. 

But one fund manager, who asked not to be identified, says the pricing service he uses was probably correct in not marking down some of the illiquid issues he holds by as large a percentage as the liquid ones.
The illiquid ones "long since have been marked down to levels that represent a worst case," he says. 

