.START 

When Ron Blackstone quit his corporate job four years ago to buy a Wendy's restaurant on this city's South Side, he had lofty dreams.
The former sales manager envisioned making millions, creating jobs in the surrounding inner-city neighborhood and branching into other lucrative businesses. 

But those dreams swiftly turned into an enduring nightmare that shows how easy it is to get burned when buying a business. 

Shortly before his fast-food franchise opened, another Wendy's unexpectedly opened a mile away -- at a distance that Mr. Blackstone says is closer than his franchise contract allows.
That competition and the loss of patrons when a nearby disco closed soured sales, he says, and losses have totaled $350,000 so far. "How can I get rid of this albatross around my neck?" he asks despairingly. 

Wendy's International Inc. says it is aware of Mr. Blackstone's problems and gave him a loan but won't comment on terms of his contract. 

Financial flash fires occur all the time to buyers of small businesses.
Purchasing a business can be one of the most treacherous experiences in an entrepreneur's career.
Right now is the season for blunders; the busiest period for small businesses changing hands typically runs from Labor Day through December.
Many disasters could be avoided, however, if buyers would follow a few common-sense steps. 

Buyers of small businesses are more vulnerable to making costly mistakes because they frequently lack sophistication and don't know where to get information -- or even what questions to ask.
Many can't afford expert advice, and those who can often believe they don't need it.
They rush ahead, willing to risk their life's savings while often doing less homework than if they were buying a house. 

"It's horrible how buyers get so carried away following their dream that they'll drop their savings on any deal that promises to make them boss," says Wally Stabbert, president of the Institute for Certified Business Counselors, in Eugene, Ore. 

Many buyers, like would-be lottery winners, imagine themselves as having already succeeded and pocketed $1 million as owners of concerns they're thinking of buying, but they don't critically examine the steps it will take to get them there, says Bernard Liebowitz, a Chicago psychologist who counsels small businesses. 

No matter how intelligent the buyer, some get so caught up in the aura of a business's success, he says, that they'll believe anything the seller tells them without checking it out.
Others, imbued with their own past successes, convince themselves they can work miracles with somebody else's troubled concern -- and don't look before they leap. "You can convince yourself of anything," cautions Mr. Liebowitz. "We all do." 

Daniel Imasdounian, who bought a name-plating company eight years ago, made the mistake of taking a seller at his or her word -- the most common blunder a buyer can make.
He says he should have known the seller wasn't disclosing everything when the seller's wife refused to part with the firm's record of receivables. 

Disregarding his instincts as a trained accountant, the Whittier, Calif., businessman signed the deal anyway. "I guess I was naive," he reflects. "The seller was presented as a religious and honest person -- and I couldn't put two and two together when the person was so nice." 

Ugly surprises followed: $2,500 in court claims from unpaid suppliers, overdue tax bills of $6,600 and $15,000 in bills from other suppliers the seller had promised to pay.
Consequently, some of the unpaid suppliers refused to do business with him. 

Eventually, Mr. Imasdounian, who sued the seller for damages in Orange County, Calif., Superior Court, won in court and the business recovered.
But for several years, he was in a costly court battle that sapped his energy for running the business. 

In a recent deal, Mr. Imasdounian made sure he can deduct any unforeseen liabilities incurred by the previous owner from his payments to the seller. 

Outright dishonesty by a seller or a seller's management team can be extremely difficult to detect.
Dallas businesswoman Carolyn Draper warns that, based on her experience, buyers should be skeptical of the managers they inherit. 

When she purchased a delivery service three years ago, a top manager there impressed her. "He knew the business," she says.
But when sales dropped several months later, she grew suspicious.
Paying a midnight visit to her company, she discovered the manager running his own separate delivery service, shipping packages to customers the company had lost. 

The manager vanished and her company had to absorb losses of $150,000. "We were too trusting.
We didn't have the proper controls in place in a new partnership," says Ms. Draper.
The next time, Ms. Draper promises, she'll retain her own managers to monitor cash flow. 

Red tape in an industry the buyers were unfamiliar with tripped up Fawzy Banawan and his wife, Fatima, who invested $200,000 in a Charlotte, N.C., day-care center last year.
Just a few days after the purchase, a local welfare agency -- which had contracted with the prior owners to care for 22 children -- pulled the children out, taking away nearly half of the business. 

The Banawans hadn't obtained their own license to run a day-care center, as that state requires, and the previous agency's contract wasn't transferable.
As a result, Mr. Banawan says, the center lost $31,000 until the Banawans got a license and renewed the contract with the welfare agency. (They filed a suit in state court in Charlotte against a day-care consultant and a broker who advised them in the purchase.
The defendants' lawyers, who requested dismissal of the case, haven't filed a response to the charges.) 

Hidden environmental hazards are increasingly a concern.
When Austin Fernandes, entering real-estate development, bought a commercial lot in California last year, he says he never suspected there were underground storage tanks left when a gas station closed years ago. 

The 24-year-old business student says he discovered the tanks by checking records at a local county assessor's office -- after he'd bought the lot.
With federal and state laws requiring property owners to remove unused tanks and clean up any damage they've caused, his cleanup bill could run from $25,000 to $500,000, potentially wiping out his initial investment, he figures. 

He has sued the sellers and brokers involved in a California state court, alleging, among other things, that they fraudulently failed to disclose the tanks' presence; he seeks to collect damages before the government compels a cleanup.
Lawyers for the sellers and one of the brokers deny the charges, but haven't filed a response.
In the future, Mr. Fernandes says, he won't rely on others to handle such homework as checking property records. "Never trust anybody to do it for you," he says, "because in the end, you'll have to pay." 

To head off problems, a buyer should be sure to peruse a business's books -- balance sheets, income statements and tax returns -- for at least the past three years.
And the business records should be current.
An entrepreneur who spent $750,000 to purchase a Delaware machinery company three years ago says the concern lost $100,000 the first six months he owned it because product prices were based on the costs of parts listed in out-of-date financial records.
He blames himself for naively assuming he'd grasp the manufacturing business because he'd been a corporate marketing executive in the same industry. 

Buyers should size up a business's prospects, too, by talking with customers, suppliers, neighboring business owners and industry experts.
As Mr. Blackstone's Wendy's experience attests, buyers should certainly find out if rivals will soon open.
Often they can do that by talking with competitors or others in the industry. 

A trade association has information on an industry's growth forecasts, historical ups and downs and competitive problems.
Local bankers may supply guidelines on financial ratios for an industry.
And the local office of the U.S. Small Business Administration knows retired executives who offer free counseling. 

Would-be buyers are also advised to hire both an accountant and a lawyer.
An accountant can find problems such as a seller's attempt to run up profits before a sale by not paying bills; lawyers can identify undisclosed suits or liabilities. 

