.START 

Last week, small-business owners popped champagne corks when House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski announced he would finally support repeal of Section 89.
That now-notorious measure would force companies to prove they don't discriminate in the employee benefits they offer executives and lower-paid workers.
Business groups unanimously condemned the soupy language of Section 89 as so burdensome and costly that some employers were preparing to drop all fringe benefits.
Alas, these folks had better try to recork the bubbly. 

In backing repeal, Chairman Rostenkowski casually added that he would substitute "certain nondiscrimination rules" -- which he did not define -- that would apply only to health benefits.
Ways and Means passed the new Rostenkowski rules last week as part of the capital-gains tax package, but so far the legislative language hasn't been made public.
A source who has seen it calls it Son of Section 89, and says that in some areas -- such as the obligation to notify workers of benefits -- the new law is more onerous than the original. 

Ways and Means won't release the language of the new rules -- which will be added to Section 106-b of the tax code -- and is waffling on what actually constitutes repeal.
A committee spokesman says, "It is virtual repeal.
It is not total repeal." When they talk that way in Washington, it's time to check your wallet. 

Section 89's history is as dubious and murky as any of the 1,000-page "continuing resolutions" Congress is fond of passing in the wee hours.
No bill embodying Section 89 was ever filed, nor will any Member admit parentage.
It was by many accounts the brainchild of two Ways and Means staffers, Kent Mason and Harry Conaway, who dropped it into the 1986 Tax Reform Act during a closed committee session.
Democratic Rep. John LaFalce, chairman of the Small Business Committee, says, "I have not talked to any Member of Congress who says he understood what Section 89 was all about, or even that there was a Section 89." It's little wonder that Hill staffers sometimes say they have the power of Members without the accountability. 

Messrs.
Mason and Conaway have since followed the timeworn career path of many former congressional staffers.
Both men are now employed by firms where their duties include consulting on and interpreting for clients the Section 89 provisions they ushered into the tax code.
Another consulting group is even marketing a $5,500-a-copy Section 89 software program, which they say is "reviewed/designed," as well as endorsed and recommended by "Kent Mason, who wrote Section 89." 

Today, the House Rules Committee will vote on a proposal to allow a simple vote to repeal Section 89 onto the House floor.
You'd think that since 75% of all House Members, including a majority of Democrats, support repeal that a vote will be allowed.
But the Rules Committee plays by House Rules, which means anything the leadership wants usually happens. 

The Section 89 affair embodies all that is wrong with the modern Congress.
Written by staffers and passed by largely unsuspecting Members in the dead of night, its repeal has been kept on hold by a combination of sleight of hand and sheer parliamentary muscle.
The battle over Section 89 is really a battle over whether Congress can be forced to represent the people instead of its own peculiar interests. 

