.START 

The U.S. economy continues to grow modestly, but conditions still vary substantially from region to region, a new Federal Reserve report said. 

Manufacturers say conditions are "generally satisfactory or improving" in the South and West, but weakening in New England and parts of the Midwest, according to the report, which was based on surveys conducted by district Federal Reserve banks in early September and late August. 

The consumer spending picture is mixed, with retailers in some regions noting new strength and others reporting softer sales, the Fed found.
The farm economy is improving everywhere.
And there is little sign of accelerating inflation. 

In short, the economy is performing about as the Fed hoped: It is growing slowly enough to avoid an outbreak of inflation, but fast enough to chase away recession jitters. "My perception is that things are moving along at a fairly low pace, but at an appropriate pace for this stage of an expansion," said Robert Black, president of the Federal Resrve Bank of Atlanta. 

The report offers clues into the thinking of the 12 district bank presidents as they prepare for the next scheduled meeting of the Fed's policy-setting group Oct. 3. 

The Fed hasn't made a move since it pulled short-term interest rates down a bit in late July.
The Bush administration continues to privately urge the Fed to ease again, particularly in light of the recent run-up in the dollar.
Lower U.S. interest rates would help restrain the dollar. 

But several of the regional Fed presidents are resisting any further easing moves unless the economy exhibits new signs of weakness. 

The most upbeat reports came from the New York, Atlanta and San Francisco regions.
The New York Fed noted "some recent signs of strengthening," although demand for consumer loans is off.
The Atlanta Fed said business expectations for the rest of the year are "somewhat brighter than before." And the San Francisco Fed, which covers everything west of Salt Lake City, reported "a healthy pace." 

In contrast, the Chicago Fed reported slower growth with several industries returning to summer shutdowns that they had skipped in recent years.
The Boston Fed said the commercial real estate market in New England is softening.
For the third month, more industrial companies in the Philadelphia region report declining business activity than report improvements.
The St. Louis Fed said no sector of that region's economy is showing significant employment growth.
And the Dallas Fed said the Texas manufacturing expansion "appears to have ebbed." 

On the inflation front, all the reserve banks that made comments were optimistic.
New England manufacturers, for instance, uniformly reported flat or falling material prices, although a third of them mentioned recent or anticipated price increases ranging from less than 1% to 5%.
In the West, recent union settlements generally call for wage increases of 4% or less, the San Francisco Fed noted. 

