.START 

Would You Buy a Car 

From This Woman? 

CAR SELLING isn't the man's world it once was. 

In part to appeal to women buyers, auto dealers say they are starting to add more women to their ranks.
The number of saleswomen enrolled in the National Automobile Dealers Association's ownership training school has more than doubled in the past five years, according to Frank McCarthy, the group's executive vice president. 

"Car dealers are no longer the good ol' boys who sit around and drink coffee, read the paper and smoke cigarettes," he says. 

A few years back, women started complaining about condescending salesmen who assumed that female buyers cared only about the car's color, Mr. McCarthy says.
Recognizing that about 45% of new car purchases are made directly by women and another 30% are influenced by them, some dealers figured one way to attract female buyers was to add more women to the sales force. 

Car saleswomen, of course, also sell to men, and they tend to use different tactics than salesmen, according to a study by sociologist Helene Lawson at Loyola University of Chicago.
While observing and interviewing 45 Chicago-area saleswomen and men, Ms. Lawson found that some women "take on roles men expect of them -- the matronly grandmother or mother -- or they act silly or 'dizzy. '" 

Not all customers respond well to car saleswomen, Ms. Lawson says.
Some men, especially older ones, simply won't buy a car from a woman, she says. "They'll try to stump the female salesperson by asking tough technical questions they wouldn't pose to a man," she says. 

Or they can be rude, asking, "Where's your father?" or "Can I talk to a real salesman?" 

Most customers, though, like to find women on the sales floor, Ms. Lawson and Mr. McCarthy agree.
Women, they say, are perceived as less hard sell. 

Aluminum-Bat Makers 

Are Pitching Overseas 

WITH THE U.S. aluminum bat market approaching saturation, some companies are trying to get foreign baseball players hooked on metal right from the start. 

Hoping to take advantage of the growth of baseball's popularity overseas -- baseball becomes an official Olympic medal sport in 1992 -- Jas D. Easton Corp. is supplying aluminum bats to national teams in several countries including Italy, Australia and the Soviet Union. 

In addition, Easton is running ads in foreign sports publications and sponsoring baseball clinics overseas to sell the sport, as well as aluminum bats. 

Other bat makers are also taking a swing at building business overseas. "It's a boundless new market," says Mike McGrath, director of international marketing for Hillerich & Bradsby Inc. Hillerich, which makes Louisville Slugger brand bats, is covering its bases overseas by marketing both aluminum and wooden bats. 

Aluminum bat sales have grown to 90% of all bats sold in America, up from 18% in 1973, according to Easton.
But because aluminum bats -- which don't break easily -- aren't replaced as often as wooden ones, the company decided the only way it could boost sales substantially was to expand overseas, says Jim Darby, a senior vice president at the Easton Sports division. 

Because many foreigners are just starting to get interested in America's favorite sport, aluminum bat makers shouldn't have the same problem they face with baseball purists in the U.S. 

Professional ballplayers in the U.S. can't use aluminum bats.
Metal bats make it easier to hit home runs and artificially raise players' averages, says Jim Small, a major league spokesman.
What's more, aluminum bats don't provide the same resounding crack that wooden bats do, he says, adding, "As long as there are trees, we're going to use wooden bats." 

Cartoon Ads Appeal 

To Older Generation 

ADVERTISERS are discovering that grownups like cartoons as much as kids. 

A Butterfinger candy bar television spot -- featuring the cartoon family the "Simpsons" from "The Tracey Ullman Show" -- ranked in the top 10 in Video Storyboard Tests Inc. 's first quarter 1989 poll of the most popular ads. 

In addition, Garfield the cat for Embassy Suites hotels and the Peanuts gang for Metropolitan Life Insurance were pitchmen in two of the top 12 print ads of 1988, according to a study by Starch INRA Hooper Inc. 

In the past, Madison Avenue frequently shied away from comic book characters, believing they appealed only to youngsters, says David Vadehra, president of Video Storyboard. "But their appeal is much stronger than advertisers thought." 

These cartoon characters have more pull than most flesh and blood celebrities, both Starch and Video Storyboard found.
What's more, a cartoon spokesman isn't as risky as a "live" celebrity, says Mr. Vadehra. "No {cartoon} is going to jump up and say 'I never used that product]' like Cybill Shepherd did with beef." 

Odds and Ends 

BLACK CONSUMERS are less likely than whites to use coupons, shop in department stores and shop by catalog.
But they're more apt to shop in convenience stores and order products through TV shopping shows, according to a study by Impact Resources, Columbus, Ohio. . . . Watch out Ernest and Julio: Anheuser-Busch Cos. will promote Michelob Dry's new 20-ounce longneck bottle as "the beer to be shared." Touting the beer as an alternative to wine at dinner, TV commercials feature the decorative bottle in an ice-filled bucket. 

