.START 

The dreaded "t word" suddenly is looming over pension funds, and pension managers are dismayed at the prospect. 

Chairman Lloyd Bentsen of the Senate Finance Committee said Tuesday that he was considering proposing a tax on short-term trades of securities by currently tax-exempt pension funds.
Such a measure would be aimed at encouraging a longer-term view toward investing. 

Pension managers said yesterday that the idea is misguided. "They're trying to cure a problem that doesn't exist with the worst possible fix," David Feldman, head of American Telephone & Telegraph Co. 's $38 billion retirement fund, said of congressional advocates of a pension tax. 

Once taxing pension assets begins, "it's the camel's nose under the tent, and who knows where it goes from there?" he said.
And Dale Hansen, executive director of the $56 billion California Public Employees Retirement System, said: "Congress is hungry for more revenue, and we {pension funds} are a potentially very large target." 

Pension funds, with assets approaching $2 trillion, hold nothing more precious than their tax-exempt status. 

Details of the Texas Democrat's idea are sketchy, as are those of an earlier proposal along the same lines by Republican Sen. Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas that has received support from Republican Minority Leader Robert Dole.
But even the suggestion of a pension-fund tax is touching off alarm bells among retirement-system officials. 

Concern that the corporate takeover boom is threatening the ability of U.S. companies to invest in the future and provide secure jobs for workers has become a frequently voiced theme of the Bush administration and many members of Congress.
One result of forcing pension plans to take a "long-term"approach, advocates say, would be to keep them from investing in takeover fights, especially those where companies become targets of hostile bids. "I think you can make a good case that best investment thinking is done when a long-term horizon is taken," said pension-industry analyst Charles Ellis of Greenwich Associates. "It would be great if pension funds took a longer-term view." 

But fund officials contend they are already long-term investors and contribute very little to fueling corporate takeovers.
According to pension-industry estimates, no more than 1% or 2% of pension assets are used to finance takeovers, typically by investing in leveraged buy-out funds or by buying takeover-related high-yield junk bonds. 

Rather than rapidly buying and selling stock holdings, the $20 billion New Jersey public employees retirement system, for one, says it typically holds a stock for five or six years; the California public employees system says it turns over its stock portfolio every 10 years. 

James Herod, deputy executive director of the Texas Employees Retirement System, said that the $6 billion pension fund "opposes any federal control over our plan," and that federal taxation of a state trust would raise constitutional questions.
In addition, he said, "To the extent that any pension money goes to pay tax, it's not available to pay benefits." 

Threatened one public-fund official, "If they're going to talk about taxing our pension funds, we're going to talk about taxing their Treasury bills." (Treasury securities currently are exempt from state taxes.) 

The pension-tax idea, which Sen. Bentsen hasn't decided yet to pursue as legislation, was a leading topic of discussion yesterday as a corporate-pension group, the Committee on Investment of Employee Benefit Assets, held its annual meeting in Washington.
AT&T's Mr. Feldman said the group, whose members have more than $500 billion in benefit assets, were "unanimous in thinking that taxing pension plans is a bad idea." 

"If the tax is directed at fixing a problem of short-term investing, it's simply not a problem in our view," he said. "If it's directed at raising revenue, it's going to make the job of providing adequate pensions that much harder." 

