.START 

Marlon Brando appears for only a few minutes in "A Dry White Season," in the part of a brilliant lawyer who continues to fight apartheid even though he knows his courtroom victories will be nullified, one way or the other.
This brief, exquisite characterization happily revives the memory of Marlon the Great, when he was acting up a storm and he was pretty.
He's long since almost disappeared from the screen, and seems to have settled into his protective heft.
Yet even now, with a twist of the mouth, an inflection, he tells you what you need to know about Ian McKenzie, a lawyer whose cynicism poorly disguises a deep, weary sadness. 

It's a memorable act, a remarkably subtle, bravura performance.
Unfortunately, almost everyone else in this dutiful picture plods through his preordained paces. (The exception is exiled South African actor Zakes Mokae, who gives a wild edge to the character of a black taxi driver pushed by events into a revolutionary role.) 

"A Dry White Season" originally was a novel by Andre Brink, a South African writing about an Afrikaaner shaken out of his complacency by the 1976 Soweto uprising.
His protagonist, Ben du Toit, found his assumptions about life turned upside down at age 50, when he realized that his minor acts of benevolence toward the family gardener didn't mean much when black schoolchildren were being gunned down by government men. 

Putting this story on film, director Euzhan Palcy ("Sugar Cane Alley") -- a woman born and raised in Martinique -- wanted to avoid the "Cry Freedom" scenario (doing an anti-apartheid movie entirely from a white man's perspective).
So she reworked the script with Colin Welland to include the black point of view as well. 

What's emerged is an entirely worthy effort without an unpredictable moment.
Except for a gesture from Mr. Brando, another from Mr. Mokae, the entire enterprise moves by rote.
This is the high-minded equivalent of a "Rocky" picture, earnestly teaching the lesson that apartheid is evil. (Is there anyone in the Western world who would argue the point, at least openly?) 

The movie isn't poorly made.
Ms. Palcy has lined up all the ingredients in the right order.
There's the juxtaposition of comfortable white life in South Africa against the impoverishment of blacks; the horror of black children being massacred; the loaded legal system that makes the murder of blacks an unprovable crime. 

It's all laid out too neatly, as though filling in some equation that equals outrage.
But genuine outrage comes from passion, and it is hard to feel passionate about characters who never slip outside their archetypes.
Donald Sutherland has the ostensible lead, as Ben, whose discovery of the evil around him seems neither astonishing nor particularly interesting. 

Janet Suzman, as his wife, has the far less sympathetic but slightly more absorbing part.
She's disturbed about what's happening to blacks but prefers to act with unenlightened self-interest.
She recognizes she has a good thing going, in the material if not the moral sense.
Where else could she, the wife of a schoolteacher without an inheritance, live like a pasha? 

The South African officials all are cruel pigs (but we already learned that this summer, in "Lethal Weapon 2").
Most of the black actors are doomed to suffering nobly, except for Mr. Mokae's Stanley.
He's Ben's guide into reality, and one of the few characters allowed at least a layer of complexity. 

Susan Sarandon, who likes to be associated with righteous causes, must have taken the part of the liberal journalist for that reason, because there couldn't have been much professional interest for her in what she's been given to do.
The movie may be instructive to those who have missed the evening news for the last decade or so.
At the very least, it means well. 

Which is more than anyone could plausibly argue about "Black Rain," the latest action picture from sci-fi futurist/director Ridley Scott ("Alien," "Blade Runner"). 

Mr. Scott, who in his former life produced 2,000 commercials, has an eye for what's visually hot -- or rather, what's stylistically cool.
His films have been masterworks of design and sound, creating dehumanized worlds of tomorrow. 

Here he's applied his particular talent to the present, to an otherwise routine cops 'n' mobsters scenario played out in Japan, the world of tomorrow he's found today.
His Japanese are alien creatures as well -- either grimly impassive or cuddly and fun, like so many extraterrestrials who have marched across the big screen in recent years.
Underneath the slick production, the smoky grays and blues, lurks some rather unstylish racism. 

As cop stories go, this one (written by Craig Bolotin and Warren Lewis) dredges up many cliches of the genre and invents many new ones, mostly vulgar lines spit out by Michael Douglas with a reasonable amount of fervor.
There is much violence, shot with the same chill elegance as the rest of the film, which somehow makes it seem even worse than the usual cinematic bloodletting. 

Andy Garcia (the feisty rooster in "The Untouchables" and the really vicious bad guy in "Eight Million Ways to Die") is the picture's brightest light, as the affable partner.
Yusaku Matsuda could spend a lifetime playing soulless heavies -- he's so mean as the punk gangster -- but does he really want to?
And Japanese star Ken Takakura admirably carries the burden of being the human Japanese, the cop who joins up with the visitors from New York.
Oh, yes, there's a girl, played by Kate Capshaw, whose lines seem to have been cut drastically, but not nearly as much as the backs of her dresses.
On the other hand, one could argue that's entirely appropriate for an enterprise that's more fashion statement than film. 

VIDEO TIP: For one of the few interesting movies about apartheid, take a look at "A World Apart," scheduled to appear on video in the next few weeks.
This 1988 picture about a real-life journalist (played by Barbara Hershey) imprisoned for her anti-apartheid views, told from the point of view of her daughter, was a vivid, personal account. 

