.START 

Vons supermarkets last weekend played host at an Hispanic food show in Long Beach, Calif.
More than 5,000 people, most of them Mexican Americans, turned out to browse among booths manned by south-of-the-border specialty companies like El Rey Sausage and Argas Tortillas. 

But wait.
Sprinkled liberally among the beans and tacos were booths for Hebrew National kosher hot dogs, Hostess bakeries' Twinkies, and -- perhaps the least ethnic food ever created -- Continental Baking's Wonder Bread.
Co-sponsoring the Hispanic food fair extravaganza was Coca-Cola Co. 

The food expo was striking testimony to marketers' discovery that just advertising to the Hispanic market isn't enough.
The future, to hear them tell it, is in promotions -- the same promotions, like sweepstakes, price breaks and sampling, that have been so overused on the general population.
And leading the charge, rather than Hispanic-market companies like Goya, are all-America mass-marketers like Procter & Gamble and PepsiCo. 

"There isn't an advertiser in the Hispanic marketplace that isn't concentrating on promotions, special events and sales-moving techniques.
Advertisers are much more sophisticated than they were just a year ago," says Jack Feuer, editor of the U.S. Hispanic Report, a Santa Monica, Calif.-based newsletter. 

Mr. Feuer attributes the increase to "Hispanic marketing growing up.
We had expected the field to go from infancy to adolescence in 1989.
Instead, it has gone all the way to maturity." Willard Bishop, a Chicago-based grocery consultant, agrees, noting that Hispanic marketing, once regarded as a specialty area, has become almost a mass-market business. 

Marketers spent $550 million advertising to the country's more than 20 million Hispanics last year, according to Hispanic Business, a trade publication.
Mr. Feuer says those marketers are now pouring just as much, or perhaps more, into promotions.
The reason is simple: They have to.
The Hispanic market is such a desirable one for marketers, and so fast-growing, that hordes of marketers are now vying for attention and need to stand out. 

What's more, Hispanic marketing experts contend that promotions are more effective in the Hispanic marketplace.
They say the Hispanic culture tends to be brand-loyal, family-centered and "festival-oriented," meaning that with special events like being the host of a block party, "You get more bang for your dollar," says Steven Soto, president of the National Mexican American Grocer's Association. 

Mr. Soto says PepsiCo, Coca-Cola and Philip Morris's Miller Brewing and cigarette brands were among the first to create Hispanic promotions, like sponsoring concerts in parks and "mini-fiestas" in stores.
More recently, Mr. Soto says, Procter & Gamble in the past nine months has been heavily involved in launching similar Hispanic promotions, as have several other packaged-goods giants like Beatrice and Colgate-Palmolive.
Pepsi's Frito-Lay unit, which started a playground program several years ago, recently set up a scholarship program in Dade County, Fla. 

Now, other packaged-goods companies are joining in.
Vons, which runs a small chain of Hispanic grocery stores as well as more than 300 Vons supermarkets, attracted an unlikely mix to its Hispanic food festival last weekend: Ben & Jerry's ice cream, Campbell Soup and General Foods, among others, were hawking their wares. 

But while marketers have seized on special events to promote themselves to Hispanics, there has been some debate over whether couponing is effective.
Several conflicting studies have suggested either that Hispanics don't use coupons at all, or that they use them more frequently than the general population. 

Part of the confusion may stem from the different Hispanic nationalities living in the U.S. Iberia Foods, a New York-based Hispanic foods company, for example, uses coupons in the Miami market populated by Cubans.
But it doesn't use coupons in the New York area, where the largely Puerto Rican and Dominican population "isn't accustomed to them," says Maria Ibias, its advertising director. 

Stuart Rosenthal, executive vice president of marketing at Vons, however, says the belief that Hispanics don't use coupons is "to some extent a myth." He says coupon use has been low in some cases because coupons are in English.
And he says a number of packaged-goods companies have recently been issuing Spanish-language coupons, including Procter, Keebler, Lever Bros. and General Mills. 

Ironically, though, the push to promote has been mostly by mass marketers.
Goya, one of the largest Hispanic-market companies in the U.S., says it hasn't increased its involvement in promotions at all.
Iberia has been sponsoring special events for at least a decade, although Ms. Ibias does say it is getting more involved now, primarily to compete against Goya. 

As the push toward promotion grows, so too will the clutter now slashing the effectiveness of mass-market promotions.
But Hispanic marketing executives contend it will be a long time before the Hispanic market is too cluttered; Mr. Feuer compares the Hispanic market today to the mass market in the 1950s, before people were besieged by promotions at every turn. "The level is so low it won't be saturated," adds Mr. Soto. "You're getting the message out to consumers who haven't been subject to {promotions} in the past." 

