.START 

Last month, Israeli Finance Minister Shimon Peres announced the sale of the government's $53 million stake in Jerusalem Economic Corp., an industrial development concern, as the latest move in a massive public offering. 

But the same week, the Israeli tourism minister threatened to impose price controls on the state's hotels, if they kept marking up drinks. 

"I don't think we need to talk about the death of the socialist dream when the government is still reaching inside minibars," says Micha Rinat, an economist with the kibbutz movement. 

But if the dream isn't dead, its condition is critical.
Many Israelis are dissatisfied with their sluggish economy, in which only 50% of the state's industry is in private hands.
The other half is equally divided between the government and the giant trade-union federation, the Histadrut. 

The Histadrut was established in 1920 -- 28 years before the birth of the state -- with 4,500 members.
Many of them came from Eastern Europe, imbued with the ideals of the Russian Revolution and a mistrust of capitalism.
Officials of the labor movement, indeed all the early Zionist leaders, rarely accepted salaries any higher than laborers' pay. 

Today, the Histadrut has more than 1.5 million members -- almost half the population -- and its trade-union role is dwarfed by its other activities.
The Histadrut owns Koor Industries Ltd., the state's largest industrial conglomerate whose interests in steel, electronics, chemicals and consumer products yielded 1988 sales of $2.34 billion.
It also owns Solel Boneh, the state's biggest construction company and a big share of Bank Hapoalim, its largest bank.
It runs a daily newspaper, a publishing house and the nation's major pension fund. 

Most of those concerns currently are deeply troubled.
Koor, which produces 10% of Israel's gross national product, is struggling to avoid insolvency.
In 1988, New York-based Bankers Trust Co., owed $20 million, petitioned to have the concern liquidated.
The crisis has been averted so far by a promised $50 million government bailout, asset sales and massive firings. 

"I'm a Labor Party member from a nice socialist family," says Benjamin Gaon, appointed Koor's chief executive officer 15 months ago and the recent target of demonstrations over closed factories and eliminated jobs. "You have to face the truth. {Bankers Trust} in New York doesn't care about the socialist movement in Hadera {a town affected by recent sackings}; it cares about the money it lent and it's my job to repay it." He adds: "Unless you are prepared to do unpleasant things without any compromise we will vanish." 

The Histadrut has already started shedding some of its businesses and that process is likely to be accelerated if Likud candidates are successful in the Histadrut elections in November.
Likud wants to sell off all the businesses to fund the Histadrut's sorely depleted pension fund.
Labor, which took a battering in recent municipal elections, is bracing for its toughest-ever battle to retain control of the organization it has always dominated. 

Israel's small population limits the government's ability to behave with the measure of ruthlessness associated with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's reforms in Britain, or even Reaganomics in the U.S., argues Mr. Rinat, the kibbutz economist. "This is a household, not a government," he says. "Anything that happens in any corner has influence on everybody else." 

Nevertheless, many Israelis say a socialist Jewish state is a contradiction in terms.
Socialism, says Harry Wall, Israel director of the Anti Defamation League, "never was endemic to the Jewish character.
It was a stop-gap phenomenon to deal with the early waves of immigration and the challenges of setting up the state." 

The irony, he adds, is "that Jews who came to Israel hadn't been allowed to bear arms, yet they made great soldiers.
They hadn't been allowed to own land, but they made great farmers.
The one thing they had been allowed to do was run economies and manage finance, and in Israel that's been the least successful." 

