.START 

Immunex Corp. announced a series of agreements under which the biotechnology company will reacquire the right to manufacture and market promising biological agents for treatment of cancer and immune dysfunction. 

Among product rights reacquired was granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor, or GM-CSF, which promotes growth of infection-fighting white blood cells.
In a recent study, GM-CSF reduced deaths following bone-marrow transplants in cancer patients.
Immunex plans to file an application for Food and Drug Administration approval of GM-CSF for this use late this year. 

Immunex, which in the early 1980s licensed away the right to make and sell products it had developed, now has shifted gears and is reclaiming rights to such products as part of its strategy of becoming "a fully integrated biopharmaceutical company," said Stephen A. Duzan, chairman, president and chief executive officer. 

Under the first of several related agreements, Immunex agreed with the Sterling Drug Inc. unit of Eastman Kodak Co. to restructure a joint venture.
Under terms of the pact Immunex paid nearly $5 million for the rights to market and manufacture interleukin-1 receptor, interleukin-4 receptor, and B-cell differentiation factor.
Immunex said the payment will be made out of cash reserves during the third quarter. 

The experimental agents generally are thought to have potential for controlling various aspects of the human immune response, Immunex said.
Sterling, for its part, received rights to certain so-called rational drug design projects and other product development projects. 

In a related move, Immunex said it acquired from Behringwerke AG of West Germany the manufacturing and co-marketing rights to certain colony stimulating factors, including GM-CSF, and interleukin-3.
In return, Behringwerke received rights to certain Immunex receptor products outside of North America. 

Behringwerke also received an option to manufacture and market in Japan the receptor products.
If exercised, these rights would require Behringwerke to pay a license fee, which Immunex said would offset its payment to Kodak's Sterling unit. 

