.START 

Does anyone believe that First Bank System will be the only bank to stub its toe, or worse, on LBOs? 

This week the Minneapolis concern became the first banking company with serious, although still quite manageable, problems related to the booming leveraged buy-out business.
Although bank lending to LBOs has mushroomed, banks in general have yet to be tarred by it. 

And many analysts believe they won't be.
Banks are senior to junk-bond lenders, with a higher priority claim.
Their LBO loans are secured by assets, and they are diversified across the breadth of American industry. "I don't expect LBOs to be a major problem for many banks," says Christopher Mahoney, a bank analyst at Moody's Investors Service. 

But the reasons for comfort with respect to banks in general also apply to First Bank -- or at least, they were supposed to.
In fact, the company had been trumpeting its newly cautious approach to credit for several years.
Thus analysts were taken aback by its sudden decision to increase the amount of loans it classifies as nonperforming (mostly LBO-related) by about $83 million. 

Few people expect that LBOs will become a crisis on the scale of the industry's loans to Latin America or to the energy patch.
But that still leaves plenty of room for trouble. 

"We can expect to see more troubled LBOs and higher levels of nonperforming assets caused by LBOs," Mr. Mahoney says.
Piper Jaffray & Hopwood analyst Steven R. Schroll goes further: "Other banks are going to catch up," he says. "In my estimation a lot of other banks are going to have the same problem." 

Yesterday, First Bank's chairman resigned.
First Bank had indicated Monday that up to 11% of its leveraged buy-out-related loans were "nonperforming," or bad.
According to Piper Jaffray's Mr. Schroll, the departing chairman, D.H. Ankeny Jr., was intent on making First Bank a "newage commercial bank on the leading edge of banking in the 1980s." Its loans to LBOs and other highly leveraged deals -- some said to be originated by First Bank, some syndicated by others -- grew 32%, to $738 million, in the first six months of 1989. 

Analysts believe that First Bank's problem loans stem from at least three 1987 LBOs.
Namely, Seaman Furniture, a furniture retailer acquired by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts that has missed interest payments on its bonds; G. Heileman, a Wisconsin brewer bought by the now-troubled, Australia-based Bond Corp., and Phillips Beverage Co., a Minneapolis liquor distributor acquired by its management.
Edward Phillips, the company's chairman, is on First Bank's board. 

None of the three companies would comment.
First Bank also declined to identify its problem borrowers.
It said it is increasing the amount of loans it classifies as nonperforming and boosting the "associated charge-offs . . . as a result of a few loans in the company's portfolio of highly leveraged transactions." Among other changes, it said it would "seriously consider eliminating" riskier lines of business.
Analysts think First Bank will concentrate on more standard commercial and retail banking and leave LBOs for the big boys. 

And the big boys are increasing their exposure to LBOs -- which they lump under a broad category known as "highly leveraged transactions." At Wells Fargo, one of the more aggressive players, HLTs account for 23% of domestic commercial business.
Security Pacific increased its exposure 44% in the first half of 1989.
Bank of New York's rose 22% in the second quarter alone. 

And LBO loans are proving riskier than average.
At Citicorp, 7.5% of highly leveraged loans are troubled, or "nonperforming," compared with only 5% for all domestic loans.
At Wells Fargo, 3.2% of LBO-related loans are nonperforming, compared with 2.2% overall. (The figures are better at Chase Manhattan; only 0.4% of LBO loans are nonperforming, far less than its average overall). 

Wells Fargo, like others, finds comfort in the fact that its LBO loans are mostly small (they average about $36 million) and spread across 25 industry groups and close to 100 borrowers.
Of those, only one is classified as "nonperforming." However, that loan -- said to be to failed drugstore operator Revco -- is for roughly $102 million. 

Only Bankers Trust, one of the most eager bidders for LBOs, has run up significant losses, according to a report by Bear Stearns.
It had "highly leveraged transaction" charge-offs of $57.4 million in the first half of 1989, an annual rate of 3.6%. 

"The entire amount was from two transactions from medium-sized companies in which we were the sole lender," a bank spokesman says. "The prior seven to eight years we have been in the business, losses have been minimal." 

LBOs, for Bankers Trust and others, also have been profitable.
Fees are larger and interest rates are 1 1/2 percentage points higher than on other corporate loans, according to Wells Fargo. 

The potential problem, as First Bank demonstrated, is that problem loans can develop in bunches.
In a broad economic downturn, diversification might fail to work. "In a recession, even so-called good deals could get in trouble," says Keefe Bruyette analyst James McDermott.
And in a general business slowdown, the value of assets securing loans is likely to drop. 

The notion that banks won't suffer any loss of principal until junior creditors have lost their entire stake is accurate only in theory. "Theoretically junk debt gets wiped out first, but when push comes to shove, quite often the senior debtors have to give something up," says Standard & Poor's Vice President Andrew Aran. 

Also, the buy-out of NWA and the pending buy-out of UAL involve no junk bonds -- the debt comes entirely from banks.
If junk markets remain skittish, "the banks' profiles in deals will have to increase if the deals are going to get done," says Keefe Bruyette's Mr. McDermott.
Will banks take on added risk if it's the only way to accomplish big-fee deals?
The banks say no.
What is unnerving about First Bank is that -- after a series of mishaps in energy, real estate and agriculture loans, and a disastrous wrong-way bet on interest rates, it, too, believed it was taking a conservative stance. 

First Bank's annual report says that "a change in approach and culture was heightened in 1986 when the company undertook a comprehensive review of the loan portfolio . . . and developed a monitoring and examination system." The company's highly leveraged loans, in particular, "generated heightened awareness and increased concerns regarding the potential risk in such lending," the annual report says. 

Ben Crabtree, an analyst with Dain Bosworth, says the change of heart was for real. "The credit culture has changed a lot over the last couple of years," he says. "They tried to develop an anticipatory strategy to get bad loans off their books before they ended up being bad losses.
The logical question is, 'Why didn't they catch these things coming? ' This is a big surprise." 

Junk bonds' recent distress isn't likely to spark a profusion of stock offerings any time soon, says Steven Einhorn, a partner at Goldman Sachs. 

During Campeau's cash squeeze last week, some analysts were predicting that growing numbers of companies would avoid issuing high-yield junk and return to the equity markets for capital.
The timing seems right, with the stock market trading near record highs.
A big cyclical company, such as AMR, parent of American Airlines, could raise money in the stock market, reduce debt and cut interest expense, slash fares and undercut debt-laden competitors. 

But debt securities will remain in vogue as long as the economy chugs along outside of recession territory, says Mr. Einhorn. "In a long business expansion," he notes, "there is a tendency to forget what the fixed cost of debt can do in a recession." 

In the next 15 months, withdrawals of stock from the market will still outpace new issues, Mr. Einhorn predicts.
That's a bullish factor.
Goldman's market strategist figures that two to three percentage points of the market's 15% gain in the first half was caused by diminished supplies of stocks. 

-- Craig Torres 

Loans to "highly leverage transactions" as a percentage of bank equity (June 30, 1989) 

