.START 

The former president and chief executive officer of Holly Farms Corp. has sued his ex-employer, alleging that an error committed by Holly's lawyers cost him and other employees more than $35 million. 

In a suit filed last month in Memphis, Tenn., Chancery Court, R. Lee Taylor II alleged that an "inadvertent drafting error" in an amendment made to Holly's stock bonus plan in January has financially hurt him and more than 600 other plan participants.
Mr. Taylor is also suing Holly on behalf of the others. 

The New York law firm of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz drafted the amendment for Holly.
Mr. Taylor hasn't sued Wachtell, but legal experts say that the law firm might be liable if Mr. Taylor's claim is found to have merit by a court.
That is so, the legal experts say, because if Holly loses the suit, Holly could seek to recover its losses by suing Wachtell. 

"When a lawyer acts negligently and causes injury to a third party, most state courts now recognize that the lawyer may be liable to the third party," said Stephen F. Gillers, a professor of legal ethics at New York University's law school.
Mr. Gillers and others say that attorney liability to third parties is an area of the law that has been changing rapidly in the past 10 years. 

Mr. Taylor was fired from his job in August, less than two months after Tyson Foods Inc. acquired Holly for about $1.29 billion.
Tyson's purchase ended eight months of bidding and litigation with Holly. 

Holly has filed a suit of its own against Mr. Taylor in Delaware Chancery Court.
That suit alleges that Mr. Taylor breached his fiduciary duties to Holly by making "false and misleading statements" about the stock bonus plan after it was amended in January.
Holly seeks compensatory damages and attorneys' fees from Mr. Taylor. 

Wachtell wouldn't comment on the suits.
The New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, which is representing Holly, also wouldn't comment.
Leslie A. Nicholson Jr., who is representing Mr. Taylor, declined to comment, as well. 

In his suit in Memphis, where Holly is based, Mr. Taylor contends he interpreted the plan properly and that "based on the drafting error in the plan, Tyson is inequitably causing Holly Farms to take advantage of that error to defeat the rights of the participants in the plan." 

The stock bonus plan, adopted in 1986, was intended to reward Holly employees.
The plan was amended by Holly's board early this year to provide for a change of control of Holly.
Mr. Taylor, who was also a Holly director, described the amendment to Holly's board in a memo distributed to directors in January.
He said that under the terms of the amendment, the size of the bonus would depend on the performance of Holly's common stock until the date of an acquisition and the performance of the acquiring company's stock afterward. 

However, Mr. Taylor now concedes, because of the "drafting error" that he later discovered, the amendment called for a payment to participants in the plan based only on the value of the acquirer's stock.
That wasn't the board's intention, he says now.
The value of Tyson's stock under the terms of the plan was less than a blended value of Holly and Tyson stock. 

Mr. Taylor seeks to recover money he believes he and others are owed by Holly.
Holly has moved to dismiss Mr. Taylor's Tennessee action.
A hearing on that motion is scheduled for later this month. 

