.START 

The Southeast prepared for the worst as Hurricane Hugo took aim at a 300-mile stretch of Atlantic coast that hasn't been hit by such a major storm in a century. 

With wind speeds rising to 135 miles an hour yesterday evening, Hugo posed a serious threat to coastal residents and property.
More than 100,000 people were evacuated from low-lying areas under orders from state officials, but they left behind numerous high-rise hotels, million-dollar beachfront properties and two of the South's most historic antebellum cities, Charleston, S.C., and Savannah, Ga. 

Most weather specialists said the hurricane would hit at high tide early this morning.
While some predicted yesterday afternoon that the eye of the storm would strike Savannah, reports in the evening suggested that the hurricane might land farther north, in South Carolina. 

Because of the high tide, many insurers feared the flood damage would be severe along the coastal areas.
Moreover, a slow-moving storm like Hugo, which has been advancing at a pace of only about 20 miles an hour, is likelier to linger over land and cause more destruction. 

Much of the coastal development in the Southeast has taken place in the past five years -- a period in which no big storms have struck -- so the construction quality "is completely untested," said Ray Hafner, Cigna Corp. 's vice president in charge of claims field operations in Philadelphia. 

Few people were willing to predict what residents would find upon their return.
Houses that are "300 feet back from the beach now could wind up with beachfront" property, said Robert G. Liming, South Carolina's tourism director. 

The toll in property could be very high.
With urban centers and such richly developed communities as Hilton Head, S.C., and Myrtle Beach, S.C., in the path of the storm, U.S. insurers could have as much as $4 billion at risk, according to the North Carolina Insurance News Service. 

Many insurers have already deployed "catastrophe teams" to North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia to handle the battery of claims they will see from homeowners and businesses.
Meanwhile, some insurers are still trying to get a handle on losses in Puerto Rico and other islands. 

Most insurers said it was impossible to estimate what kinds of losses they might face at this point.
But many of the claims that insurers process in the next few days will come from residential property owners, including losses for tony beachfront homes, luxury condominium high-rises and posh resorts.
It could be a few days before insurance adjusters know the full extent of the damage, because many coastal areas, as well as Hilton Head and other islands, have been evacuated. 

The stakes may be highest for South Carolina, where tourism has nearly passed the textile industry as the state's top producer of income and jobs.
Last year, travelers spent $4.7 billion there, providing for 98,000 jobs, mostly in Hilton Head, Charleston and Myrtle Beach. 

Among the threatened areas, Hilton Head features expensive resorts, including the 416-room Westin Hotel, estimated to be worth $70 million; the Hyatt Regency, 505 rooms; the Palmetto Dunes, 500 rooms; and the Marriott, 338 rooms.
In addition, Fogelman Properties' famous Harbour Town marina and commercial development on the island is worth $75 million to $100 million, according to George Lapides, the company's senior vice president. 

In Myrtle Beach, the Keystone Plantation, a mixed development of hotels, villas and golf courses, was built at a cost of about $500 million. 

Water is the main threat for low-lying Charleston, where a tidal surge would swamp the cobblestone streets and lower floors of the elegant houses facing Fort Sumter, said Peter Sparks, a professor of civil engineering at Clemson University. 

If the storm lands near Savannah, it could also touch off a surge that might send 10 feet of water crashing onto River Street, a swathe of affluent eateries and boutiques nestled together in century-old warehouses. 

Savannah drew four million tourists last year who spent a collective $440 million, said Rhett Mouchet, a commercial real estate broker.
Their visits were "pretty much centered around River Street." 

Elsewhere, the danger would be wind, not water, said Prof.
Sparks, who added that many high-rise buildings at Myrtle Beach were built with a "light, cheap" siding that would shear off.
A single building, he said, sustained $300,000 in damage when brushed by Hurricane Diana in 1984. 

Prof.
Sparks said that in some resort towns, insurance losses might be greater for the furnishings than for the structures themselves. "People who own a quarter-million-dollar home don't have secondhand rugs on the floor." 

In the Southeast, almost every major U.S. insurer has been jumping into action.
State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., the country's largest home insurer with 11.5 million policies, will fly in 110 adjusters by tomorrow morning to assist its regional staff.
A truck loaded with computers, copiers, policy forms and other office equipment arrived in Columbia, S.C., yesterday to set up a temporary claims processing center. 

By today, Sears, Roebuck & Co. 's insurance unit, Allstate Insurance Co., will have 450 representatives, including local personnel, to start processing claims and assisting folks whose houses and property have been damaged.
Adjusters will work out of blocks of hotel and motel rooms in Raleigh, N.C., and Columbia to process claims. 

Adjusters for Aetna Life & Casualty Co. will move into Savannah once the storm passes and start canvassing the region.
San Francisco-based Transamerica Corp. is monitoring the storm from its Atlanta offices.
Transamerica covers most commercial property, such as small retail shops and business and light manufacturing operations in the storm's region, but not much waterfront property. 

Insurers will be writing checks on the spot for policyholders whose homes or businesses have been leveled or severely damaged.
Allstate estimates it will pay about 95% of its claims on the scene and may write between 28,000 and 30,000 checks.
Even so, it may take two months before all losses are reported, said James Keillor, Allstate's regional CAT coordinator who's working out of Charlotte. 

In Puerto Rico, three U.S. companies insure a substantial amount of property -- Cigna, American International Group Inc. and Continental Corp. 's Puerto Rican-American Insurance Co. Continental said it also has some exposure in Guadeloupe and the Virgin Islands, where information is scant, because no outsiders, not even insurers, have been allowed to enter St. Croix.
The companies said it's too early to estimate the amount of the claims. 

Despite all their efforts to anticipate what kind of assistance might be needed after a major disaster, insurers don't always get everything just right.
After a hurricane destroyed much of Mobile, Ala., in 1979, one insurer swooped in with electric typewriters, phones and other supplies for a makeshift claims office.
But the storm knocked out the city's electric power and the insurer didn't bring any power generators.
By candlelight, many claims checks were written by hand, recalls one agent who was on the scene. 

