.START 

choose one: A bowl of ice cream.
Or a scoop of frozen processed dairy dessert with cellulose gel. 

Chances are, no matter how good the frozen processed stuff tastes, not too many people are going to buy anything with a moniker like that.
And that could turn out to be quite a marketing problem for the dairy industry.
Every major dairy company in the country right now is trying to find ways to create low-calorie, low-cholesterol ice creams, cheeses and yogurts.
They're experimenting with two all-natural fat substitutes that the Food and Drug Administration is currently reviewing, Procter & Gamble's Olestra and the Monsanto Nutrasweet unit's Simplesse. 

But the problem is, current FDA rules prohibit the dairies from using names like "ice cream" or "cottage cheese" for their low-cal creations.
The names they would have to use probably would be technical -- like "frozen processed dairy dessert" rather than "ice cream" -- and technical doesn't sell.
It also doesn't sound natural, even if the product itself is. 

The result is a marketing quandary for the dairy companies: They don't want to pour millions of dollars into developing fat-substitute ice creams and cheeses only to be forced to use names so unappealing that consumers recoil in disgust. 

The FDA "is going to have to re-evaluate" its definitions of dairy foods, says William Baar, vice president of sales and marketing for Borden Inc. 's dairy division, which is experimenting with fat substitutes for its ice creams, yogurts and other dairy products.
He contends revisions are necessary because things like fat substitutes "weren't even issues when those {regulations} were written originally," more than 40 years ago. 

Kraft General Foods, a Philip Morris Cos. unit, is about to test how far the FDA will let it go with a new product called Sealtest Free Nonfat Ice Cream.
As previously reported, the new entrant uses cellulose gel, a natural ingredient widely used in foods, instead of fat.
But the product apparently doesn't contain the 10% butterfat the FDA requires in "real" ice cream. 

A Kraft spokesman says "the term 'nonfat ice cream' is very appropriate." He adds that Kraft plans to send a letter to the FDA suggesting how it could revise its current frozen desert standards.
An FDA spokesman won't comment other than to say, "current standards say 10% butterfat is standard, so if this deviates, it isn't meeting the standard." 

Kraft tried a similar strategy, with some success, several years ago with its Kraft Light Naturals Reduced Fat Cheeses, which contain less fat than FDA-defined cheeses.
Regulators initially contended the label was misleading because the product doesn't meet the FDA's definition of cheese.
But the controversy died down when the FDA didn't take action. 

This time around, however, the debate is likely to intensify.
Already, the rest of the dairy industry is trying to figure out where it should stand.
At Borden, Mr. Baar says the company hasn't decided if it wants to take the Kraft route, boldly naming as "yogurt" and "cottage cheese" the fat-substitute products it is developing.
Mr. Baar points out that if fat-substitute dairy products flop or turn out to be just fads, the company could hurt its main product line by forging ahead with those names. 

"Whether or not {fat-substitute products} are long-lasting is the big issue," Mr. Baar says. "You have to look closely before you make dramatic changes." He points to the short-lived soft-cookie craze that lost several companies a bundle. 

Dairy trade groups are also still working out their positions.
On the one hand, they don't want fat-substitute ice creams and cheeses masquerading as the real thing.
Yet they want labels to distinguish between natural products, like Kraft's fat-substitute ice cream, and completely artificial knock-offs. "We're looking at a couple of options right now to accommodate new {fat-substitute} products more readily than the current system permits," says Thomas Balmer, director of special promotions for the International Ice Cream Association, a trade group. 

Alan Huggins, a dairy industry consultant in Chicago, notes that the issue is complicated because not only the FDA, but also individual states, have their own definition of what constitutes dairy products like cheese and mayonnaise. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

DUN DEAL: Dun & Bradstreet Corp. named Wells, Rich, Greene/Worldwide to handle advertising for its Business Credit Services division.
Billings will be approximately $5 million to $10 million.
The account was previously handled by Edwin Bird Wilson Inc., New York. 

HI] FIDELITY: McCann-Erickson New York was hired to direct ad efforts for Fidelity Investments, a Boston-based financial services unit of FMR Corp.
The account, estimated at $10 million, was previously handled in-house by Fidelity. 

DOW JONES ACCOUNT: Angotti, Thomas, Hedge Inc. was hired to handle ads for Dow Jones & Co. 's News/Retrieval, News Services and Broadcast Services units.
The $2.5 million account had been with Bozell, New York, and Gillespie Advertising Inc., Princeton, N.J. 

CEREAL MYSTERY: Kraft General Foods named North Castle Advertising Inc., Stamford, Conn., to handle the account for an undisclosed new product from Kraft's Post Cereal division.
The size of the ad budget wasn't disclosed. 

TIME AND KODAK: Time Warner Inc. will publish its first single-sponsor issue of Time magazine.
The special issue, which comes out on Oct. 23, is a retrospective of photojournalism and will be sponsored entirely by Eastman Kodak Co. 

WHO'S NEWS: D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles announced three promotions: Thomas Carey, 45, will be the new executive vice president of DMB&B/International; Peter Rosow, 51, and Richard Levenson, 47, were named joint managing directors of DMB&B/New York. . . . M.T. Rainey, 34, was named new chief executive of Chiat/Day/Mojo's London office.
She was previously Chiat's corporate director of new business in New York. 

