.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

IN THE STAR-STUDDED GALAXY of mutual fund managers in the stock market's "go-go" years, one of the brightest was Gerald Tsai, a Shanghai-born entrepreneur who learned portfolio management in Boston, home of staid trust funds and the prudent-man rule. 

A graduate of Boston University, Tsai joined Fidelity Investment in 1952 at age 24.
Five years later, he was allowed to set up his own fund.
There he developed the gunslinger tactics that became the hallmark of the go-go funds.
Basically, the technique involved picking "glamour" stocks too speculative for most funds and trading in and out of them at breakneck speed in 10,000-share blocks.
By 1965, Tsai owned 20% of Fidelity and dreamed of succeeding founder Edward Johnson.
The boss preferred his son, so Tsai sold out and headed for New York. 

By this time Tsai was a legend, one of a growing band of brash fund managers who won celebrity in the hot stock market.
In the offering that underwriters made for his new Manhattan Fund, Tsai expected a modest $25 million.
He got $247 million. 

Tsai had all the props -- an office with a thermostat at 55 degrees to keep its occupant alert, an "Information central" with enough gimmicks to baffle an astronaut.
But performance didn't match the hopes.
The gloss was off the glamour stocks that were Tsai's trading staples.
In contrast to disciples like Fred Carr and his Enterprise Fund, Tsai stayed clear of the volatile over-the-counter issues that became the gunslingers' favorites.
In 1968, Manhattan Fund ranked last among the 310 funds tracked by the Arthur Lipper survey. 

But Tsai had the last laugh.
In August 1968 he sold his firm to CNA Financial, ending up at 40 with CNA stock worth about $35 million.
He is now chairman of the executive committee of Primerica Corp., a big financial services company that was formerly American Can. 

