.START 

Tokyo stocks closed with substantial gains as a relatively stable yen against the U.S. currency helped improve market sentiment. 

London stocks rallied to close moderately higher. 

At Tokyo, the Nikkei index of 225 selected issues, a 0.49-point loser Wednesday, went up 274.44 points to 

In early trading Friday in Tokyo, the Nikkei index rose 112.58 points to 34857.60. 

Thursday's volume on the First Section was estimated at 650 million shares, not much different from the 648 million Wednesday. 

Advancing issues widely outnumbered declining shares, 636 to 307, while 179 others remained unchanged. 

Buy orders far exceeded sell orders throughout the day, traders said, attributing the gains to index-linked investment trust fund buying that came into the market several times during the day. 

Some traders noted that the active buying was induced by the announcement of a list of recommendations by Nomura Securities, the largest among the "Big Four" brokerage houses, following its meeting to set its quarterly strategy Tuesday. 

The list focused on housing stocks and consumer and leisure-related issues, among others. 

The Tokyo Stock Price Index (Topix) of all issues listed in the First Section, which lost 3.49 points Wednesday, was up 17.94 points, or 0.69%, at 2655.52. 

The Second Section index, which gained 14.80 points Wednesday, was up 23 points, or 0.67%, to close at 3449.89.
Volume in the Second Section was estimated at 26 million shares, up from 24 million Wednesday. 

Other traders said, however, that because Nomura listed about 80 issues as the most-recommended stocks, compared with 30 it usually names, the focus was rather vague.
Investors carefully selected shares among individual incentive-backed issues -- those whose prices seem likely to rise in the short term and those that are little affected by currency market developments. 

The selectiveness reflected an investors' move to avoid committing themselves to the market, as uncertainties about currencies and domestic interest rates remained strong, traders said. 

Institutional investors stayed on the sidelines, although many of them had closed their books for the fiscal midyear Wednesday. 

Hiroyuki Murai, general manager of the stock trading division at Nikko Securities, said institutional investors are waiting to see the results of the meeting of the Group of Seven industrial nations slated for tomorrow in Washington as well as those of strategy meetings held by the rest of the Big Four brokerage houses yesterday and today. 

Thursday's notable winners were retail shares, which attracted investors on their strong earnings outlook because of growing domestic consumption.
Retailers are also expected to increase sales if the government eases restrictions over the size of stores and business hours as the result of pressures from the U.S. 

Some retail shares gained on speculation about mergers and acquisitions within the sector. 

Seven-Eleven gained 450 yen ($3.10) to rise to 8,980 yen ($61.88), Takashimaya was up 290 to close at 3,300 while Daiei rose 140 to 3,090.
Ito-Yokado was up 110 at 4,570.
Other gainers in the sector included Isetan, Mitsukoshi, Seiyu and Sogo. 

Pharmaceuticals and food issues rebounded from Wednesday's losses.
Yamanouchi Pharmaceuticals was up 70 at 3,800 and Chugai Pharmaceutical gained 30 to 2,210. 

House Food Industrial advanced 50 to 2,700 and Nissin Food Products added 90 to 4,120. 

London shares were up in thin trading, largely over renewed takeover rumors and relative firmness on Wall Street, which helped to reassure the nervous market. 

The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index closed at 2380.9, up 11.1 points.
The index closed at its intraday high after talk of a possible takeover bid circulated in late dealings.
It also rebounded from its session low of 2365.4, which it hit during a brief bout of profit-taking following morning gains. 

The narrowest measure of the market, the Financial Times 30-share index, closed up 8.3 points at 1962.9.
Volume was a scant 413.8 million shares, down from 513.1 million Wednesday.
More than half of the day's turnover was done before midday. 

Dealers said the late takeover rumor wasn't pegged to any one particular share, although market talk was strongly focused on ASDA Group, a U.K. food retailer, which closed 7 1/2 pence (12 cents) higher at 197 1/2 pence ($3.13) on 17 million shares traded.
The company has been the focus of takeover talk for a number of weeks.
Canada's Belzberg family and the U.S. supermarket chain A&P are most often mentioned as potential suitors.
Dealers remarked that there was talk a bid could be announced this morning. 

"The market is still very nervous and volatile," a dealer with a large U.K. brokerage firm said. "This little bit of takeover talk drew some buying in.
But volume is still very thin." 

Another dealer added that "a lot of people feel there's a very big bid coming out besides B.A.T.
What it is?
Nobody really knows." 

Shares initially moved higher on a technical shortage of stock among market makers, some dealers said.
And relative firmness on Wall Street, along with the lack of movement by West Germany on interest rates, as feared Thursday, helped to ease fears that a major downward correction was imminent. 

Takeover speculation was still the topic of the day.
Jaguar, the focus of active dealings since Ford Motor announced its interest earlier this week, closed at 548, up 38, on 11 million shares traded.
Midland Bank rose 9 to 384 on persistent rumors that either Hongkong & Shanghai Bank is attempting to lift its current 14.9% holding or that West Germany's Deutsche Bank is seeking a significant stake.
But only 1.9 million shares changed hands. 

Elsewhere, stock prices closed higher in Stockholm, lower in Zurich and Milan and mixed in Frankfurt, Paris, Brussels and Amsterdam.
South African gold stocks closed higher. 

Share prices closed higher in Hong Kong, Singapore and Manila, and were lower in Sydney, Wellington, Seoul and Taipei. 

Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end. 

