.START 

A Tennessee state judge awarded temporary custody of seven frozen embryos to a divorced woman, ruling that "human life begins at conception" and that the fertilized eggs aren't marital property. 

The decision could have a wide impact on a number of sensitive issues such as abortion, fetal research and in vitro fertilization. 

In his ruling, Maryville, Tenn., Circuit Judge W. Dale Young said from the moment of fertilization, the cells of a human embryo are "unique and specialized to the highest degree of distinction." 

The decision, which appeared to go beyond the U.S. Supreme Court's interpretations of when life begins, surprised many legal scholars. "I think the ruling should have been made on much narrower grounds," said John Robertson, a professor at the University of Texas School of Law. "The fact that he decided it on right-to-life grounds is reaching out in an unprecedented and unwarranted manner." 

Leonard Loeb, president of the American Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers, disagreed. "I don't know if I would read that much into it," he said. "The decision, whether you agree or disagree with it, was a basic, reasoned one.
Embryos are life, not property, and the natural person to receive and nurture embryos is the female." 

Mr. Loeb and other legal experts said they expect the decision, which awarded temporary custody of the embryos to 29-year-old Mary Sue Davis, to be appealed by her former husband, Junior Lewis Davis.
Neither the Davises nor their attorneys could be reached for comment. 

The case has received international notoriety in the six months since Mr. Davis obtained a restraining order blocking Mrs. Davis from using her eggs that were fertilized with his sperm before their breakup.
Mrs. Davis had nine eggs surgically removed, but attempts at implanting two of them in her failed.
The remaining seven fertilized eggs are in frozen storage at a clinic in Knoxville, Tenn.
During the trial, several medical experts testified that the embryos hadn't yet begun to assume different characteristics.
Judge Young, however, sided with a French geneticist's argument that the full genetic blueprint for an individual is created at the moment of conception, saying the Davises "have produced human beings, in vitro, to be known as their child or children." 

"This decision is catastrophic in that, at the very least, it will make in vitro fertilizations hard to do," said Ellen Wright Clayton, a professor of reproductive law at Vanderbilt University Law School in Nashville, Tenn.
She said if the judge's opinion is followed to its logical conclusion, the fate of thousands of currently frozen embryos could be decided by people other than the couple. 

Ms. Clayton said the effects of the decision, if upheld on appeal, could reach as far as fetal research and the abortion issue.
She said fertility clinics would have to give a couple two choices when seeking help. "They can either have a couple of eggs removed and fertilized and hope it catches the first time," she said, "or they can have the normal eight to 10 removed and risk losing control over what happens to the remainder if they aren't needed." 

Mr. Loeb said, however, "This is a whole new area of law that has been developing over the last few years, which means it has few precedents on which to base decisions.
Abortion foes will probably try to use the decision as a battleground." 

