.START 

The dollar finished moderately stronger, barely reacting to a decision to leave German interest rates unchanged and news that the second-quarter U.S. gross national product was lower than earlier estimates. 

Foreign-exchange traders characterized activity as thin, with participants refraining from all but minor position adjustments ahead of a gathering of finance heads from the Group of Seven major industrial nations tomorrow.
A third day of unexpected dollar selling by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York helped keep dealings edgy and cautious, traders said. 

Many traders still expect the group to issue a fairly unoriginal statement on the dollar's recent strength that mirrors the language of the most recent communique.
But some have expressed concern that apparent dissatisfaction among European and Japanese members with the dollar's strength could prompt the group to adopt a firmer stance. 

John Lyman, senior customer dealer at Bank of Tokyo Ltd., New York agency, said the dollar's recent weakness in part reflects the view that the G-7 will try to bolster its image in the foreign-exchange market.
He said that with widespread speculation of a stronger G-7 position on the dollar, the U.S. currency could rebound next week if the meeting in Washington ends with just another warning against an "excessive" rise or fall in the dollar. 

"The G-7 now has to come out with something different," Mr. Lyman said. "I think we've got to see harsher phrasing.
The market has discounted the usual." 

Motivated partly by the potential for volatile trading after the meeting, the dollar rose slightly as participants reduced short-dollar positions taken during the U.S. currency's slide this week.
In late afternoon New York trading yesterday, the dollar was at 1.9435 marks, up from 1.9395 marks late Wednesday, and at 145.63 yen, up from 145.13 yen.
Sterling was at $1.5798, down from $1.5835. 

In Tokyo Friday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 145.80 yen, up from Thursday's Tokyo close of 145 yen. 

After trading in a narrow band in Asia Thursday, the dollar held steady in early European dealings as the market awaited the outcome of the Bundesbank's central bank council meeting.
Although few in the market had expected the Bundesbank to raise German interest rates before the G-7 gathering, the market had nonetheless been wary of the possibility. 

The dollar ticked up briefly when the central bank announced that it would leave rates unchanged.
The rise was short-lived, though, as the specter of the G-7 meeting chilled trading, dealers said. 

Also damping dollar enthusiasm was the second revision of the second-quarter U.S. GNP that put growth at 2.5%, down from last month's revision of 2.7%. 

However, traders said they don't consider the revision particularly bearish for the dollar because the change was fairly small and because the second quarter is so far behind the market. 

When the dollar seemed to find fairly substantial support above Wednesday's closing levels, more short-covering impetus emerged, carrying the dollar steadily higher in the New York morning until the Fed intervened.
Another intervention by the Fed hit the dollar after it had struggled to the day's peaks of 1.9490 in the midafternoon. 

Increasingly, the Fed appears to be eager to placate other G-7 members by ensuring the dollar doesn't seem too energetic and by demonstrating a willingness to cooperate in combating strength in the U.S. currency. 

Recent statements by members of the G-7 appear to indicate varying degrees of concern about the dollar's recent strength.
In particular, Japanese and German officials have appeared to be more concerned than U.S. and U.K. officials. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $365.50 an ounce, up 60 cents.
Estimated volume was a moderate three million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Friday, gold was quoted at $364.45 an ounce. 

