.START 

Several major airlines moved to match price increases proposed by American Airlines, making it more likely that some fares will rise sharply next week. 

Late yesterday, Delta Air Lines, Texas Air Corp. 's Continental Airlines, and Pan Am Corp. said that they would match the increases, which are set to raise fares about 4% to 20% on certain tickets that require advance purchase. 

Earlier, Trans World Airlines and Midway Airlines filed similar fare increases into their computer reservation systems. 

"We haven't increased these fares on a systemwide basis since the spring of 1988," said Dan Cupertino, director of pricing and revenue control at Atlanta-based Delta Air Lines. "With costs rising, it's time." 

Industry executives will be closely watching United Airlines, a unit of UAL Corp., Northwest Airlines, a unit of NWA Inc., and Eastern Airlines, a unit of Texas Air, to see if they match the moves.
If those airlines don't match by next Friday, the effective date on the price rises, it's possible the increases will be delayed or pulled out. 

But the moves by Delta and Continental indicate that there is broad support in the industry for a fare increase now.
Until yesterday's action, Delta had appeared opposed to a fare increase -- and, by refusing to go along, had effectively blocked rises proposed by other carriers. 

Also, Midway's quick match surprised many industry watchers.
The Chicago-based carrier is typically cautious about fare increases, but this fare rise would help the company pay off the $210 million price tag for its recent acquisition of certain Eastern Airlines assets. 

Last week, Robert Crandall, chairman at American, set the stage for his company's proposed increases. 

At a meeting with Wall Street analysts, he said, "While remembered fondly by our customers, the rock bottom fares of the early '80s are simply not economically feasible." He said cutting fares to stimulate traffic "just doesn't make sense to us." American, a unit of AMR Corp., proposed raising the price on tickets bought with seven days' and 14 days' advance reservation, "excursion" tickets bought by both vacation and business fliers.
Also, the airline proposed raising fares requiring two days' advance notice. 

The latest price changes are plotted according to a mileage-based calculation, industry pricing officials said. 

For example, 14-day advance purchase tickets bought for trips of at least 1,000 miles are getting $20 increases.
Tickets for trips of shorter than 1,000 miles are rising $10. 

Fares bought seven days in advance for trips of at least 1,000 miles are getting hit with $30 increases.
Tickets for trips shorter than 1,000 miles are being slapped with rises of $40 to $60. 

Also, American is planning to double the cancellation penalties on the seven-day advance purchase fares to 50% of the ticket price. 

Two-day fares for trips of at least 1,000 miles are rising $50, and $60 to $80 for trips of shorter than 1,000 miles.
There are a few exceptions to the calculations, the pricing analysts said. 

Industry executives said these price increases are justified because the airlines are contending with expenses such as rising fuel costs.
Delta, for example, said that from May to August fuel prices rose 12%. 

The executives argue that while the consumer price index has increased about 6.2% over the past year, air fares have risen only 3.9%. 

But in fact, travelers say they're pulling more money out of their pockets.
According to a recent survey by US-Travel Systems Inc., a Rockville, Md., company, the average amount paid by business travelers increased 17% to $470 from $402. 

