.START 

The Democratic leadership's alternative to a capital-gains tax cut includes a happy surprise for a wide swath of upper-middle-income taxpayers: a reduction in their capital-gains-tax rate. 

The leadership alternative, formally announced yesterday, would raise the top tax rate for individuals to 33% from the current 28%.
But the top tax on capital gains would be set at 28%. 

The result: 3.5 million taxpayers would have their capital-gains taxes cut. 

But late last night on ABC-TV, President Bush pledged in an interview that he would veto any increase in the top tax rate, even if coupled with a cut in the capital-gains tax. 

Currently, the Tax Code includes an anomaly that the Democratic leadership alternative seeks to abolish.
Individuals with the highest incomes pay less tax on their last dollar of income than many people who earn less. 

The richest Americans pay taxes at a rate of 28% on the upper parts of their income.
But married couples without children whose taxable income is between $74,850 and $177,720 a year pay at a rate of 33% on the upper parts of their incomes.
So do single taxpayers with taxable incomes between $44,900 and $104,330 a year. 

The Democratic leadership seeks to end this by imposing a 33% top tax rate on everyone in these high-income brackets.
But the Democrats' plan doesn't impose the 33% rate on gains from the sale of capital assets.
That rate was set in the plan at 28%. 

Currently, capital gains are taxed at ordinary income rates.
That means that taxpayers who now pay taxes at the 33% rate would get a tax cut on their capital gains under the Democratic leadership plan. 

The leadership plan would raise taxes on 600,000 high-income taxpayers who currently pay at the 28% rate. 

The Democratic leaders are seeking to substitute their proposal for a controversial measure, approved last week by the House Ways and Means Committee, that would reduce the top capital-gains tax to 19.6% for the next 2 1/2 years.
Both sides expect a very close floor vote on the issue as early as next week. 

Besides imposing a new top tax rate, the leadership alternative would expand the tax benefits of Individual Retirement Accounts.
The plan would give everyone, regardless of income, a deductible plan.
Those who don't currently qualify would get a 50% deduction on annual IRA contributions of as much as $2,000.
The money could be withdrawn without penalty to finance the down payment on a first home or for higher education, in addition to retirement. 

The plan also would speed up the collection of payroll taxes from large companies, effective next year. 

The IRA expansion would cost the Treasury $15.4 billion over five years, according to the congressional joint tax committee.
The increase in the top tax rate would raise $35.4 billion during the same period.
All told, the plan would reduce the budget deficit $22.5 billion over five years, the panel said. 

House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) said the plan is receiving "very substantial positive reaction." But not everyone is happy.
Republicans lambaste it as just another Democratic Party tax increase.
And some liberals dislike its preferential treatment given to capital gains. 

"This is an awful plan," said Rep. Byron L. Dorgan (D., N.D.). "George Bush wants to give big tax breaks to the rich, and we want to give them to the near-rich." 

