.START 

Executives at employee-owned companies have a warning for management at UAL Corp: There's turbulence ahead. 

Assuming that the $6.75 billion acquisition hammered out by the pilots union, senior managers and British Airways is completed, employees will own 85% of United Airlines, making it the nation's largest worker-owned company.
As such, it better be ready for skillful maneuvers. 

In theory, with a worker-owned company the old labor-management antagonism dissolves.
Enthusiastic workers suggest ways to improve operations and an equally eager management welcomes the ideas.
In reality, it isn't that simple. 

Top executives find themselves answering to novice owners -- from baggage handlers to shop stewards -- who want a say in decision-making. "A guy whose brother owned a trucking company thought his brother should be delivering steel," recalls a manager at National Steel Co., which sold its Weirton Steel division to employees in 1983.
Yet if suggestions are ignored, workers feel betrayed. 

"If the management style is such that 'I'm the ultimate decision-maker and no upstart union member can tell me differently, ' you're in big trouble," says Joseph V. Vittoria, chairman of employee-owned Avis Inc. Mr. Vittoria, who invites employees to "Just call me Joe," says he presents virtually the same information to employees that he does the banks. 

Employee-owned companies can work, as the viability of Weirton and Avis show.
While management is still thrashing out details on how UAL will be run, officials hope past cooperative efforts will provide a foundation for the new organization.
Even during a heated contract dispute a few months back, pilots and management jointly pressed the Transportation Department for a new route to Tokyo, a company spokesman says. "The common interest of common ownership will supersede any parochial concerns," he predicts. 

Privately, however, some UAL officials fear the pilots union may try to muscle in on management duties.
It was a coup that, under the takeover pact, labor representatives on the board will have the right to block major corporate decisions like the sale of routes or aircraft, or the acquisition of another carrier. 

Pilots union chief Frederick C. Dubinsky insists that "the pilots have never said they want to run the airline." The provision on major corporate decisions is merely to "prevent the kind of situation we had a few years ago where management was taking money from the airline to buy hotels and other businesses," he says. 

Even if the pilots union and management make their peace, there will be the machinists union to deal with.
The machinists' financial adviser has accused the pilots union of using "blue-collar-mail" to force the other unions to support their bid "just so they can declare victory." 

Successful employee-owned companies require abrupt culture changes and top management must set the tone.
At UAL, the first change, observers say, must come from chairman Stephen M. Wolf.
Known as a cool, reserved executive, he will have to overcome his distance from labor and start meeting union members face to face. 

In 1987, after Avis agreed to an employee stock ownership plan, or ESOP, Mr. Vittoria spent most of his time traveling to dozens of cities, explaining the concept to workers.
He continues to hold regular employee sessions.
Initially, reaction was skeptical. "We got a lot of 'Hey, wait a minute.
Why are you suddenly giving me stock?
What's it going to cost me? ' " Mr. Vittoria says. 

The selling job was even harder at Weirton Steel, where employees were asked to make substantial wage and benefit concessions, a situation similar to what UAL faces.
Union leaders and management in the small West Virginia steel town addressed church groups and manned a booth at the county fair to explain the ESOP. "One big fear always associated with an ESOP is whether it's really a union-busting tactic," says Walter Bish, former union president and now Weirton's manager of government affairs. 

But Mr. Bish says workers soon evolved from laborers to business people. "They went from asking 'Why did those no-good-bums cut us loose, ' to 'Who is going to lend us money at what interest rates? ' " 

At the same time, certain labor-management distinctions must remain.
When workers came to Mr. Bish complaining about a supervisor, arguing that as owners they should have hiring and firing rights, he put his foot down. 

Front-line supervisors often have the hardest time with worker suggestions. "If you have a manager out there who is insecure because a machinist comes up with a better idea, you have a problem," says Mr. Vittoria.
Avis says workers' ideas -- such as rental cars for non-smokers and gas pump islands redesigned so tires don't rub against them -- have been implemented, bolstering morale. 

Officers have to understand and balance both labor and management.
Lee Irish, a partner with law firm Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue who has structured ESOPs, points to ill-fated Rath Packing Co., where a union chief took over as president of the meatpacker only to fall out of favor with his own union over a contract dispute.
Strikes and plant idlings helped cripple the company, which ultimately filed for bankruptcy protection. 

At UAL, employees and managers will each receive three of 15 board seats, leaving the majority with outside directors.
Both the pilots union and management wanted such an arrangement, to make sure neither side could stack the board. 

Still, management will continue to hold an upper hand because it will nominate the outside directors, although UAL will consult the union regarding nominees, and labor can suggest its own candidates.
Mr. Dubinsky, a probable board member, has hinted that labor may insist that some current directors not return. 

One risk of a mixed board is that it can become a "parliament where people express the views of their constituents" rather than solve company problems, says Eugene Keilin, general partner of Lazard Freres & Co., who worked on both the Weirton and UAL ESOPs.
Infighting between union and management representatives on the board, he says, contributed to the problems at Hyatt-Clark Industries Inc., an employee-owned bearings maker that filed for bankruptcy protection in 1986.
They squabbled over how much authority workers should have in the selection of management and how money should be spent. 

That's why at Weirton, Mr. Keilin -- not management -- compiled the list of outside candidates and screened them to make sure none had a history of sour labor relations or an autocratic style. 

It's a hard balancing act.
Weirton's Mr. Bish says one of the toughest things for him was his first board meeting. "Here I was," he says, "going into the board room as president of the union, representing union workers and at the same time representing 85% of the shareholders at one time." 

