.START 

Dow Jones & Co. proposed to acquire the 33% of Telerate Inc. it doesn't already own for $18 a share, or about $576 million. 

The market apparently expects the two companies to negotiate a higher price.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Telerate closed at $20.375 a share, up $5.25.
It was the most active issue on the Big Board, with more than four million shares changing hands, more than 50 times its average daily volume. 

Dow Jones, which publishes The Wall Street Journal, has been an investor in Telerate, an electronic financial information and transaction services company, since 1985, when it purchased a 32% interest.
Dow Jones has invested about $911 million so far in Telerate, at an average cost of about $14.32 a share. 

Telerate's board named two independent directors to consider the proposal.
Telerate's 13-member board includes six Dow Jones officers and a former Dow Jones executive.
Neil S. Hirsch, Telerate's president and chief executive officer, declined to comment further. 

Warren H. Phillips, chairman and chief executive of Dow Jones, said that the offer was made "to integrate the two companies to obtain operational efficiencies and to permit even closer and more efficient working relationships in marketing, customer service and the management of our related businesses.
These objectives can best be achieved if Telerate is wholly owned by Dow Jones." 

Peter Skinner, Dow Jones vice president, corporate general counsel and secretary, said the company probably would finance the offer "using commercial paper, as we have in the past." He declined to comment on the market premium for Telerate shares over the $18 offer.
He said Dow Jones projects that the acquisition would dilute earnings about seven cents a share in 1990 "and contribute to earnings thereafter." 

Mr. Skinner said Dow Jones is prepared to meet with Telerate and its advisers to discuss the proposal and considerations made in setting the price, which he described as "full and fair." Separately, a group of Telerate shareholders said they filed suit against Dow Jones in Delaware Chancery court asserting the proposed offer is inadequate.
The suit described the offer as a "freeze-out" that will deny public shareholders "their right to share proportionately in the true value of Telerate's valuable and profitable businesses, and future growth in profits and earnings." The suit also said the $18 price wasn't based on any "independent appraisal" of Telerate's value, but was "fixed arbitrarily." The suit seeks to have the offer enjoined, or set aside if it is consummated, and seeks unspecified damages.
Mr. Skinner said he hadn't seen the papers and couldn't comment on the suit. 

Dow Jones said it will begin a cash tender offer for Telerate shares at $18 a share early next week.
The offer and withdrawal rights are to expire Nov. 3.
If, as a result of the offer, Dow Jones owns 90% or more of Telerate's shares, or if the two companies reach an acquisition agreement, Dow Jones will acquire the remaining shares in a merger at the same price. 

Dow Jones also publishes Barron's magazine and other periodicals, electronic business information services and community newspapers.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Dow Jones shares closed at $37.125, down 37.5 cents. 

The offer comes at a time when Telerate's earnings are under some pressure due to costs related to the start-up of its Trading Service operation, jointly developed with American Telephone & Telegraph Co.
The service is a computer-based foreign exchange trading system.
In its second-quarter report, Telerate said that the costs would continue to hurt earnings through 1989 but that the service shows "great promise." 

Telerate's earnings and sales growth have slowed after a rapid pace in recent years.
A Telerate spokesman said the company currently expects to report per-share earnings "in the low 90 cent" area for the year; for 1988, Telerate earned $91.2 million, or 96 cents a share, a 21% increase, on a 31% revenue gain to $440 million.
But earnings fell 12% in last year's fourth quarter; 8.4% in the first quarter; and 6.4% in the latest second quarter. 

Analysts generally greeted the move as a favorable one for Dow Jones, although some speculated that the company may come under pressure to sweeten the bid to $20 a share or more. 

"Dow Jones clearly didn't offer much of a premium to the current stock price," said Drew Marcus, a media anlayst at Kidder Peabody & Co.
But Mr. Marcus added that the company has taken a "slow, deliberate approach, and my feeling is that Dow Jones won't chase the stock." If the company doesn't succeed in its current bid, he said, it "would probably retreat and continue a slow accumulation." 

Bruce Thorp, a media analyst at PNC Financial Corp. 's Provident National Bank, noted that although the market activity in Telerate stock yesterday seemed to signal that arbitragers expect Dow Jones to sweeten its bid, the company appears to be under no real pressure to do so. "The stock is trading a little above where it would be reasonable to expect a deal," Mr. Thorp said. 

Andrew Wallach, an analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert, said the combination will be a "strong No. 2 in the highest value added segments" of the information services business, after Reuters PLC. 

John Morton, an analyst at Lynch, Jones & Ryan, said Telerate "is a rapidly growing business and it's a good thing for Dow Jones to own all of it." Despite a slowdown in earnings growth at Telerate recently, "longer term it is a good investment because this is the wave of information future, and the bigger presence Dow Jones has, the better," Mr. Morton said. 

