.START 

Al Neuharth has written a book.
His picture is on the cover.
His picture is on the back.
His picture is on the front, the part that shows when it's on the bookshelf.
The book, an autobiography, surely sets a record for use of the word I. 

The book is full of lists ("World's most overrated hotels;" "Top Ten Heads of State." Really.) and bumper-sticker philosophy ("Keep bean counters on tap, never on top").
In the book, Mr. Neuharth gossips, feuds, carps, boasts and preaches. 

Often, the book is insufferable.
But, then, often Al Neuharth is insufferable. 

But he's brilliant.
He took -- grabbed by the throat, really -- a little company with a handful of mediocre newspapers and turned it into a communications behemoth.
And then when it was huge -- of a size at which most companies are lumbering or slumbering -- he brought to it a small-company, entrepreneurial attitude. 

That's how Gannett Co. grew.
That's how USA TODAY was born. 

There's a lesson there, for America's business and America's businessmen. 

You don't have to be outlandish or outrageous or outspoken -- Mr. Neuharth is all three -- to be competitive and innovative.
But you do have to have vision and take risks.
Mr. Neuharth had that vision and took those risks. (That's past tense.
At 65, he has retired as chairman and chief executive of Gannett.) 

Gannett could have remained a lively little company that eventually would be eaten up by a bigger media company.
Or it could have grown and becomed sluggish and sassy like so many big corporations.
Instead, Mr. Neuharth turned to what he calls "intrapreneurship" to stimulate his employees, serve his customers and enrich his stockholders. 

"Intrapreneurship" is the use of internal talent, internal equipment and internal money to create a new product. "Most large companies have a huge and generally untapped pool of underutilized talent and equipment that can give them a great financial advantage over others in undertaking major projects or new ventures," he writes. 

Mr. Neuharth freed the people, the equipment and the money -- and kept the bureaucrats at bay -- to develop USA TODAY, an idea and then a product that was scoffed at by everyone but the public. 

Can you think of another huge company that has taken such a huge risk and developed a totally new product for a totally new market?
More interesting question: Can you think of another huge company that would even try? 

Most successful innovations -- Reeboks or Apples -- are products of the big minds of little companies.
There is more enterprise in machine shops than in research labs.
Most big companies reward caution and penalize risk. 

Part of the problem, Al Neuharth suggests, is that the money men have too big a say in too many companies. "They're intelligent.
Well-educated.
Well-intentioned.
Office walls displaying MBA degrees," he writes. "All of them know how to count money.
A few of them know how to manage it.
Very few know how to earn it.
None of them is willing to risk it." 

And Gannett's were no different. "Conservative, up-tight S.O.B.s.
Narrow-gauged and no vision beyond the next quarterly earnings report. . . . During most of 1980, while the . . . task force was trying to figure out how to launch a national newspaper, I spent much of my time keeping a tight rein on the bean counters who were trying to bomb it." 

As a young man, Mr. Neuharth tried to interest the men who owned the Miami Herald in starting up a newspaper along the Space Coast of Florida.
The idea was rejected without a hearing. "That was my introduction to the reality that most money men and big corporations aren't interested in new ideas," he says. "The comfortable status quo drives most corporations." 

Indeed.
It drives some into the hands of the raiders and junk-bond purveyors and leveraged-takeover throngs.
It drives others into unfavorable mergers.
It drives still others into bankruptcy court. 

And "it drives me crazy," says Mr. Neuharth. 

That's the saving grace of Al Neuharth.
He's bizarre, which you'll see when you read his book and discover uncensored chapters by his two ex-wives. ("Al Neuharth is a snake," writes ex-wife No. 2. "He's cold-blooded.
He's sneaky and slithers around and sheds his old skin as he grows and adapts to his newest surroundings.") He's shifty. ("When Neuharth wears a sharkskin suit, you can't tell where the suit ends and Al begins" -- a quote Mr. Neuharth cites.) 

But he's also innovative and honest.
He owns up to his mistakes and learns from them.
Then moves on to take new chances.
A legion of Neuharths might be too much for any nation to endure.
But big business could use a few more of his type. 

FOOTNOTE.
The book in question is called "Confessions of an S.O.B." It's published by Doubleday, has 372 pages of staccato prose, and sells for $18.95 at those places that still get full price for books. 

And I probably should disclose these facts: I worked for Gannett and for Mr. Neuharth for 2 1/2 years.
I was the editor of the Des Moines Register before Gannett bought it and of the Courier-Journal in Louisville after Gannett bought it.
Mr. Neuharth cites both newspapers in his book, calling them two of the most overrated newspapers in the nation.
For the record, he's full of it on both counts. 

Mr. Gartner is editor and co-owner of the Daily Tribune in Ames, Iowa, and president of NBC News in New York. 

