.START 

Vernitron Corp., only a week away from completing its $320 million acquisition of Kollmorgen Corp., pulled out, citing "adverse changes" in Kollmorgen that it didn't anticipate. 

Trading in Kollmorgen shares was suspended for several hours yesterday pending news of the termination.
When composite New York Stock Exchange trading resumed, the shares sank to $18.375, down $5.25.
The agreement called for Vernitron to pay Kollmorgen shareholders $25 a share. 

In a statement, Vernitron said it had told Kollmorgen that it couldn't complete the merger because of changes in the financial performance of Kollmorgen that weren't anticipated at the time of the agreement in April, "and other factors which were not disclosed" at the time.
A spokeswoman for Vernitron wouldn't be more specific. 

Officials of Vernitron and Kollmorgen couldn't be reached for comment.
Vernitron is a closely held industrial electronics company based in Deer Park, N.Y. Kollmorgen, based in Stamford, Conn., is a maker of electronics, defense and industrial products.
Among its more innovative products are a night-vision device for the military and frictionless bearings. 

Vernitron fought a long, bitter battle for Kollmorgen, starting with a December offer to acquire the company for $20 a share.
When Kollmorgen rejected that offer, Vernitron first launched a $23-a-share hostile tender offer and proxy fight, then proposed a merger agreement at $25 a share. 

In a seesaw battle through April, Kollmorgen alternately entertained and resisted Vernitron's $25-a-share offer.
By the end of the month it reluctantly agreed, saying it couldn't find a better alternative. 

Vernitron, which said previously it had received financing commitments totaling $325 million for the transaction, faced a greatly increased debt load from the merger.
The company was taken private in 1986 in a leveraged buy-out by a group led by Chairman Stephen W. Bershad. 

Last week, a lessor of a Kollmorgen facility in Commack, N.Y., won a temporary court injunction blocking the merger.
Mall Drive Associates, a New York limited partnership, claimed the merger would violate Kollmorgen's lease agreement, because it would result in a company with lower net worth than Kollmorgen has independently.
A court hearing was scheduled for next week on Mall Drive's request for a permanent injunction.
The Vernitron spokeswoman said she was aware of the Mall Drive complaint, but didn't think it it was a "deal-blocker." 

