.START 

The European Community Commission is taking Britain to court for failing to comply with EC water standards, embarrassing the British government as it plans to take water utilities public. 

Environment Commissioner Carlo Ripa di Meana said a 1980 directive on water purity had been "largely disregarded" by Britain.
He said he took the case to the European Court of Justice after the British government failed to provide sufficient guarantees and a fast enough timetable to clean up water supply. 

"The environment and the good health of consumers cannot rely {solely} on promises" by the British government, Mr. Ripa di Meana said.
The commission originally threatened to sue Britain last April for not implementing the directive by 1985 as scheduled. 

The EC action is an embarrassment to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's government on the eve of its plan to take public the country's 10 state-owned regional water boards.
The plan already had been criticized, delayed and fraught with financial complications.
One major worry was the #17.3 billion ($23.4 billion) price tag to upgrade the industry's sewage, water-treatment and piping system, much of which dates back to the Victorian era. 

But the commission's decision probably won't upset the plans to sell the water utilities, London analysts said. "It's bad publicity, but I don't think it will have a significant effect on the sale," said Angela Whelan, an analyst at the brokerage firm of Barclays De Zoete Wedd Ltd. 

The fear of high water cleanup costs may frighten off a few individual investors, said Stephen Doe of Smith New Court Securities PLC, but big institutions are unlikely to pay the dispute much heed.
Analysts said that even if the commission wins its court fight it has little legal power to force the British government into action.
At worst, the court could impose a relatively small fine. 

Analysts noted that the EC's demands, even if met, wouldn't break the bank.
Only #1.4 billion of the #17.3 billion total has been allocated to bringing the utilities into compliance with EC standards. 

Mr. Ripa di Meana said he expects his action to speed the cleanup of British drinking water, which he said poses serious health risks.
The level of nitrates exceeds the EC standard in 30 distribution zones serving 800,000 people, while 52,000 people in Scotland drink water with excessive lead content, according to the commission. 

The British government told the commission that the high lead concentrations only affected "remote rural areas" in Scotland, Mr. Ripa di Meana said.
But the commission found that these areas included part of Edinburgh.
Lead can cause brain damage and retardation in children, and nitrates have been linked to cancer. 

The commissioner said his clean-water campaign won't stop with the United Kingdom.
Similar cases have been brought against France and Belgium and the commission will decide next month whether to take court action against Germany and Luxembourg.
He added that proceedings are pending against Italy and Spain. 

For Mrs. Thatcher, the commission's action is a political embarrassment, undercutting recent efforts to ally her government with the suddenly popular British environmental movement. 

The British government huffed and puffed at the commission's decision.
British Environment Secretary Chris Patten called the decision "astonishing" and said he couldn't "understand what the commission thinks this action will achieve." 

Britain maintains that its five-year cleanup program is going as fast as possible. "Some things can't be speeded up," an Environment Department spokeswoman said. "Putting {water-treatment} buildings up takes a finite amount of time." 

