.START 

Unusual things are happening as this sparsely populated British colony becomes one of the world's fastest-growing tax havens: Government typists are being hired away at triple their pay; a charter-boat skipper is raking in a six-figure income as an engraver; and people are saying nice things about Panamanian strongman Gen. Manuel Noriega. 

Thousands of foreigners -- but almost no Americans -- looking to avoid the long arm of the tax man are setting up dummy corporations on these small islands east of Puerto Rico. "We are described as the Delaware of the Caribbean," says Financial Secretary Robert A. Mathavious. "The growth has exceeded our wildest imaginations." 

On reclaimed land on Wickhams Cay in Road Town, the capital, new office buildings are encroaching on the T-shirt shops and sailor bars.
The main drag is torn up as workers lay new power lines.
Jobs at trust companies, law firms, banks and the like are being added by the score. 

Mr. Mathavious, a 36-year-old economics graduate of the University of the West Indies, says the booming financial sector here will soon pull even with tourism, the dominant industry, in supporting the island government's $32 million annual budget.
Mr. Mathavious, who makes $30,000 a year, says the trust companies are hiring away his clerical workers, some at salaries higher than his own. 

For a quarter-century the British Virgin Islands enjoyed favorable tax treatment through a United Kingdom treaty with the U.S. that enabled it to build a modest tax-haven business.
But in the late 1970s, Uncle Sam got nasty, demanding information previously held secret and insisting on limits on who could form tax-haven companies here, Mr. Mathavious says.
As negotiations for a new treaty dragged into the Reagan administration, it became clear to BVIslanders -- as they call themselves -- that they would have to develop an offshore haven that wasn't reliant on the 

"The Reagan administration wanted us to become an arm of the IRS," Mr. Mathavious recalls. "Give them an inch and they want a mile," says Richard Peters, the leading tax lawyer on the island of Tortola, and guardian to more than 3,000 companies. "They're not gentlemen." 

The treaty was terminated in 1984, and Mr. Peters and others drew up the BVI's International Business Companies Ordinance.
For $300 down and $300 a year to the government, you can park any lawful assets in a company here, avoid taxes from all sorts of places, and not tell anybody who -- or where --you are. 

Typically, two layers of discreet lawyers stand between you and nosy government types.
One of those layers is in the investor's home country, meaning that in the BVI, lawyers, trust companies and the government rarely have the faintest idea who has set up a company here. 

Under the old tax treaty, Mr. Peters says, U.S. withholding on dividends and royalties was reduced substantially for non-U.S. citizens holding U.S. assets through a company here.
And BVI taxes on that income were little or nothing in most cases. 

When the treaty was lost, that tax benefit was, too.
But the new BVI ordinance provides a broader array of benefits.
For investors, such as those in Eastern Europe, who fear their wealth could be seized, the law allows them to transfer control of assets here and keep their true ownership secret.
For wealthy men who want to evade laws in Latin America and parts of Europe that require portions of estates to go to wives, placing assets in a BVI company gives them the freedom to leave their wealth to anyone they choose.
The BVI law also makes it easier for majority stockholders to squeeze out minority holders, and allows the issuance of so-called bearer shares, meaning that ownership in a company can be transferred easily and anonymously. 

Though the tax breaks of the old treaty are gone, individuals and private companies in Latin America, Europe and Asia can still reduce their taxes by holding assets through a string of companies based here and in other tax havens, lawyers say.
But BVI companies are of almost no use to residents of the U.S., which has tax laws that look askance at dummy corporations, Mr. Peters notes. 

The Reagan Treasury's hard line cost BVI-based companies a valuable, though narrow, tax benefit.
But the new tax-haven law made the colony a broader offshore financial center.
After the law was instituted, all it needed was a panic in an established tax haven to chase some business this way.
That's just what happened when Gen. Noriega, facing U.S. financial pressure to get him to step down, declared a banking holiday in 1988.
Wealthy Latin Americans, Europeans and Asians pulled their hidden assets out of Panama for more stable havens. 

Since then, formation of companies in the BVI has mushroomed, to 6,600 last year -- many of them transfers of Panamanian companies.
In all, tax-haven companies now outnumber the 12,000 or so residents of the colony. "Noriega has given us quite a boost," says Janice M. George-Creque, one of just five BVIslander lawyers. 

On top of the government fee, a law firm or trust company here typically charges about $1,000 to set up a company.
The orders usually come through an overseas law firm, so nobody in Road Town knows who owns the company.
Or for what purpose.
There apparently isn't any way to know whether a company's assets represent profits of the drug trade, the plague of most Caribbean tax havens.
BVI lawyers and trust companies say they depend on the overseas lawyers to screen out money launderers or others whose motives are suspect. "Money changes hands," says Geoff Williams, manager of Barclays Banks PLC's office in Road Town. "Who can tell if it's dirty or it's clean?" Even so, BVI banks have voluntarily limited each cash transaction to $5,000 in an effort to curb money laundering. 

Barclays and the three other banks here have combined deposits of about $200 million, far more than they are able to lend locally.
Money on deposit is expected to keep growing, and more banks are expected to seek charters.
The government is also preparing to lure insurance companies with a tax law just for them. "We can't have a one-product financial center," Mr. Mathavious says. 

Meanwhile, the colony's 40 or so islands, more than half uninhabited, are as natural a haven for dope smugglers as they were for pirates when Sir Francis Drake passed this way centuries ago.
The U.S. Virgin Islands, an entry point for drugs headed for the mainland, are less than a mile from the BVI's main island of Tortola.
And drug runners have stopped paying cash to locals who help them, the government says, instead paying "in kind," leading to increased cocaine use here. 

Another looming problem: Few BVIslanders have moved past the bottom rung of the financial ladder.
Chief Minister H. Lavity Stoutt, the BVI's top elected official, has made moving BVIslanders into professional-level financial jobs a top goal of his administration. 

For now, expatriates do most of the lawyering, lending and managing.
And getting them to share isn't always easy. 

Dirk de Jong knocked around the Caribbean for 20 years, skippering a charter boat, before moving to Tortola with no job and no business.
Over drinks, he met a fellow Dutchman who runs a trust company.
The man suggested that Mr. de Jong learn to engrave the corporate seals required for each dummy corporation so that law firms and trust companies wouldn't have to send away to the U.S. 

Mr. de Jong says the government issued him a business license on the condition he hire an islander as an apprentice.
But he never has, instead working 70 hours or more a week to keep up with demand.
He engraves 100 a week, $25 each, $7.50 extra for rush jobs. "I'm a loner," he says, in his workshop atop Tortola's highest peak. "I'd be distracted." 

Mr. Bailey is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Chicago bureau. 

