.START 

On a hillside here, 17 families have invaded a patch of land and thrown up an instant shantytown they call Land & Liberty.
There is no potable water, raw sewage covers the ground, and the people fear an epidemic.
They are living in hovels pieced together from wood and cardboard smuggled out of the places where they work, the gleaming factories on the horizon called maquiladoras. 

About 1,500 of these foreign-owned plants -- most of them the property of U.S. companies, including many blue-chip firms -- now line the Mexican side of the 2,000-mile border, and they have been of enormous economic benefit to struggling Mexico.
But as the squatters of Land & Liberty can testify, it is a benefit that carries a high price in other terms.
And that price is being paid on both sides of the border. 

The maquilas, as the factories are usually called, assemble parts sent from across the border into finished products and then ship them back.
Duty is paid only on the value added by the Mexican labor, which is dirt cheap; annual wage and benefit costs per worker here are frequently $30,000 less than they would be in the States.
As for Mexico, the maquilas have helped drive a jobless rate of 40% in some border points down to almost nothing and are earning more precious foreign exchange for the nation than anything else save oil. 

But their very success is helping turn much of the border region into a sinkhole of abysmal living conditions and environmental degradation.
A huge, continuing migration of people looking for work has simply overwhelmed the already-shaky infrastructure. 

Shantytowns spring up overnight around border cities where there is little or no living space left; some of the 400,000 maquila workers pay more than a third of their monthly income to share a bed in one room occupied by six others.
Road building and repair can't keep up with the galloping population.
Traffic is gridlocked in the cities.
Old cars on dirt paths raise huge clouds of dust that mingle with exhaust fumes and industrial pollution to cast a poisonous pall of smog over the border towns -- and their American neighbors.
Aquifers shared by both Americans and Mexicans are being sucked dry at an alarming rate, and industrial toxics and untreated sewage are poisoning rivers, streams and other water sources. 

The border has always attracted Mexicans seeking work, but since the maquila program began in 1965 the flow northward has become a torrent.
The combined population of Juarez, Mexicali and Tijuana has multiplied almost fivefold, to about three million, since the pre-maquila days of 1960.
And that figure doesn't include the people living in the belts of hovels that have been springing up around those and other cities. 

This shadow population is unknown but large, and it is growing rapidly.
Outside Tijuana, the wooden, cardboard and cinder-block huts that make up the shantytown of El Florido now seem to stretch endlessly, and it is only one of many such places here.
In Nogales, where the population has increased sixfold, to about 300,000, since the first maquila opened in 1968, a recent survey found seven people for every room of living space.
Rents have soared, and thus more and more people are living in hovels outside the city. 

Sometimes they don't have even that much.
On the hillside just above Land & Liberty, a fresh group of squatters is sleeping on the rocky ground, with families huddled together at night for warmth.
A rooster serves as the communal alarm clock, and at his call most arise to get ready for work at a Kimberly-Clark Corp. maquila, where they sew hospital garments.
Many maquilas offer clean and relatively pleasant working conditions, and those who toil in them also get some benefits.
Though the base pay is low -- most workers get only about $6.50 a day -- almost any kind of regular job is a boon to people who otherwise wouldn't have one. 

But even the best of the maquilas demand much more of workers, and give less incentive, than similar plants in the U.S. Maquilas are generally non-union, set production quotas at rates at least 10% above those in similar factories north of the border, and grant little or no extra pay for seniority; a fresh recruit off the streets can make as much, or nearly as much, as someone who's been on the job for 10 years.
Men don't have nearly the chance of getting jobs that women do, which creates social problems. (Factory managers say that women have more patience and manual dexterity.) 

Finally, some maquilas resemble sweatshops more than factories.
They lack ventilation, and workers may pass out from the heat and fumes.
Production demands can put them at risk; Edwviges Ramos Hernandez, a teacher in Juarez, worked at one factory where in a year three workers had fingers sliced off.
The machines, she says, were set at a maddening pace. 

In Tijuana, Zenaida Ochoa, one of six children in the same family who work at maquilas, wonders how long she can continue.
She lives in the El Florido shantytown outside the city and must rise at 4 a.m. to get to work by 7.
There she sews garments for nine hours straight in a tin-roofed enclosure that sizzles in the summer heat.
She makes about $60 a week, which is higher than most -- but a chicken costs a tenth of that.
She is plagued by back pain from hunching over her sewing machine all day, and says, "My eyes burn from staring at the needle." A fellow worker, she relates, tried to organize a union to get better pay and working conditions -- including toilet paper in the restroom -- and was fired. 

So it is perhaps unsurprising that the turnover at maquilas can exceed 180% a year. "Women only work at them because there is no other work," snaps Rosa Maria Palacio, sitting on a frayed red velveteen couch that is the only furniture in her cardboard hut at Land & Liberty.
She left her own maquila job cleaning gun chambers to survive as she could: making tortillas, working as a maid, cooking for a church.
She says she will never go back to work at a maquiladora. 

These plants are also suspected of contributing mightily to toxic pollution.
They are supposed to ship back across the border for disposal all toxic substances brought into them, less what was used in manufacture, but there is widespread doubt that they are uniformly doing so. 

Mexican academics researching the shantytowns, and community workers who spend time in them, say that residents in places without water lines commonly eat and drink out of barrels, some of them labeled as previously holding toxic substances, that they've gotten at the maquilas where they work.
If all these barrels are in use, the skeptics wonder, then what are the companies using to ship the leftover stuff back to the States? 

Ana Maria Apolo, a chemical engineer who a year ago left her job at a Tijuana unit of San Diego-based Computer & Communication Technology Corp., says that although some of the company's toxic waste was being recycled, much of it simply went down the drain. "The company wasn't concerned about it.
They were concerned about production.
If there was less to recycle, it meant less money spent," she says. (Proper disposal of toxic waste in the U.S. can cost $200 a barrel or more.) 

Jerry Smith, a vice president of CCT, says the company "has made scrupulous efforts to deal with our toxic waste," and denies that such dumping occurs.
On the whole, the toxics law is indeed being obeyed, insists William Mitchell, an American national who is vice president-marketing for Grupo Bermudez, the largest operator of maquila industrial parks in Juarez and a frequent spokesman on maquila doings in general. "It's being done, just very quietly," he says. 

So quietly that the records don't show it.
For example, the Texas Water Commission counts only 143 tons of such waste shipped north to Texas by the maquilas in 1987, but it estimates that Juarez-area plants alone produced perhaps 5,000 tons of it.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, which has tracked returning waste since 1985, can identify only 26 maquiladoras that have actually made such shipments. 

Wherever they're coming from, it's clear that toxics are joining the general flow of pollution that is endangering water supplies and the environment generally.
Water samples in Nogales have already revealed high levels of substances that can cause chronic damage to the liver or central nervous system.
U.S. cities that share ground-water aquifers with their Mexican neighbors are worried. "Where is all this stuff?" asks Prof.
Jeffery Brannon, a maquiladora expert at the University of Texas at El Paso. "We don't want to be the next Love Canal." 

Raw sewage is already a major hazard, and its effects are not confined to Mexico.
In San Elizario, Texas, where an aquifer shared with Mexico has already been contaminated, 35% of children contract hepatitis A by the age of eight and 90% of adults have had it by the age of 35.
In Juarez, a torrent of lumpy sludge called the Black Water Ditch flows alongside the Rio Grande, a potential poisoner of joint water supplies.
And in Imperial, Calif., county health officer Lee Cottrell helplessly watches over one of the world's most contaminated streams, the New River. 

It flows 120 miles north of the border after passing by Mexicali, Mexico, and empties into the Salton Sea, a recreation spot where people have been known to frolic in waters untested by the health department.
The New River's donation: more than 20 kinds of pathogenic viruses and bacteria, including three strains of polio.
Mr. Cottrell, who has seen dead animals and even a few human corpses flow by, calls the stream "a time bomb waiting to blow." 

Across the border from San Diego, the Tijuana River is an affront to both man and nature.
This murky green ribbon of slime and stench flushes eight million to 12 million gallons of human waste per day from Mexico into the U.S. through the Tijuana Estuary, a 2,513-acre U.S. wildlife refuge that is turning into a biological desert. 

Decreasing salinity is killing plant and animal life that thrives on brackish water, and the smelly, poisoned goo entering the estuary has already done in more than half the fish species and almost all the bottom-dwelling invertebrates. "If this goes on, we could kill the estuary in 15 years," laments environmentalist Pat McCoy, who led the 1982 battle to make it a refuge. 

In 1983, San Diego County had to close a stretch of beach where the estuary empties into the Pacific.
Since then, two surfers who apparently defied the ban have almost died of an inner-ear infection that can infect the brain and that is caused by exposure to fecal matter. 

The continuing rush of population to the border is affecting not only the quality but also the quantity of water, particularly in El Paso.
Its main water supply is an aquifer that it shares with booming Juarez, and water levels in it have been dropping sharply.
Due to run dry as early as 2010, El Paso is now re-injecting into the ground highly treated sewage in order to extend the supply. 

As do other U.S. border cities, it also shares the air with Mexico, and that problem is proving well -- nigh intractable.
El Paso is out of compliance with federal air standards, and though it is spending millions to meet them, it has little chance of doing so. 

The reason lies mainly across the border, where a great yellow-gray cloud rises over Juarez and enshrouds both cities; frequent temperature inversions seal it in place.
There are 250,000 clunker autos on the Mexican side (average age: 15 years) spewing raw exhaust fumes into the air -- they have no pollution-control devices -- and raising plumes of dust on unpaved roads.
Industry adds more poisons, some of them from plants of U.S. furniture makers who recently fled Los Angeles to escape new restrictions on solvents emissions.
Still more is added to the mix by residents who burn tires and trash to keep warm, and by the Juarez city dump, which has a tendency to catch fire spontaneously. 

Glumly looking at dozens of smoke plumes rising above the Mexican side, Raul Munoz Jr., chief of environmental and community health services for El Paso, says: "Air doesn't stop at the border.
We're just spinning our wheels over here." 

Little is being done about the wholesale environmental destruction, health hazards and poor living conditions that the rush to the border has spawned.
Though Mexico's environmental laws were stiffened last year, its fiscal crisis has left it with so few inspectors to enforce the laws that they can be evaded with ease; a 1988 survey of maquiladora plant managers in Agua Prieta, Mexico, disclosed that none had ever seen such an inspector.
And there is no money for huge housing and infrastructure programs, either. 

Maquila owners aren't doing much to help.
A few have begun offering single-sex dormitories for workers, and in Agua Prieta they pitch in just over a dollar a month per worker to build roads, bridges and such.
So far, the money has built one bridge.
More significant measures are resisted; when the Mexican government last year proposed a 2% tax on the annual wages paid by maquilas, with the money to be used for such construction, the operators killed the idea. 

Several say that they are in Mexico to make profits and that infrastructure Mexico's blem, not theirs.
They also fear that if they did pay extra for it, at least some of the money would wind up in some politician's pocket.
They already refer to the one tax maquiladoras and all other Mexican industries pay, a 5% federal housing tax, as the "rip-off fund." 

Mexican officials aren't eager to press the point.
We are not in a position to scare these companies away," says Leobardo Gil Torres, the mayor of Nogales. "We are in a crisis, you see.
What do we do if these companies leave?" 

Ms. Nazario reports on social issues from The Wall Street Journal's Los Angeles bureau, 

Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, San Diego Economic Development Corp. 

