.START 

What is the parent of Kidder, Peabody & Co. doing teamed up with rival broker Charles Schwab & Co.? 

Trying to squeeze whatever profits can still be made from the business of selling stocks to individual investors, it seems.
In an agreement that might have been unheard of only a short time ago, General Electric Co. has joined forces with Schwab to sell stocks, bonds, options and mutual funds through an electronic system that competes with GE's own Kidder brokers. 

Schwab, the big discount-brokerage firm, makes a business of tweaking such "full service" brokerages as Kidder for the higher commissions they must charge.
Now, it's getting the help of Kidder's own parent to spread its gospel. 

Schwab's discount brokerage and investment information services have just became available on an at-home computer system called GEnie.
The GEnie system, offered by GE Information Services, has more than 167,000 subscribers in the U.S., Canada and Japan.
Theoretically, Kidder customers looking to save money could abandon their Kidder brokers and opt for the lower costs for stock trading available through Schwab on GEnie. 

Indeed, GE and Schwab issued a news release in which Schwab's chairman, Charles R. Schwab, took a direct swipe at full-service brokerage firms. 

"More investors today are bypassing the mystique and extra expense of traditional financial service firms and are instead taking more control of their financial affairs," Mr. Schwab says, not mentioning Kidder by name. 

A GE spokesman in Fairfield, Conn., insists that the parent company isn't setting one of its children against the other, because "Kidder isn't in the discount-brokerage business." 

Charles V. Sheehan, managing director in charge of Kidder's brokerage network, is expected to take to the firm's nationwide communications system first thing this morning to explain the GE/Schwab marriage to his sales force.
Mr. Sheehan says his point will be that Schwab and Kidder are in "different businesses." 

Yet that rationalization may be a tough sell to Kidder's 1,500 brokers.
It certainly has been for Sears, Roebuck & Co. and its Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. unit. 

Sears, with its Prodigy electronic homeshopping system, has been undercutting Dean Witter brokers by offering stock trading at lower commissions, just as GEnie will.
Many Dean Witter brokers were furious when the Prodigy system started up and they discovered that some of their clients were bypassing them. 

"When our brokers first read something like this, it could sound like a major GE initiative that could be a threat someday," acknowledges Kidder's Mr. Sheehan. "But it is not a major GE initiative.
Anybody who's providing these home network services has got to be able to allow consumers through their (personal computers) to access a broad spectrum of services," including stock trading, he says. 

Kidder, he says, stands "prepared to compete on the basis of what we think is the real value to customers, the value from us that you can't get from discount brokers." 

The selling point of a discount broker is cheap commission rates.
In exchange, an investor forgoes the stock research and advice provided by a full-service broker. 

Schwab says that on the GEnie system, the commissions offered will save investors as much as 76% compared with full-commission brokers.
Also, GEnie users for a limited time will be given a commission rebate by Schwab of as much as $100 on their first three trades. 

Schwab already has its own system, called the Equalizer, that allows investors to trade stocks at home.
But the San Francisco-based discount broker has been trying to expand its electronic business; a spokeswoman says Schwab anticipates that 25% to 30% of its business will come from electronic delivery channels in the next few years. 

John Keefe, a financial-services analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., says GE might be able to have its cake and eat it too, providing that Kidder brokers don't raise too much of a stink.
Mr. Keefe says that instead of Kidder's traditional, older investors, the GEnie system "will appeal to a more progressive, more highly educated, probably younger group that does its own research and knows how to work computers." 

