.START 

The Senate voted to withhold federal funds for local AIDS education and information programs from states that fail to require a "good faith" effort be made to notify the spouse of any patient infected with the disease. 

The 95-3 roll call came after liberal Democrats signaled their willingness to accept the notification provision, but homosexual activists remain concerned that unless modified, the amendment could set off a wave of spousal-notification laws in legislatures across the country.
Similar language was narrowly tabled in debate last year, and physicians have opposed any mandatory notification requirements because of the consequent liability for themselves. 

In recent years, many states have developed so-called partner-notification programs in compliance with current rules by the Centers for Disease Control, and these processes could satisfy the standard of making a "good faith" effort.
However, the amendment goes further in referring not only to state governors but also legislatures, and the staff of the Senate Appropriations Committee said last night that as currently written, the provision appears to require passage of a state law. 

The action came as senators met late into the night and appeared close to an agreement on both the amount and the method of financing additional spending on law enforcement and anti-drug programs. 

The AIDS provision was attached to a massive spending bill allocating more than $140 billion to federal health, education and labor programs, including the CDC, in the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1.
An estimated $195.8 million allocated for information and education programs related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome would be directly affected, and the underlying measure would provide a total of $1.59 billion for research and treatment activities for the disease. 

The proposed AIDS spending represents a 30% increase over current appropriations.
As the funding has increased, however, so have the number of amendments offered by conservatives in an apparent effort to isolate the homosexual community.
Language was again inserted yesterday to prohibit the distribution of any materials to school children that states homosexuality is "normal" or "healthy," and the issue of spousal notification has been used to separate the homosexual community from what Sen. Jesse Helms (R., N.C.) described as the "innocent victims of this horrible curse." 

The conservative emphasis on homosexuality has been striking in Congress this year, when the political right appears to be losing strength on a second issue -- abortion.
The same spending bill funds an estimated $30 billion in Medicaid payments to states, and without debate, the Senate Appropriations Committee this year loosened current restrictions to allow federal funding for abortions in case of rape or incest.
Currently, such funding is permitted only when the woman's life is endangered. 

Though the proposed change is sure to be challenged by the Bush administration, conservatives allowed it to be adopted on the floor yesterday by a simple voice vote.
The issue will be divisive in conference with the House, but in the aftermath of the Supreme Court decision this year on abortion, opponents of the current restrictions are more aggressive in testing their strength. 

Apart from additional AIDS funding, the spending bill provides a nearly 11% increase in federal assistance for public school elementary students from disadvantaged families, and an estimated $1.2 billion is allocated for the child-care initiative authorized earlier this year by the Senate.
In both cases, the real cost will be shifted into the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1, 1990, reflecting how Senate appropriators crafting the bill were frequently constricted by budget limits. 

Funding for student aid and college loans is effectively frozen, and the $4.7 billion provided for Pell grants for low-income students doesn't meet recent Bush administration revisions showing an estimated $696 million more will be needed if grants are to be maintained at scheduled levels for as many as 300,000 students in this school year. 

The budget scramble is intensified by the pressure to find across-the-board savings to finance proposed increases in funding for drug-treatment and education programs and law enforcement.
During the prolonged floor debate last night, senators meeting behind closed doors appeared to have narrowed differences over a bipartisan anti-drug package and how to finance the added costs. 

Some form of an across-the-board cut at a certain percentage seems certain, and Democrats last night agreed to pursue more-selective, individual reductions to meet part of the increases above the $2.2 billion of increases requested by the administration for anti-drug programs. 

A favorite target will be more than $1.8 billion in unexpended federal aid to help states cope with the arrival of immigrants.
But even as the talks have continued, the same account has been raided by others looking for funds for their own priorities.
The Senate bill yesterday, for example, would rescind as much as $483 million for a variety of purposes, and the draining of funds infuriated delegations from Florida, Texas and California, which sought to protect their promised allocations in future years beyond 1990. 

John E. Yang contributed to this article. 

