.START 

The Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association plans a $150 million wager that there is a lot of money to be made in rescuing ailing savings and loan associations. 

The proposed investment by the $9 billion Los Angeles retirement system would be the biggest commitment yet by a pension fund hoping to profit by reviving troubled thrifts.
The sizable pledge could pave the way for other pension funds considering thrift investments as the huge federal overhaul of the thrift industry is about to begin. 

The Los Angeles retirement system's investment would be made through a buy-out fund being organized by former Treasury Secretary William E. Simon and several partners, who are already large investors in thrifts.
The Simon fund's goal is to buy a number of West Coast thrifts, and perhaps some commercial banks, and merge them into a California-based financial services company that might eventually make an attractive takeover candidate. 

"It will be a very conservatively run institution with a very strong capital base," said Larry B. Thrall, a Simon partner. "We think having pension funds as our partners gives us the best kind of partner because of their long-term perspective," he said. 

No other pension funds have yet signed up for the Simon fund, which needs $500 million to $600 million to begin operations, and has an eventual target of $1 billion.
Reaching that target would enable the fund to build a banking institution with more than $15 billion in assets. 

The Los Angeles pension system is going to unusual lengths in a bid to minimize its risk.
Terms of a final agreement are still being negotiated, and any agreement will have to be approved by the retirement system's board.
One planned provision gives the Los Angeles retirement system, and later investors, partial veto rights over proposed acquisitions before bids are made by the Simon group. 

That differs from the so-called blind-pool structure of most leveraged buy-out funds, in which investors agree to go along with any takeover selected by the pool operator. "I consider this a much better deal than the LBO pools," said Charles Conrad, administrator of the Los Angeles system. 

Los Angeles pension fund officials say they expect returns averaging 18% a year from their thrift investments.
Compared with other investment possibilities, that should outweigh the risks of entering the thrift area.
Consultants hired by the Los Angeles fund concluded that investing in ailing thrifts should be less chancy than some more widely accepted investments such as venture capital. 

Another safeguard being discussed calls for the Simon group to contribute some or all of its existing thrifts and banks, at their acquisition cost, to the new fund.
That would give the fund a broader base and place the Simon group at greater risk if its choice of investments for the fund go bad. 

Since 1986, the Simon group has bought five thrifts and two commercial banks in California and Hawaii, which currently have combined assets of $10.5 billion.
Those acquisitions were done with money raised by Mr. Simon and his partners from a handful of investors, without the use of a buy-out fund. 

Mr. Simon agreed to organize a fund after being approached by the Los Angeles system.
He believes that federal regulators overseeing the thrift-industry overhauls would like to do business with pension funds. "This is a big job, and they are going to need the {pension} funds," Mr. Simon said. 

Mr. Conrad said the Los Angeles fund is close to approving another, smaller investment in a thrift buy-out fund organized by investment bank Blackstone Group and Old Stone Corp., a Providence, R.I. thrift holding company. 

