.START 

Rockwell International Corp., maintaining that it is "caught in the middle of an inter-governmental feud" over waste disposal at the Rocky Flats nuclear-weapons plant, sued the Justice Department, the Energy Department and the Environmental Protection Agency. 

The unprecedented action could have tremendous significance for other bomb-plant contractors that believe they face a Hobson's choice similar to Rockwell's. 

The heart of the issue, in the company's eyes, is this: It can keep manufacturing the nation's supply of plutonium triggers at Rocky Flats, thereby generating waste that the Energy Department has conceded cannot legally be stored anywhere.
Or it can suspend operations, as it has threatened, and possibly be charged with default on its contract with the government. 

"Rockwell and it's employees currently find themselves between a rock and a hard place," George B. Merrick, a Rockwell vice president who oversees safety matters at Rocky Flats, said in the court papers. 

The suit, entered in federal district court in Washington, asks for a judge to spell out both the government's and Rockwell's obligations under the pact.
It also seeks injunctive relief, yet it's unclear that the El Segundo, Calif.-based company can ever obtain what it's really after: total assurance that it won't be prosecuted. 

"A judge can only uphold the law, and there's nothing in the law that grants immunity from criminal prosecution," said Shira Flax, the Sierra Club's Washington-based expert on nuclear-weapons plants. 

Rockwell's chief aim, she added, appears to be the protection of employees who sign day-to-day administrative reports, many of which were seized by investigators during a June raid of Rocky Flats and are now under the scrutiny of a federal grand jury. 

But one Bush administration official said the government is worried that Rockwell might have a hidden agenda: pulling out of Rocky Flats altogether.
A judicial order to close the plant, he said, would be much better for the defense contractor's image than a move to shut it down on its own. 

Rockwell, however, insisted that it had filed suit "very reluctantly" and only after "extensive efforts" to have the Energy Department, EPA and Justice Department "resolve the inconsistent and conflicting demands being placed on" the company. 

In an affidavit used to support the June raid, the Federal Bureau of Investigation alleged that Rockwell had dumped toxic chemicals into waterways near Rocky Flats and had burned hazardous waste in an incinerator that was supposed to be idled.
Last week, the company announced that an internal investigation had found those charges to be baseless. 

But the bulk of the FBI's contentions centered around violations of federal waste-storage and disposal statutes -- and that's what yesterday's suit takes on. 

In particular, Rockwell said that trigger production at Rocky Flats inevitably results in the accumulation of low-level mixed waste, a combination of radioactive and hazardous materials.
Compliance with federal land-disposal restrictions, the company said, is "currently impossible" because there is no government or commercial facility that can treat the substance. 

The company said similar dilemmas exist at Rocky Flats with regard to residue in a shuttered plutonium-recovery incinerator and waste water in a liquid treatment building. 

Rockwell said in the suit that until recently, it had been led to believe by the Energy Department that the company would not be "subject to legal liability" as long as it made a good-faith effort to carry out its contract at Rocky Flats. 

Yet in the past few months, Rockwell added, it has become clear that it may be prosecuted.
It cited numerous letters to and from high-level government officials, including EPA Administrator William Reilly, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh and Energy Secretary James Watkins. 

Nathaniel Miullo, the EPA official who directly oversees compliance at Rocky Flats, said he thinks the company is basically sincere in crying Catch-22. "EPA has its statutory responsibility, and DOE has its marching orders" to make warheads, he said. "Understandably, these could be conflicting views to the company." 

Late last week, the EPA, the Energy Department and the state of Colorado reached an agreement that requires a long-term strategy to be developed for waste disposal at Rocky Flats.
But Rockwell said the accord doesn't sufficiently address its real concerns.
While the Energy Department "obtained for itself an agreement by EPA and the state of Colorado that they would not take any administrative action against DOE," Rockwell could not secure the same guarantee for itself, the suit said. 

The Bush administration official, who asked not to be named, said it was decided at a meeting last week among top government officials not to grant Rockwell immunity -- partly because of the precedent it could set for contractors operating nuclear-bomb plants across the country. 

