.START 

The British government cleared Sir James Goldsmith's #13.35 billion ($21.14 billion) bid for B.A.T Industries PLC but reserved the right to reconsider if there is a "material change" in the bid. 

The expected decision not to refer the all-paper, highly leveraged bid by Hoylake Investments Ltd. for a three-month investigation is evidence the British government doesn't view leverage alone in takeovers as worrisome to the economy. 

Ignoring requests by B.A.T and its political allies that the bid's partial junk-bond financing should be studied, Trade and Industry Minister Nicholas Ridley said "a referral {for investigation} is based on whether competition would be affected." The offer by Hoylake, an investment company, for the tobacco, financial services, paper and retailing giant doesn't pose antitrust problems, he said. 

But Mr. Ridley left the government room to reconsider if Sir James and his allies, including British financier Jacob Rothschild and Australian businessman Kerry Packer, restructure the bid, saying such action might be warranted if there is "a material change in terms or other material facts." 

That caveat reflects last week's decision by Britain's Takeover Panel to allow Sir James to make a new offer within 21 days of getting U.S. insurance regulators' approval for a change in control of B.A.T's Farmers Group Inc. insurance unit.
B.A.T isn't expected to overturn the Takeover Panel's decision in an appeal scheduled for next week. 

Because a new Hoylake bid probably would be substantially restructured -- probably to include a cash portion and possibly to sell some B.A.T businesses -- the government wants the option of re-examining the transaction. "The government is giving itself some leeway," said Ernie McKnight, an executive of Scottish Amicable Investment Managers, a big B.A.T holder.
But he and other institutional holders don't expect the government to kill the transaction. 

On London's stock exchange yesterday, B.A.T shares rose 14 pence to close at 827 pence ($13.10). 

B.A.T said it regretted the government decision, which was welcomed by Hoylake.
B.A.T said the government missed an opportunity "to establish a coherent policy on the controversial question of highly leveraged bids . . . with their negative potential for the markets, for companies and for small shareholders. 

B.A.T's chairman, Patrick Sheehy, said the company is reviewing "suitable measures to provide a sustainable increase in shareholder value." Since the Hoylake bid was launched in July, institutional holders have pressed B.A.T to consider asset sales, a recapitalization and other restructuring plans. 

