.START 

Federal Express Corp., reeling for a third straight quarter from efforts to internationalize, reported net income declined 54% in its fiscal first quarter. 

The Memphis, Tenn.-based express-delivery company said earnings fell to $30.4 million, or 58 cents a share, from $66.3 million, or $1.26 a share, a year earlier.
The year-ago net included an $18.1 million gain from an income tax-accounting change.
Operating income increased 8% to $108 million from $100 million.
Revenue jumped 53% to $1.65 billion from $1.08 billion. 

Frederick W. Smith, the company's chief executive officer, said in a statement that an earnings decline had been expected as a result of the takeover of Tiger International Inc., a world-wide freight carrier. 

In addition, the company is continuing to have problems in Europe, where it has been spending heavily to develop a sales and operations network.
G. Edmond Clark, Federal's investor relations manager, said in a recent interview that Europe's varied cultural, political and regulatory norms have forced Federal to buy local companies on the continent.
Demand has yet to match the large investments, however. "You have to put the network in place before you can offer the product," he said. 

In a recent talk to employees, Mr. Smith also mentioned that European freight forwarders haven't been as receptive as forwarders elsewhere to Federal's acquisition of Tiger.
One of the key issues in the Federal-Tiger merger is whether forwarders -- which transport freight between customers and airports and thus compete with Federal itself in that segment -- will work with Federal Express.
Tiger has always done most of its business with forwarders. 

"We're not doing particularly well across the North Atlantic," Mr. Smith told the employees. 

At least one analyst said Federal's earnings decline was within expected ranges. "As far as I'm concerned, it's in line," said David M. Guthrie, an analyst with Morgan Keegan & Co. in Memphis. 

The earnings news was announced after markets closed.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Federal Express closed at $54.50, up $2.50. 

Earnings have declined for three quarters ever since Federal announced last December that it was buying Tiger for $880 million.
Federal has had to pay interest on money borrowed in connection with the acquisition while it waded through the process of obtaining regulatory approvals for the acquisition.
That accomplished, the companies merged Aug. 7. 

"The benefits of this whole thing don't really happen until you merge the two companies and eliminate duplicate flights," Mr. Guthrie said. 

Mr. Clark said the company's fiscal second quarter could be off as well. "I've worked very, very hard to try to temper short-term expectations to make sure that people interested in our stock understand that we aren't a near-term story," he said. 

