.START 

New internally prepared figures project a surge in fourth-quarter demand for OPEC oil that could take much of the pressure off the organization's ministers, who begin meeting here tomorrow. 

It is widely believed that ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries won't make much headway in restoring production discipline at this session anyway.
But now, data that will be supplied to them -- perhaps at their opening session -- suggest sharply higher fourth-quarter demand for OPEC oil will help them avoid the lower prices that could have resulted from continued overproduction. 

The new OPEC figures estimate that fourth-quarter demand for the group's petroleum will exceed 22 million barrels a day, more than one million barrels a day above their estimates for the third quarter.
That's in line with previous fourth-quarter estimates made publicly by OPEC's secretary-general, Subroto.
Yesterday, Mr. Subroto repeated his view that "22 million isn't a bad figure for the fourth quarter." 

That level of demand apparently would match OPEC's current rate of output.
According to outside estimates, OPEC now is producing 22 million barrels a day, well above its self-imposed production ceiling of 19.5 million. 

Several OPEC countries that have the capacity to produce more than their OPEC quotas are currently doing so.
Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates are the leaders of the overproducers -- both have been protesting that their official quotas of slightly more than one million barrels a day each are too small. 

At the meeting here, the eight oil ministers who make up OPEC's monitoring committee were supposed to work on a market-sharing arrangement that could lead to new permanent quotas and satisfy Kuwait and others seeking special treatment.
The committee also was authorized to increase OPEC's overall production ceiling to 20 million barrels a day or more for the fourth quarter if market conditions warranted. 

But since June, when the quota overhaul was proposed, most ministers have turned pessimistic about the possible results of the meeting.
Consequently, all 13 OPEC oil ministers were invited to the meeting.
Senior officials said all are expected to come except Hisham Nazer, the Saudi Arabian oil minister who is recuperating from surgery.
He is to be replaced at the meeting by Omar Al-Faqih, a Saudi minister of state. 

Several OPEC delegates suggested yesterday that if new quotas ever were developed, they would have to have active public support from heads of state of the OPEC nations.
An eventual summit meeting of these leaders is being discussed, possibly late next year in observance of OPEC's 30th anniversary. 

Some senior OPEC officials yesterday expressed doubt that they would try to change such a basic matter as the fourth-quarter output limit in the absence of Saudi Arabia's Mr. Nazer. 

But some action on that matter remains possible.
Saudi Arabia previously indicated support for a ceiling of 20 million barrels a day if the increase was divided among the exporters on a pro-rata basis.
A Saudi delegate said yesterday that the kingdom still would recommend a higher ceiling if the demand truly allows it. 

Some industry officials and consultants here to observe the meeting said a formal increase in OPEC's ceiling wouldn't have much effect on oil prices as long as actual production remains as high as it now is. 

