.START 

SO YOU WANT to invest overseas? 

That makes sense.
After all, foreign stock markets often outperform the U.S. market.
Now all you have to do is figure out what you're investing in. 

It won't be easy: Disclosure and accounting rules overseas differ sharply from those in the U.S. -- and also differ significantly among the foreign countries. 

Only companies in the U.S. and Canada, for example, issue reports quarterly on profits and other key financial data.
And most companies in Japan and West Germany don't consolidate the financial data of majority-owned subsidiaries (see accompanying table). 

Gary Greenberg, a global analyst with Harris Associates, says that in other nations the lack of a strong enforcement body like the Securities and Exchange Commission permits overseas companies to be more footloose and fancy-free with disclosures.
And insider trading is often greeted with a wink by government regulators.
In Holland, Spain and France, where stock exchanges are relatively small, government regulation and oversight of company disclosures are "very relaxed," Mr. Greenberg says. 

As a result, many experts advise individuals to avoid investing in foreign markets on their own.
And, in fact, some countries such as Brazil, India, South Korea and Taiwan make it difficult, if not impossible, for individuals to invest in companies within their borders. "Overseas mutual funds are better because professional fund managers can lead you through the foreign stock-market jungle with all its perils and pitfalls," says Martin Skala, senior editor of Standard & Poor's Outlook publication on U.S. and world investment. 

But even the most sophisticated funds can be fooled.
For example, the Acorn Fund in Chicago, which invests in small start-up companies overseas, recently saw its investment of $575,000 in the stock of Lafe Holdings Ltd., an electronics manufacturer in Hong Kong, decline by 54% after the company's chairman sold all his stock but didn't disclose it. 

"Such undisclosed insider dealings are much more common overseas, and you've really got to keep your eye on management," says Ralph Wanger, the Acorn Fund's president. 

Outright lying can also be a problem.
A case in the Netherlands is cited by Mr. Greenberg of Harris Associates, which manages the Acorn Fund. 

"In Holland recently, a high-tech company told a Dutch analyst that six-month earnings would meet 15% growth projections," Mr. Greenberg says.
But profit turned out to be flat, compared with the year-earlier period. "Company officials said they lied because they were trying to be fair in not telling the analyst more than anyone else," he adds. 

The Acorn Fund, which is holding $1 million of the Dutch high-tech company's stock, "would have sold it had the company official been honest about the profits," says Mr. Greenberg. "Now it's too late because the stock price has come down too much." 

Sometimes companies overseas, if they don't lie, at least embroider the facts.
The manager of a large overseas fund for a major brokerage house recalls that four years ago a Southeast Asian company in which the fund had invested claimed it had a lucrative long-term contract to supply disk drives to International Business Machines Corp. 

"Suddenly the company went bankrupt from liquidity problems, and there was no advance warning," says the fund manager.
No one knows for sure what really happened.
But the manager says that if the company had problems with the contract, in the U.S. it "would have had to tell about its problems in advance of the disaster.
And, of course, IBM routinely doesn't comment on contracts of this nature.
We suspect the contract never was {formally agreed to}.
But when company executives didn't return our phone calls, we luckily got out of the stock without losing our shirts." 

Overseas companies don't have to embroider facts, though, to complicate things for the U.S. investor.
Differences in accounting rules make for a wide divergence of financial results in various countries. 

To illustrate how tough it is to compare such profits, three accounting professors at Rider College in Lawrenceville, N.J., set up a computer model of an imaginary company's financial reports in four nations.
Starting with the same gross operating profit of $1.5 million, the company had net profit of $34,600 in the U.S., $260,600 in the United Kingdom, $240,600 in Australia and $10,402 in West Germany -- all because of varying accounting rules in each country. 

Although many companies have worldwide operations, their financial results in different countries aren't comparable, the professors say.
They term this a "serious problem" for "accountants who may be called upon to analyze a foreign company's financial statements." 

The results of companies in Japan, West Germany, Switzerland and Spain are among the most difficult to compare with those of their U.S. counterparts, says Kenneth Oberman, manager of the Oppenheimer Global Fund.
In Japan and West Germany, he says, many corporations don't consolidate results of their majority-owned subsidiaries; in Switzerland and Spain, some concerns set up hidden reserves, which result in lower reported profits. "When I invest in a Swiss company," says Mr. Oberman, "I usually add a fudge factor of 25% to its financial results, and sometimes I find I should have added 40%." 

Investing in Korean companies can also be tricky.
Some Korean companies create "special gains and losses" that sometimes don't relate to company successes or failures, says Robert Kim, a portfolio manager for the Korea Fund, managed by Scudder Stevens & Clark. "If a Korean company wants to pay less taxes or quiet worker demands for higher wages, it can do this with depreciation schedules much more easily than in the U.S.," Mr. Kim says. 

Because financial reports can lose something in translation, some managers of overseas funds hire country nationals to analyze stocks.
Five years ago the Merrill Lynch Pacific Fund hired Etsuko Nakajima, a Japanese financial analyst. "She has been very helpful in spelling out language nuances," says Stephen Silverman, the Pacific Fund portfolio manager. 

In researching a Japanese investment company, the fund found that the Japanese-language version of the company's policy of refunds to clients was less generous than the U.S. translation had indicated. "This made the stock more attractive to us," Mr. Silverman adds. 

Mr. Berton covers accounting from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. 

