.START 

A battle for control over a technology critical to computer publishing is testing the mettle of Adobe Systems Inc., for years a darling of investors because of its high profits and seemingly impregnable market position. 

While the battle turns on arcane points about software, it illustrates how in the computer industry small companies are coming under increasing pressure from the industry's giants.
It also demonstrates the risk of alienating customers by aggressively pursuing high profits from a near-monopoly. 

In an attempt to preserve the pre-eminent role of its Postscript software, Adobe on Wednesday said it would release technical information that will make it easier for competitors to copy the software, which controls how computer printers produce typefaces and other images. 

Adobe's move came a day after Apple Computer Inc., Adobe's largest customer, and Microsoft Inc., the biggest maker of personal-computer software, announced they would offer a product that would rival Postscript.
The companies said their software would have different features than Adobe's, but neither would say when it would be available. 

Fears over the Apple-Microsoft agreement sent Adobe shares plunging.
In over-the-counter trading yesterday, Adobe plummeted $4.125 a share to close at $15.625 -- a drop of 40% from levels at the beginning of the month. 

John Warnock, Adobe's chief executive officer, said his company's decision to make available the technical data was "inevitable, it was only a matter of time." He conceded that the move was prompted by the Apple-Microsoft announcement. 

Some industry observers say Apple and Microsoft may be more interested in breaking Adobe's monopoly than in offering better software. "If Adobe were a larger company, John {Warnock} would not have caved in, he would have been in court," said Richard Shaffer, editor of Computer Letter. "Faced with the pressure from Microsoft and Apple, it was an easy choice: your money or your life." 

Mr. Shaffer says Apple's involvement also points to a double standard for the computer industry's giants. "It's ironic . . . that Apple should team up to deliberately produce an imitation of Adobe's product," he said, "when Apple itself fears the same kind of attack" on the system software for its popular Macintosh computer. 

Indeed, Apple sued Microsoft last year for copying parts of its Macintosh software.
The case is pending. 

Analysts suggested that Adobe might have avoided its current straits if Mr. Warnock had moved more rapidly to mollify critics, who have complained about the company's steep royalties and withholding of technical information. "Adobe might have . . . done this 12 months ago" and prevented Apple from teaming up with Microsoft, said David Nelson, an analyst at Shearson Lehman. 

Many analysts think Mr. Warnock also could have cut royalty rates -- long a sticking point with Apple and other Adobe customers.
For years, makers of personal computers and top software companies have chafed under royalty charges that bring Adobe as much as $250 for every printer sold that functions with Postscript. 

In the past, Adobe's customers had little choice but to ante up.
That's because a string of small competitors have found it difficult to duplicate Adobe's software -- and customers haven't embraced the few companies who do offer rival products.
Postscript is "a complicated program to copy legally," said Charles LeCompte, editor of Printout, a Newtonville, Mass., newsletter.
Mr. LeCompte estimates that Adobe still holds "well over 90% of the market for Postscript products." 

Whether Adobe can retain its dominant position in printer software may depend on how International Business Machines Corp. responds to the Adobe and Apple-Microsoft moves.
Steve Jobs, chief executive officer of Next Inc. and an Adobe proponent, said IBM has the clout to either protect Adobe's position or promote a rival standard. 

So far, IBM hasn't indicated what it will do.
The company is an Adobe customer, but Nick Donofrio, IBM vice president, advanced workstation division, said at an industry conference here this week that IBM will support the Apple-Microsoft approach for use in Microsoft's OS/2 software, which IBM uses for its latest generation of personal computers. 

Both Apple and Microsoft say Adobe's concession comes too late for them to alter their plans.
Randall S. Battat, Apple's vice president for product marketing, said Apple might have continued to use Adobe's software "if years ago" the company had lowered royalty rates and provided greater "flexibility and openness" about its software. 

Founded in 1982, Adobe is credited with supplying the software instrumental to turning the desktop computer into a personal print shop.
The Apple-Microsoft agreement isn't expected to have any short-term impact on Adobe's revenue, which is expected to top $115 million for the fiscal year ending Nov. 30. 

