.START 

Carolco Pictures Inc. acquired a 33% stake in Vista Organization Ltd. as part of an agreement that could ultimately give Carolco ownership of the entire company.
Carolco also agreed to acquire an affiliated partnership of Vista. 

Carolco is a Los Angeles-based movie company best known for such action films as the "Rambo" series, and Vista is a New York motion-picture production and financing concern.
If all aspects of the two complicated transactions announced yesterday are completed, and Carolco makes the exchange offer for the partnership and ultimately acquires all of Vista, the total value of the transactions would amount to an indicated value of about $70 million in cash and securities. 

Carolco didn't put a dollar value on the transactions. 

In addition, a subsidiary of the Vista partnership agreed to invest $30 million in four Carolco motion pictures that are under production, as part of a new joint venture. 

Carolco and its affilates have been sniffing around Vista for a few years.
In February 1988, a predecessor company to Carolco's 48%-owned Live Entertainment Inc. had agreed to acquire Vista and the assets of the partnership for common stock with an indicated market value of $25.1 million, and $30 million of preferred stock.
But that transaction never came to fruition.
Live's predecessor did, however, acquire Vista's home-video unit and ancillary rights. 

Live Entertainment has been prominent in the news since late last month, when the company's chairman, Jose Menendez, and his wife were shot to death in their Beverly Hills mansion.
In an effort to boost Live's share price, which fell sharply on speculation that the murders might possibly be linked to organized crime, Carolco earlier this week announced that it and its officers would be buying an unspecified amount of Live stock in the open market. 

Carolco had considered using some of the Live Entertainment shares it holds as partial payment for the Vista transactions, "but when the stock price fell sharply, that came out of the picture," said Roger Smith, Live Entertainment's chief financial officer. 

Under the agreement announced yesterday, Carolco acquired 11 million newly issued shares of Vista Organization Ltd., or about a 33% stake, and warrants to buy an additional six million shares for 50 cents each, boosting its stake in Vista to 43%. 

Carolco acquired the Vista shares in exchange for the right of Vista's shareholders to sell the rest of their stock to Carolco in a little over two years for $1.08 a share, payable in cash or Carolco stock.
The agreement has an indicated value of $24 million, based on 22 million Vista shares outstanding on a fully diluted basis prior to yesterday's agreement. 

In addition, Carolco has agreed to make an exchange offer for Vista Organization Partnership Limited Partnership, which it plans to eventually liquidate. 

