.START 

A $250 million emergency loan agreement between Campeau Corp. and Olympia & York Developments Ltd., reached earlier this week, has set the stage for what may develop into a nasty battle between Campeau and its bondholders. 

In addition to making the loan, which will be used primarily to buy inventory at Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores, O&Y agreed to participate in the refinancing of an $800 million bridge loan due in April 1990.
O&Y, however, made that participation conditional on the sale of Bloomingdale's as well as the redemption of 75% of Allied and Federated debentures, notes and preferred stock by Campeau Corp. at Sept. 15 prices. 

What has bondholders riled is that prices for Allied and Federated issues were at basement levels that day, selling for as little as half par value. 

The implied threat is that without O&Y's participation in the $800 million refinancing, Allied and Federated will be forced to seek court protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
Such a move would immediately depress Allied and Federated junk bonds, which aren't secured by tangible assets. 

Bondholders, who asked not to be identified, said they wouldn't sell their bonds at the Sept. 15 levels and described O&Y's refinancing terms as a gambit for increasing the equity stake of Campeau shareholders.
After the $250 million cash transfusion, O&Y will own 38.4% of Campeau Corp. on a fully diluted basis while Robert Campeau, chairman, will retain 43.2%. 

"It's a negotiating ploy, nothing more," said one Federated bondholder. "Why would O&Y let Federated and Allied go into Chapter 11 after investing $250 million?
It's a way for them to drive down bond prices.
We won't sell at Sept. 15 levels, and I don't think anybody else will, either." 

A second Federated bondholder concurred. "Campeau has been trying to refinance that $800 million bridge loan for some time now," he said. "This is a way for them to do it while driving down bond prices.
Nobody will sell for less than market value." 

Those close to O&Y and familiar with the agreement said bargaining over the buy-back price for 75% of the Allied and Federated junk bonds will be a "game of chicken." 

Until O&Y stepped in with the emergency funding, said one source, the junk bondholders were faced with getting nothing on the dollar for their high-risk investment. "Federated and Allied would have gone into Chapter 11 without that funding," he said. "If O&Y is going to step up to the plate for a second time, O&Y wants the junk-bond holders to give up something." He noted that bondholders who have the remaining 25% could participate if the company's fortunes later improve. 

According to the source, O&Y isn't keen to see Federated and Allied slide into Chapter 11 because it would lose on its common-share investment in Campeau.
And O&Y doesn't want to see Campeau's retailing side sink after it pours another $250 million into Campeau. 

O&Y's 38.4% fully-diluted stake in Campeau consists of 5.23 million common shares, about $550 million in convertible debentures and warrants, and a $75 million loan secured against Campeau's 50%-stake in its flagship office tower, the 68-story Scotia Plaza in Toronto's financial district.
O&Y owns the other half of Scotia Plaza. 

The $800 million bridge loan in question was originally provided by Citibank as part of the $6.6 billion acquisition of Federated by Campeau in May 1988.
Citicorp then syndicated most of that bridge loan to other banks.
The loan was due to be repaid this January but has been extended three months. 

Andrew Leinoff, senior securities analyst at McCarthy Crisanti & Maffei Inc., described the prices of Allied and Federated bonds on Sept. 15 as at "panic levels" but said it wasn't surprising that Campeau would initially make a lowball offer. 

"There's nothing wrong with trying to buy that way," said Mr. Leinoff. "But it's hard to say whether they'll return with a higher offer.
Part of the problem is that they are so unpredictable at this point.
It causes uncertainty in the marketplace as to whether Federated and Allied will continue as entities, confusion as to how the bonds should be valued, and uncertainty as to management at both chains.
Uncertainty is the operating word here." 

Those close to O&Y insist that the company won't help fund a new $800 million bridge loan unless 75% of the outstanding Campeau bonds are redeemed.
Campeau, however, appears confident that financing to repay that bridge loan will be found with or without O&Y. "We have other options," said a Campeau spokesman. "An agreement in place can be amended, even though we think the redemption plan is workable." 

