.START 

K mart Corp. and Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the two giants of discount retailing, have plenty in common. 

They carry much the same merchandise, offer prices that are pennies apart and operate stores that look almost exactly alike.
Even their names are similar. 

Yet consumer perceptions of the two chains are anything but the same.
In several independent surveys, many shoppers say they view Wal-Mart as the industry leader, K mart as a laggard. 

In a 1987 poll by the Chicago-based research firm Leo J. Shapiro & Associates, Wal-Mart shoppers rated their store significantly higher and said they spent much more money than K mart shoppers said they did.
Consumers questioned last year by Landor Associates, a strategic design consultant in San Francisco, gave much higher marks to Wal-Mart in the category of "esteem." And shoppers earlier this year told Mona Doyle, a consumer pollster in Philadelphia, that they were significantly more satisfied with Wal-Mart. 

With so many similarities between the two chains, why do shoppers seem to view them so differently? 

Some retailing specialists believe the answer lies in an often-ignored side of the industry.
They say that unlike manufacturers, whose success depends more on the quality of their products, retailers can rise or fall on the tiny signals they send consumers in everything from the stores' logos to the width of their aisles. 

It might not seem significant that Wal-Mart employees wear vests, while K mart employees don't, or that Wal-Mart bags its merchandise in brown paper sacks, while K mart uses plastic.
But with other things roughly equal, these small differences can make a big difference in consumers' perceptions of what a retailer stands for and the vibes shoppers get in its stores, the specialists say. 

"Everything a company does sends a signal about who they are, what they believe and what they want to be," says Carol Farmer, a retail consultant in Boca Raton, Fla. "One little bad thing can wipe out lots of good things." 

K mart still is bigger than Wal-Mart in sales -- $27.3 billion to $20.6 billion in the latest fiscal year -- and number of stores -- 2,200 around the U.S., compared with 1,325 for Wal-Mart, mostly in the South and Midwest.
But Wal-Mart edged ahead in profit for the first time in the fiscal year ended in January, with earnings of $837.2 million to K mart's $803 million.
Wal-Mart's sales also have been growing much faster than K mart's in recent years. 

Of course, in some areas -- such as advertising and quality of apparel sold -- consultants and some consumers give K mart higher marks than its rival.
In recent years, K mart has overcome much of its disadvantage as an older chain through extensive renovation programs.
It also has upgraded its customer service and cut prices.
K mart says it is now Wal-Mart's equal. "Our research shows that in markets where we compete, Wal-Mart doesn't seem to have any competitive advantage," says Michael Wellman, K mart's marketing vice president. "The bulk of the people who have a choice shop both stores." 

But many retailing executives and consultants consider Wal-Mart the leader in attention to the details that help shape shoppers' attitudes.
They say the chain is particularly adept at striking the delicate balance needed to convince customers that its prices are low without making people feel that its stores are too cheap.
These same consultants say K mart, on the other hand, sometimes risks cheapening its image with tactics that generate quick sales -- such as offering to double manufacturers' coupons or running its "blue light specials," the spur-of-the-moment sales that K mart stores announce over their public-address systems and mark with flashing blue lights. 

The blue light special "has all the charm of a P.A. announcement in a railroad station," says Ted Peterson, a retail design consultant in Hinsdale, Ill.
Although K mart says the specials spark heavy impulse buying, Mr. Peterson contends that the "net result is that it adds to the dreariness" of shopping at K mart. 

Consultants also contrast Wal-Mart's simple logo, in white block letters on a brown background, with K mart's bright red and blue store signs.
The brown in Wal-Mart's logo conveys "a warmer invitation" to shoppers, says Clive Chajet, chairman and chief executive of Lippincott & Margulies Inc., an image consultant in New York. "It's friendlier and less blatantly commercial." 

K mart's red "K" grabs shoppers' attention and signals that the store's prices will be low, consultants say.
It also helps create a mood that can prompt impulse purchases.
But several say the red K doesn't work particularly well with the cold turquoise blue letters that spell out the word "mart." 

The K mart logo, though highly recognizable, also conveys the impression that the chain hasn't changed since its early discounting days in the 1960s.
At the time, it attracted shoppers by hawking low-priced light bulbs, hangers and other odds and ends, not the more stylish apparel and home goods it also carries today.
K mart says it has no immediate plans to change its logo, though that could happen at some point in the future. 

Subtle differences in store decor also affect how shoppers feel.
Visits to competing K mart and Wal-Mart outlets on the west side of Madison, Wis. -- both representative stores -- show how the little things can add up. 

At the Wal-Mart, the main aisles are wider than those at the nearby K mart.
Fluorescent lighting is recessed into the ceiling, creating a softer impression than the glare from the exposed strips at K mart.
And the apparel departments are carpeted in a warm, autumnal orange, while K mart's are tiled in off-white. 

Together, such features signal to consumers that Wal-Mart is "more upscale" and carries "a little better-quality" merchandise than K mart, says Jack D. Fontaine, a senior vice president at Dayton Hudson Corp. 's Target discount-store unit. 

Creating this impression is important in selling apparel, consultants say, because clothing shoppers linger longer and make more emotional choices than those in search of shampoo or household cleaners.
Carpeting makes the department feel homier, and the padding underfoot can also make tired shoppers more comfortable. 

Consultants who have studied the retailers say Wal-Mart has the edge in customer service, and that difference is also apparent in Madison.
At the Wal-Mart store, an aggressively friendly grandfather guards the entrance, smiling at babies and striking up conversations with shoppers, while another employee follows customers to their cars to pick up their shopping carts and even stops to pet a puppy.
At the nearby K mart, a young woman working as a greeter stands stoicaly and waits for people to ask her questions. 

The Wal-Mart employees also wear blue vests that make them easier to pick out from a distance than K mart employees, identified only by small nameplates.
And the vests' subdued blue color reinforces Wal-Mart's image as a friendly, nonthreatening place to shop. 

All of which makes a difference with shoppers.
Many consumers in focus groups held by Leo J. Shapiro & Associates praised Wal-Mart for making them "feel more welcome," for taking "time out to treat you like they're glad you're doing business with them" or "smiling and saying, 'How are you doing? '" 

Though consultants regard K mart's marketing efforts highly, they say the chain sometimes fails to state its message as clearly as Wal-Mart.
Banners installed earlier this year by K mart include the vague claim that the chain has "Very Important Prices." "VIP" tags appear on its shelves.
Wal-Mart's signs, by contrast, say "Always the Low Price on the Brands You Trust.
Always." 

Mr. Wellman, the K mart vice president, concedes that the VIP program "has not conveyed the message as succinctly as we wanted to.
It's just another message that may or may not be here next year." 

K mart also is trying to improve service, though Mr. Wellman says the efforts have nothing to do with Wal-Mart.
K mart set up a toll-free phone line for customers to air their concerns.
It started awarding prizes for customer service and distributed new employee badges that say "Committed to Customer Care." It also copied Wal-Mart's practice of stationing "people greeters" at its doors.
Says Mr. Wellman: "We're going to have more to say on the subject" of service. 

But what works for one chain doesn't necessarily work for the other.
Wal-Mart, which has always had what it calls "everyday low prices," draws shoppers with only one ad circular a month.
Last year, K mart cut back to one ad circular a week from two and started reducing prices to new "everyday levels." Nevertheless, in the first four months of its current fiscal year, K mart's customer count fell about 5% from a year earlier, says L. Wayne Hood, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. 

