.START 

It was probably inevitable.
Though there are more than three years to go before the target date for European economic unity rolls around, the very prospect of it has already produced one dubious development -- an explosion of Eurokitsch. 

At the Eurotempo shop here, the fan of a united Europe can easily drop a load of pounds, marks or francs in no time on a profusion of souvenir gimcracks: Euro-beach towels and matching Euro-beach balls ($37 of Belgian francs buys the pair), giant Euro-banners ($72), Euro-playing cards, Euro-cigarette lighters, cheap Euro-watches, Euro-jogging suits with matching Euro-caps, Euro-barbecue aprons, Euro-pillows, Euro-ashtrays, and assorted other Euro-this and Euro-that. 

Save for the insult to good taste, such commercial exploitation of the One Europe idea isn't important in itself.
But as an indicator of growing Europhoria -- the fervid, uncritical belief that simply unifying the Continent will somehow pump its collective economy full of helium and make everyone richer than he is -- it is something to worry about.
Is economic unity being oversold, are expectations getting out of hand, is the populace expecting a replay of the miracle of loaves and fishes?
Some people think so. 

The average European, however, doesn't want to listen to them.
He does expect 1992 to mystically enlarge the economy and distribute it better to everybody.
He expects his politicians to stay out of the way of this happening, and has even begun voting against those who show anti-European tendencies.
He has gotten the Word, and the Word is written in the Cecchini Report on the benefits of a single market, the EC's glowing picture of what a unified Europe will bring. 

It says that removing internal barriers will create five million to six million jobs, raise gross national product by 6%, and ensure more choice for consumers of goods and services.
How?
Michael Emerson, who is in charge of assessing the economic impact of EC policies for the European Commission in Brussels, argues that the Continent will benefit enormously from a seeming contradiction. 

EC policies, he writes in a recent article, will promote a concentration of big, efficient producers in some sectors (food processing, for example) while stimulating greater competition in others, such as information services.
More businesses in Europe thus will have a wider field to play on, a global one in many cases, and the muscle to play the game well.
At the same time, consumers here will benefit from lower prices on many goods and services due to open competition.
With these two developments working simultaneously, says Mr. Emerson, "the full integration of national markets into a single EC market is the potential source of large gains." 

This kind of synergy may indeed materialize, with Europe the richer for it.
But the nagging question remains: Markets will be no bigger (the EC hasn't yet found a way to increase the birthrate or create wealth out of thin air), so just who will materialize to buy all this stuff? 

In Europe, a lot of people seem to assume that just because something new is being offered, somebody new is going to snap it up.
Demand will be created by supply.
Germans would guzzle French beer if only health rules keeping the French brews out were abolished.
Britons would down tons of snails in garlic butter if only they could. 

These flights of fancy are definitely not shared by everyone.
Europe's bankers -- perhaps aware that in neither of the two cases cited above did consumers rush toward the newly available goods -- are among the doubters, and with good reason.
Like well-tailored lemmings, they rushed into the City of London just before the Big Bang deregulation of financial markets there -- and got clobbered. 

That particular economic sector not only failed to oblige them by magically expanding, but shrank in the wake of the 1987 crash.
So the bankers are not inclined to listen to the siren song of EC enthusiasts touting the benefits of one big open market.
Once burned, twice shy. 

Yves Lamarche, chairman of BAII, a Paris-based consortium bank backed by Arab money, says he doesn't plan any acquisitions or strategic repositioning before the magic date. "We went in fast on the Big Bang, bought a broker, thought it was the deal of the decade," and then had to lay off 300 out of 500 employees.
Although the broker is once again profitable, "we're not going to rush into a situation like that again," Mr. Lamarche says.
Apart from Deutsche Bank, which bought an Italian banking network for Bank of America, most European banks are also taking a wait-and-see attitude toward 1992. 

Other businessmen believe that unity will bring real gains, but only after a painful shakeout that most people don't want to think about.
Percy Barnevik, chief executive of ASEA Brown Boveri Ltd., the huge Swedish-Swiss industrial-equipment maker, predicts a wave of plant closures and lost jobs in the beginning.
In Eastern and Western Europe, he notes, there are 28 factories making locomotives for protected national markets; how many, he wonders, can possibly survive the cold winds of 1992? 

And there are some who wonder whether there will be any gains at all. 

Sir John Hoskyns, former director general of Britain's Institute of Directors, has called the EC's projections for growth "pure guesses" and maintains that "the cost if {1992} goes wrong will almost certainly exceed the benefit if it goes right." 

The twaddle about unity, he maintains, ignores the fact that Europe after 1992 will still be a fragmented market in many vital respects, one with different tastes, customs, climates, and distribution systems.
Despite the economies of scale and convenience the EC predicts -- N.V. Philips could make fewer types of light bulbs, Unilever's toothpaste trucks could get from London to Athens faster and more cheaply -- Sir John and others warn that unless small and medium-sized businesses in all 12 EC countries learn to reach out, speak each other's languages and adapt to foreign tastes, 1992 could be a big bust. 

So -- if the Euro-enthusiasts are right, those who fail to position themselves for 1992 may be left with their noses pressed to the window, watching the party.
If they are wrong, as so many were about the Big Bang deregulation, then everyone will have to wait until the next bright idea comes along.
What to do in the meantime?
Spread out that Euro-beach towel, maybe, and deal those Euro-cards. 

Mr. Revzin is chief of The Wall Street Journal's Paris bureau. 

