.START 

HURRICANE HUGO ROARED toward the U.S. as coastal residents fled inland. 

More than 100,000 people in the Southeast were evacuated from low-lying areas as the storm advanced toward Georgia and South Carolina.
Forecasters said the hurricane had intensified, with winds of about 135 mph along its leading edge.
They said it could cause "extreme damage." In Washington, Bush declared hurricane-ravaged Puerto Rico a disaster area, and U.S. military police began arriving to restore order on the Virgin Island of St. Croix, where violence and looting had erupted in the storm's aftermath. 

The 12-mile eye, or center, of the hurricane was expected to hit land early today.
The storm has left 23 people dead and 50,000 homeless in the Caribbean. 

BUSH AGREED in principle to hold a summit with Soviet leader Gorbachev. 

Opening three days of high-level talks, the president met in Washington with Shevardnadze, and the Soviet foreign minister said they had decided that the first summit between the two leaders "is necessary." Secretary of State Baker said the superpowers plan to set a "general time framework" for the meeting during weekend discussions in Wyoming.
The Baker-Shevardnadze talks also are expected to spur chemical and nuclear-weapons cuts.
In Vienna, NATO unveiled conventional arms-reduction proposals. 

The NATO package, presented to the Warsaw Pact, is designed to monitor and implement major reductions of weapons and troops in Europe. 

A Tennessee judge awarded temporary custody of seven frozen embryos to a divorced woman, ruling that "human life begins at conception," and that the fertilized eggs aren't marital property.
The woman intends to carry the fertilized eggs to term.
Her ex-husband argued that he didn't want to become a father. 

Saudi Arabia beheaded 16 Shiite Moslems from Kuwait for exploding two bombs in Mecca at the height of the Moslem pilgrimage to the holy city, Riyadh's Interior Ministry announced.
One pilgrim died in the bombings in July as thousands of people left the Grand Mosque after prayers. 

Vietnamese soldiers began what Hanoi has described as the final withdrawal from Cambodia.
The pullout of an estimated 26,000 troops, to be completed Tuesday, ends an 11-year occupation.
The Communist government in Phnom Penh said it would continue its fight against a three-party guerrilla coalition that includes the Khmer Rouge. 

Federal investigators examined flight recorders from a USAir jetliner that slid into New York City's East River on takeoff.
Two of the 63 people aboard were killed in Wednesday's crash.
Officials said the pilot told the control tower he was aborting the takeoff moments before the crash, but didn't disclose the nature of the plane's problem. 

A school bus in Texas plunged more than 40 feet into a water-filled pit after being struck by a truck near the town of Alton, just north of the U.S.-Mexico border.
At least 19 youngsters were killed and 65 other people were sent to hospitals, police said.
At least one student was reported missing. 

A four-nation team converged on a desert in south-central Niger in an attempt to determine the cause of Tuesday's crash of a French jetliner.
All 171 people aboard the aircraft were killed.
Moslem extremists have claimed responsibility for downing the plane, and an airline official said a bomb was the incident's "most probable" cause. 

At least 10 bombs exploded in Bogota, damaging the offices of Colombia's main political parties and a bank, police said.
At least two people were reported injured.
The bombings have occurred almost daily since President Barco declared a crackdown Aug. 18 on the country's cocaine traffickers. 

The White House asked Congress for $9 million to help the election campaign of Nicaraguan opposition candidate Violeta Chamorro.
The administration wants the money available in time for Nicaragua's one-month voter registration period in October.
The elections are set for February 1990. 

Police in South Africa dispersed anti-apartheid demonstrations in Johannesburg and Pietermartizburg, the first such action since police began displaying a hands-off attitude last week.
As President de Klerk's new cabinet was sworn in, draft-resistance leaders said more than 780 white men would defy Pretoria's conscription laws. 

Gunmen assassinated a moderate Sunni Moslem member of Lebanon's Parliament.
The 74-year-old official's driver also was killed in the incident in Beirut, police said.
Across the capital and in surrounding mountains, Syrian forces and Christian gunners dueled with mortars and tank cannons. 

Died: Thomas F. Burke, 59, chairman of M/A-Com Inc., in Tewksbury, Mass., of injuries from an automobile accident. 

