.START 

Lance Wilson had come so far. 

From his working-class neighborhood in a black section of Brooklyn, he had made it to the University of Pennsylvania law school.
He had become a top official in Ronald Reagan's Department of Housing and Urban Development, eventually earning a personal fortune from HUD-related transactions after he left the agency.
He had become a Wall Street investment banker with all the trappings: a Jaguar, a 25-foot pleasure boat, an $825,000 condominium on New York's Upper East Side and a summer house on Long Island. 

A crowning moment came in the evening hours of Feb. 25, 1988.
Mr. Wilson had helped to arrange a dinner in the executive dining room at PaineWebber Group Inc., with some 40 celebrators honoring his old boss: HUD Secretary Samuel Pierce.
In a private meeting just before the dinner began, Mr. Wilson introduced Mr. Pierce to his boss: Donald Marron, chairman and chief executive of PaineWebber. 

The brokerage concern had every reason to hire the young Mr. Wilson -- and later to sponsor the dinner honoring Secretary Pierce.
Within two months of the event, PaineWebber would be hired as financial adviser to HUD, despite the fact that a HUD review panel had recommended another firm.
A month after that, PaineWebber, working with HUD officials, would underwrite a huge government-backed bond issue, earning unusually large fees in the process. 

While functioning as PaineWebber's ambassador to HUD, Mr. Wilson also helped to open a multibillion-dollar market in new mortgage-backed securities in which PaineWebber has participated.
In a letter saluting Mr. Wilson's "good work" on the matter, PaineWebber's chairman noted: "It was a pleasure to hear that this will probably result in very significant business for us." 

But now, Mr. Wilson's ties to Mr. Pierce and HUD are proving to be a two-edged sword for the $2.5 billion-a-year financial services concern.
PaineWebber's is the only major corporate name to surface in the long-running scandal involving the plundering of HUD programs by well-connected Republicans.
The firm's Mr. Marron is scheduled to testify next Wednesday before a House subcommittee, which asked that he discuss, among other things, PaineWebber's policy on "influence peddling by its employees to secure contracts." 

Rep. Tom Lantos of California, the subcommittee chairman, emphasizes that there is no evidence of wrongdoing by PaineWebber.
But, he adds, "I think Mr. Wilson was an important player at PaineWebber in terms of PaineWebber's HUD activities.
I want to find out what they paid him and why they paid him." 

Today, PaineWebber is scheduled to turn over to the panel an internal report on its HUD activities.
James C. Treadway Jr., the firm's general counsel, says the concern hasn't turned up any evidence of "improper influence," adding that "not one single allegation of wrongdoing" has been leveled against the company. 

Nonetheless, Mr. Wilson's once-promising Wall Street career is now imperiled because of the thumping he's taking over his role in the HUD scandal.
Renowned for political savvy, disarming charm and intelligence, the 41-year-old Mr. Wilson requested and received administrative leave with pay after members of Mr. Lantos's subcommittee accused him of cashing in on HUD programs.
In at least one transaction, Mr. Wilson established PaineWebber as an underwriter on a bond deal that personally benefited him. 

Congressional investigators are probing Mr. Wilson's ties to a developer whom Mr. Wilson, while still at HUD, had supported in a successful bid for agency funds.
Investigators are also looking into Mr. Wilson's ownership, with other former senior HUD officials, of at least five apartment projects that received rent subsidies at a time when such funds were very hard to come by.
Investigators estimate that the sale of tax credits on four of the projects alone produced over $2 million for Mr. Wilson. 

His lawyer, Raymond Banoun, says Mr. Wilson has done nothing improper, and that he waited the full year required by federal law before dealing with HUD on his private investments. "Mr.
Wilson is an intelligent businessman who is being unfairly criticized for the apparent sin of having been successful in his business endeavors," he says.
Mr. Wilson intends to invoke his 5th Amendment privilege against self-incrimination when he appears before lawmakers, also on Wednesday, his lawyer says. 

While publicly expressing support for Mr. Wilson, PaineWebber privately is playing down his role at the firm, suggesting that he was an adequate employee, but no superstar. "His title, 'first vice president, ' it sounds highfalutin," says a senior company official.
But "there are 185 first vice presidents alone." 

Mr. Wilson bristles at PaineWebber's description. "If I was so mediocre," he asks through his lawyer, "how come I was making several hundred thousand dollars a year in salary and bonus?" 

PaineWebber is moving to distance itself from Mr. Wilson in other ways.
The company official notes that earlier this year, Mr. Wilson urged that PaineWebber elect his old boss, Mr. Pierce, to its board.
The official adds that the company's Mr. Marron rejected the idea after meeting with Mr. Pierce. "He just was not impressed," the official says. 

Although they were a generation apart, Messrs.
Pierce and Wilson were part of a New York's tiny elite of black lawyers educated in the Ivy League.
In the 1960s, Mr. Pierce was the first black lawyer to become a partner at a major New York law firm.
When Mr. Wilson graduated from Penn law school in 1972, there was still only a handful of black associates working at the city's major law firms. 

The two men were introduced by a mutual friend over lunch around the time Mr. Wilson was graduating. "Lance heard a lot about Pierce as a black leader and black Republican and Pierce became his mentor," says a person close to Mr. Wilson.
Friends of both men say that the two lawyers quickly fell into a father-son relationship, with Mr. Pierce providing a role model as someone who had succeeded in the realms in which Mr. Wilson aspired to have clout: law and politics. (Neither Mr. Wilson nor Mr. Pierce chose to be interviewed for this story.) 

Mr. Wilson joined a law firm then known as Mudge, Rose, Guthrie & Alexander, whose partners had once included Richard Nixon and the man who became his attorney general, John Mitchell.
Mr. Pierce, a partner in the law firm of Battle Fowler, had lunch regularly with Mr. Wilson, who served as a director of New York Lawyers for Reagan-Bush in 1980.
Mr. Pierce, named HUD secretary by the incoming administration, took Mr. Wilson to Washington, where he would eventually describe his protege as his "right hand." 

Former HUD aides say that over the next 3 1/2 years, Mr. Wilson helped set the political tone of the agency, where political insiders and friends had a leg up in getting a share of HUD's largess.
Mr. Wilson was a master of gentle persuasion -- a consensus-seeker who seldom overruled underlings or took actions that could boomerang.
His style stands in stark contrast to an aide whom he hired in 1982: Deborah Gore Dean, the leader of the youthful "brat pack" at HUD who eventually succeeded him, and whose activities have heretofore been the central focus of the HUD scandal. 

Mr. Wilson maintained close ties to Ms. Dean after he left HUD. PaineWebber officials said last night that in reviewing Mr. Wilson's expense accounts they had found, among other things, that he was reimbursed for picking up a $1,100 tab for a dinner for Ms. Dean and others in 1986.
Mr. Wilson's attorney said that the dinner wasn't an attempt to "influence them in their official positions." 

Upon clearing the way for Ms. Dean at HUD and leaving Mr. Pierce's side in May 1984, Mr. Wilson became president of the New York City Housing Development Corp., a quasi-public entity that provides bond financing for low- and moderate-income multi-family housing projects.
New York officials had a strong acquaintance with Mr. Wilson's work at HUD. "Lance was always very supportive of projects in the city," says former New York Housing Commissioner Anthony Gliedman, now an aide to developer Donald Trump. 

Before long, the HUD secretary tried to get his right hand back.
In 1985, Mr. Pierce wanted Mr. Wilson as his Federal Housing Commissioner, but couldn't get the go-ahead from the White House.
Administration officials say Mr. Wilson's appointment was blocked after questions arose about his dealings at HUD, including whether a developer had bought him a car. 

Mr. Wilson produced records showing he had paid for the car, according to his attorney.
Still, he was never nominated and in January 1986 withdrew from consideration as housing commissioner. 

What has most aroused congressional investigators about Mr. Wilson are his dealings, largely before he joined PaineWebber, with Texas-based developer Leonard Briscoe. 

In 1983, when Mr. Wilson was still at HUD, he supported $7 million in federal aid for a Briscoe apartment project in Texas, according to House investigators. 

Then in October 1984, only a few months after he left the agency, Mr. Wilson and Mr. Briscoe formed a Texas consulting company, Urban Community Consultants Inc. (Mr.
Wilson's lawyer says that only Mr. Wilson did any actual consulting, and that the work never involved any of Mr. Briscoe's projects.) 

In 1985, a little more than a year after leaving the agency, Mr. Wilson received a 15% interest -- then valued at $750,000 -- in a HUD-backed Florida apartment project in which Mr. Briscoe was the general partner. 

Mr. Wilson's lawyer says his client got the stake in the Florida project for advising Mr. Briscoe and representing him before HUD.
The lawyer says Mr. Wilson's work for Mr. Briscoe was separate from their consulting business and done only once Mr. Wilson was legally allowed to appear before HUD.
The lawyer insists that Mr. Briscoe's award to Mr. Wilson wasn't in connection with any action Mr. Wilson took while working at HUD. 

After Mr. Wilson joined PaineWebber in early 1986, the brokerage firm says, Mr. Wilson got the company involved as an underwriter on a $15.8 million bond issue that financed the Florida project owned by Messrs.
Briscoe, Wilson and others.
Company officials say that Mr. Wilson properly disclosed his personal stake in the project, and that there was nothing improper in PaineWebber arranging financing for it. 

At PaineWebber, Mr. Wilson's duties in the public finance group involved getting bond-underwriting business from state and local housing finance agencies, a job at which he excelled, by many accounts.
He was polished and unflappable, as if he has stepped from the pages of GQ magazine, many former friends and associates say.
In the competitive environs of Wall Street, he operated as effortlessly as he had in the drab hallways of HUD. 

"He was a very sharp, very bright banker.
I mean, he understood housing, he clearly understood HUD (programs) and HUD regulations," recalls Raymond Reisert, a former PaineWebber executive. "He had a good, technical grasp of finance." 

"He had great connections in the cities," adds another of his former PaineWebber colleagues. "He had the ability to go into state and local governments and open doors." This colleague, marveling at his extensive political contacts, describes Mr. Wilson's PaineWebber office as a political "Hall of Fame" for all its photographs of elected dignitaries.
He was an active fund-raiser for Republican candidates including his friend, Sen. Alfonse D'Amato of New York. 

PaineWebber itself also was giving generously to the Republican party -- $100,000 in 1988 -- but says the donation was unrelated to its HUD work.
In addition, the brokerage firm kicked in $5,000, along with $3,250 from Mr. Wilson, to a charity, called F.O.O.D. for Africa, whose founders included one of the federal housing commissioners who served under Mr. Pierce. 

One of Mr. Wilson's connections led to the Federal National Mortgage Association -- a giant, federally sponsored company, generally known as Fannie Mae, that buys mortgages from lenders, packages some for sale as securities and retains the rest in its portfolio.
While working at PaineWebber, Mr. Wilson in early 1987 became a member of the Fannie Mae advisory council, which advises the enterprise on mortgage-industry issues.
Some of Fannie Mae's important financial activities are regulated by HUD. 

At the time, Wall Street and the housing industry were hotly debating Fannie Mae's wish to issue a new type of mortgage-backed security called a Remic -- for Real Estate Mortgage Investment Conduit.
Supporters and opponents of Fannie Mae's involvement in the new market lobbied Secretary Pierce intently.
At Fannie Mae's request, Mr. Wilson huddled with Mr. Pierce and urged his old boss to give Fannie Mae the authority -- a position fully supported by PaineWebber, which recognized the potential for underwriting fees. 

Within a month of Mr. Wilson's joining the Fannie Mae advisory board, HUD's Mr. Pierce gave Fannie Mae limited authority to issue as much as $15 billion of the new securities.
PaineWebber's chairman, in a congratulatory letter to Mr. Wilson, envisioned reaping "very significant business." (Fannie May was given unlimited authority by Mr. Pierce last October.) Since the the 1987 decision, PaineWebber has been active in the Remic field.
Last August, it served as manager of a $400 million Fannie Mae issue, and has issued Remics of its own, including a $500 million offering last March. 

After his victory in the Fannie Mae matter, Mr. Wilson tapped yet another of his associations.
He helped arrange a fund-raising dinner for the Global Economic Action Institute, a research organization of which he was a member, to honor the work of Secretary Pierce at the Feb. 25, 1988, dinner, which was hosted and paid for by PaineWebber. 

At the private meeting Mr. Wilson arranged before dinner between the HUD secretary and the PaineWebber chairman, the two men discussed "general pleasantries and the sad state of the homeless," according to an official of the firm, but not PaineWebber's interest in doing business with HUD. 

But before long, Mr. Wilson was opening other doors to help admit PaineWebber to a lucrative business involving the sale of HUD loan assets.
The agency, under a mandate from the White House to sell off assets for cash to help reduce the federal deficit, wanted a financial adviser on hundreds of millions in asset sales -- an engagement potentially worth $1.3 million.
Mr. Wilson provided "technical advice" on PaineWebber's 100-page proposal and kept the firm abreast of how the competition was going, according to a former PaineWebber official. 

PaineWebber was competing with four other financial-services concerns for the contract.
And ultimately, a seven-member HUD advisory panel recommended another concern -- Chemical Bank. 

The panel's choice, however, was rejected by Mr. Pierce's undersecretary, Carl Covitz, who in an April 1988 memo designated PaineWebber because of its "extensive, direct experience with HUD programs" and its financial expertise.
Mr. Covitz says he doesn't remember whether Mr. Pierce ever voiced a preference on the matter.
Mr. Covitz also says he doesn't recall ever being lobbied by Mr. Wilson for the job.
But someone close to Mr. Wilson says that Mr. Wilson spoke to a Covitz aide shortly before Mr. Covitz picked PaineWebber over Chemical. 

PaineWebber wasn't the only firm on Wall Street to benefit from the HUD asset sales.
Secretary Pierce's former New York law firm, Battle Fowler, was hired as legal adviser on the transactions by the underwriters chosen by PaineWebber for the asset sales.
Mr. Pierce's former firm was promoted for the engagement by Mr. Wilson, according to a former PaineWebber official.
The law firm and PaineWebber deny any impropriety. 

At the time, PaineWebber wasn't only advising HUD on asset sales but also was representing a client interested in buying a huge chunk of other HUD loan assets, with a face value of $388.7 million.
These assets were separate from the assets on which PaineWebber was serving as HUD's financial adviser.
HUD officials nevertheless acknowledge they were concerned about a possible conflict of interest, with PaineWebber representing both the seller and buyer of various agency assets.
The officials put aside their concerns after reviewing a legal opinion asserting that "no conflict of interest should arise." The opinion was written by a lawyer for PaineWebber. 

The transaction involved the sale of below-market interest-rate loans, or BMIRs, that were issued in the 1960s and 1970s to developers of low income housing.
The Government National Mortgage Association, a HUD-supervised operation best known as Ginnie Mae, wanted to unload the paper.
But lawmakers and state housing officials expressed concern that unless the sale were structured with special safeguards, property owners could pay off the mortgages early, freeing themselves from HUD restrictions on the use of the properties.
Some of the 46,000 units of affected low-income housing, they feared, were in jeopardy of being upgraded to condominiums or other uses. 

PaineWebber helped to conceive a solution -- one that, with Mr. Wilson's involvement, would bring a huge fee.
PaineWebber would underwrite a Ginnie Mae-backed bond issue by the Arkansas Development Finance Authority, which would use the proceeds to acquire the Ginnie Mae mortgages.
Working with housing agencies from other states, Arkansas pledged to use income from the mortgages to subsidize additional low-cost housing and to offer incentives to owners to retain the units as low-cost housing. 

Congress passed a law specifically permitting Ginnie Mae, in the interests of preserving low-income housing, to sell the assets to a state agency in a negotiated sale -- without seeking competitive bids.
But the PaineWebber team still had to convince HUD of the soundness of the deal. 

Mr. Wilson was an important player in that effort, according to a former PaineWebber executive. "He had a lot of stature" with HUD officials, the former official executive recalls. "They were comfortable with him -- I mean the people at HUD trusted him." This executive's nickname for Mr. Wilson: "first vice president in charge of relationships." 

HUD blessed the transaction, in which the Arkansas housing agency says it paid PaineWebber a total of $5.4 million in underwriting and finder's fees.
The agency's former president, Wooten Epes, terms the underwriting portion of the fee "higher than normal" -- in fact, nearly twice the usual rate.
But, he explains, "This wasn't a normal deal.
It was a one-time deal never repeated," adding that PaineWebber worked long and hard developing an innovative financial structure needed to preserve the housing for needy families. 

PaineWebber says its profits from the fees totaled about $3.5 million -- the equivalent of nearly 5% of the concern's pretax 1988 earnings. "It was a nice transaction, a complicated transaction that we worked hard on, and we were nicely compensated," a company official says. 

These days, Mr. Wilson waits for word from PaineWebber on whether it will summon him back from leave while his friends anguish over his plight. "I regret very much that he is in this thing," says Theodore Britton Jr., a senior HUD official and former U.S. ambassador to Barbados who has known him for 13 years. "When you think of him coming out of Bedford-Stuyvesant . . . he went on to make quite a success out of himself." 

