.START 

Hurricane damage to its huge St. Croix refinery forced Amerada Hess Corp. to declare force majeure on some contracts and again sent gasoline futures prices skyward. 

Unleaded gasoline for October delivery rose 2.12 cents a gallon to settle at 61.86 cents.
Spot gasoline traded as much as 3.26 cents a gallon higher during the session. 

The refinery, which has a capacity of 545,000 barrels a day, was running at a rate of 400,000 barrels a day before it was shut down Saturday ahead of Hurricane Hugo's arrival.
Amerada Hess hasn't yet disclosed the nature or extent of damages to the facility, but has said some units will be operating again within 30 days and the entire refinery should be operating within 60 days. 

The closing of the Amerada Hess refinery exacerbated an existing tightness in gasoline, market observers said.
Demand remains high for gasoline, even though the traditional summer driving season ended with Labor Day weekend.
And a slew of routine shutdowns for maintenance, called turnarounds, scheduled for this fall are also contributing to the tightness.
Several traders and analysts pointed out that gasoline futures prices for outer months fell yesterday. 

Bill Hinton, vice president of the Phoenix Futures Division of Stotler & Co. said that a number of gasoline blending components are currently in short supply throughout the industry.
Overall, "that may well be more responsible for the strength in gasoline than the refinery" closing.
But another market watcher said there's a link there, as well.
The St. Croix refinery manufactures a number of such components, including feedstock for Amerada Hess refineries in New Jersey. "This will put those refineries in limbo, too," the source said. "They can't declare force majeure on themselves." 

Several sources said Amerada Hess bought gasoline on the spot market to offset lost production, which they said explained the recent jump in spot prices. 

The action in gasoline stole the limelight from crude, although Eric Bolling of Edge Trading Corp said, "If the products stay as strong it only makes sense that crude will stay up." The benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude closed at $19.62 a barrel, down six cents.
Refinery turnarounds tend to decrease demand for crude. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

GRAINS And SOYBEANS: The prices of futures contracts for corn, wheat and soybeans rose amid renewed forecasts for an early frost in the Midwest.
Because persistent spring rains delayed the maturity of crops in Indiana and Ohio, a frost that stops plant growth would trim potential production.
Some forecasters are predicting that the best chance of frost is Sunday night, but opinions vary over the area that would be affected.
The estimates range from Minnesota and northern sections of Wisconsin and Michigan to as far south as Arkansas.
Rumors continued to circulate that the White House is fashioning some sort of food aid package for the Soviet Union that would involve credits to buy U.S. corn, wheat and soybeans.
Traders are skeptical because such a move would be politically difficult. 

SUGAR: Futures prices rose following an Indian purchase of sugar on the world market.
The October contract advanced 0.27 cent a pound to 14.46 cents, which was just under the high of the day.
Analysts and trade sources said India announced it had bought 200,000 tons of refined sugar for delivery in October.
India had previously rejected offerings three times.
Now, the sources said, there were rumors that India was negotiating for additional quantities.
One dealer said he'd heard that India was interested in buying as much as 200,000 more tons.
He observed that several months ago it was estimated India would have to buy about 500,000 tons of sugar this year. "They're coming pretty close to that original projection if the reports are true," he said. 

COFFEE: Futures prices rose on reports that the presidents of the U.S. and Colombia would meet to discuss the International Coffee Agreement.
The December contract gained 1.29 cents a pound to 83.84 cents.
An analyst quoted from a news service report that Colombian President Virgilio Barco will meet with President Bush in Washington Sept. 29 to discuss the International Coffee Agreement and Colombia's war on drug traffic.
The Colombian president recently wrote President Bush to say the suspension of the agreement's export quotas earlier this year would cost Colombia $400 million annually in export revenue and was hampering his country's battle against the drug cartel.
The U.S. State Department on Wednesday said, "The President confirmed to President Barco that we are prepared to assume discussions on the ICA {International Coffee Agreement} at any time." Separately, Jorio Dauster, president of the Brazilian Coffee Institute (IBC) and head of the Brazilian delegation to the International Coffee Council talks, which will begin Monday in London, will not attend the first week of the negotiations, a New York dealer said, quoting the Rio de Janeiro office of the IBC. Mr. Dauster will take part in the second week of the talks, the dealer quoted the IBC as saying. 

