.START 

After years of failures and false starts, Green power may be about to enter the Spanish Parliament. 

For the first time ever, a coalition of ecological parties announced plans for a joint campaigning platform under the title of "The Greens Green List" for elections Oct. 29. 

Given voting patterns in last June's elections for the European Parliament in which a panoply of Green-labeled parties took a total of more than 400,000 votes, they stand a chance of winning at least one or two seats in Spain's 350-seat Cortes. 

Though their influence is likely to be minimal, they could contribute to reducing the dominance of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez's Socialist Party and possibly even to robbing him of an overall majority. 

"Opinion polls show the Green vote is growing," claimed Humberto da Cruz, a bearded 40-year-old sociology professor who's chairman of the Spanish Federation of Friends of the Earth and the Greens' standard-bearer for the current campaign. 

From 60,000 to 70,000 votes for ecological candidates a few years ago, he told a news conference, "We moving in the direction of 700,000 to 800,000 votes in these elections." 

His coalition, uniting five parties and scores of local groupings, is the first serious attempt in Spain to turn ecological concerns into a political force similar to Green movements in West Germany and France. 

Even a turnout consolidating the 400,000 votes cast for Green candidates in last June's European elections could ensure the Greens one seat each in Madrid and Barcelona, and possibly a third in Valencia, Mr. da Cruz said. 

For the moment, however, in a nation notorious for widespread indifference to ecological questions, his Green coalition faces a doubly difficult task. 

In addition to competing with such maverick candidates as former sherry salesman Jose-Maria Ruiz-Mateos, the ex-chairman of the Rumasa banking and commercial conglomerate, its members will have to teach voters to distinguish between them and rival groups with Green labels, including an offshoot of a quasi-religious sect and an extreme right-wing organization. 

Despite plans to make clear that "we're the real Greens," among other things by using recycled paper for its pamphlets, the coalition's campaign got off to a shaky start. 

The few journalists attending the news press conference had to do without the explanatory leaflets that had been prepared for them because a car belonging to one of the Greens was towed away for illegal parking. 

