.START 

International Business Machines Corp. and Baxter Healthcare Corp. said they formed a joint venture to sell computer hardware, software and other services to the health-care industry. 

The move should let the companies enhance their already large positions in that market, which consultants say totals more than $4 billion a year in the U.S.
They add that various technologies crucial to healthcare applications are coming together, so the field could enjoy a growth spurt. 

The announcement also underlines IBM's new-found willingness to employ technologies developed by other companies and to use its vast resources to ensure that those technologies find their way onto IBM equipment.
IBM has already bought stakes in more than a dozen software and systems-integration companies.
But it had previously avoided joint ventures, after several foundered in the mid-1980s. 

Mark Gross, national director of healthcare information services at Ernst & Young, the accounting firm, said that Baxter has produced some excellent software for running hospital operations but hasn't made much money at it.
IBM hasn't been as big a player in health-care information services, but Mr. Gross said he thought the joint venture could make a compelling argument that it could provide hospitals with all the software, hardware and services they needed.
At the moment, the market is so fragmented that hospitals must typically shop around. 

He said the one problem will be that some of the other major software companies in the field develop software that runs on IBM hardware and may balk at IBM's close ties with Baxter. "I think IBM will have a hard time explaining this," he said. 

IBM, Armonk, N.Y., and Baxter, a subsidiary of Baxter International Inc., Deerfield, Ill., declined to predict how big the venture would become.
But they did say it will start with 800 employees and could grow rapidly.
Lucie Fjelstad, an IBM vice president, said IBM will also step up its own marketing efforts in the area by, among other things, increasing to four from two the number of centers around the country that hospital administrators and doctors can visit to see how the technology is used. 

Jay Toole, world-wide director of health care consulting at Andersen Consulting, said he thinks that improvements in image-processing, networks and workstations are coming together quickly and could change the way hospitals are run. 

Image-processing has improved to the point where patients' records can be routed electronically throughout a hospital, or to doctors' offices outside the hospital if a patient is being treated there.
Items like X-rays and CAT scans are tougher to route electronically, but that's becoming feasible, too, with the increasing prevalence and speed of networks. 

Workstations are also becoming both powerful enough to handle those complex images quickly and cheap enough to be used widely.
IBM and Baxter said, for instance, that they might try to sell hospitals on the idea of putting workstations at every patient's bedside so that nurses -- who are in short supply -- don't have to run back to their stations any time they want to check on a patient's records or find out about occurrences elsewhere. 

IBM and Baxter said they think sales of computer equipment and services should also benefit greatly from the pressure that government and companies are putting on hospitals to cut costs by becoming more efficient. 

Yesterday, IBM stock rose 12.5 cents to close at $116.125 a share, while Baxter International common closed unchanged at $22.25, both in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. 

Separately, IBM announced that it had authorized the opening of 41 new dealerships that will sell its PS/2 personal computer line, marking the end of a moratorium it declared four years ago. 

The move is part of a broad re-evaluation of IBM's use of its network of 1,900 computer dealers.
Bill McCracken, an IBM division vice president, said IBM has already pruned 80 or so dealers from its authorization list this year and will remove more than 40 more by year end. 

He said it will probably be another couple of months before IBM decides whether to roll out nationally a plan to sell low-end PS/2s through mass-market retailers, a concept IBM has been testing for the past year.
But Mr. McCracken said that "the data we have seen to date looks real good to us.
It seems we're getting to a market we weren't getting to before." 

