.START 

In a sign that the first stage of the Kraft General Foods merger is complete, the company said Michael A. Miles, president and chief operating officer, will become chief executive and chairman. 

Mr. Miles, widely respected as a marketing whiz, takes over from John M. Richman, who originally was expected to leave at year end.
Mr. Richman, age 61, will join the New York City law firm of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz. 

The executive change comes on the eve of the first anniversary of Philip Morris Cos. ' $12.9 billion acquisition of Kraft and the merging of Kraft with General Foods to form the world's second-largest food company.
The basic organizational structure of seven operating companies and the team of top managers -- drawn heavily from Kraft's ranks -- of the $24 billion food behemoth are now in place.
The first round of post-merger house cleaning has been completed, too.
But the toughest part of Mr. Miles's assignment still looms and many uncertainties remain. 

This year, Kraft General Foods expects to realize productivity savings of more than $400 million from the combination of the two food companies.
Some of the most visible initiatives have included melding management and sales forces in the two companies' international operations, closing three plants in the U.S., and laying off about 2,000 workers, or about 2% of the 98,000-employee force.
Cost savings have also come from 3,000 separate programs.
For example, reducing the size of the caps on mayonnaise and Miracle Whip jars will save $6 million annually.
Putting Velveeta shells and cheese dinners in pouches instead of cans will leave another $3.5 million in Kraft's coffers. 

In addition, the company this year will realize $50 million from some preliminary synergies.
KGF's operating companies are jointly purchasing raw materials from crops to cardboard for a savings of $8 million.
The U.S. units are also consolidating media buys and promotions.
Last month, for instance, as part of its Great American Breakfast campaign, KGF began jointly promoting its treasure trove of brands: Post cereal, Lender's bagels, Oscar Mayer bacon and sausage and Philadelphia cream cheese. 

As a result of such efforts, Kraft General Foods is expected to meet its ambitious growth targets this year.
The company expects operating profit to grow almost 30% to more than $2 billion in 1989. 

But 50-year-old Mr. Miles and his managment team still face daunting challenges. "Bigness can be an advantage in the sense that you can utilize economies of scale and achieve volume discounts, but bigness sometimes brings with it bureaucracy and red tape," Mr. Miles concedes. "We have to make sure this $24 billion thing doesn't start behaving like a dinosaur but continues to be an action oriented and creative entity." 

Indeed, KGF's Glenview, Ill., headquarters is nowadays the site of much soul-searching, particularly over the issue of synergy.
At the behest of Mr. Miles, several management consultants have been brought in to proffer advice about whether and at what pace the blending of KGF should proceed. 

Still unresolved are such critical issues as whether the five operating companies in the U.S. should integrate their sales forces, their refrigerated and dry grocery distribution systems, their product lines and their managements.
In one of the few such moves to date, KGF recently moved the management of Birds Eye frozen products to the All American Gourmet headquarters in Orange County, Calif. 

"They basically have taken all the easy synergies, but the harder work is yet to be done," says Roy Burry, an analyst at Kidder Peabody.
Mr. Burry estimates that the so-called -- easy synergies have offset about one-third of the acquisition's $1.50-to-$2-a-share dilution to Philip Morris earning.
But he contends the "jury is still out on whether there are enough remaining synergies to offset the remaining dilution." 

"The issues now are the ones that could fundamentally change the structure of doing business, as opposed to doing what they do now more efficiently," says one source close to the company.
He adds: "They will pull it off, but will go through some real bumps and grinds because of the complexity." 

At the same time, Mr. Miles and his team also are grappling with more fundamental business issues.
KGF's unit volumes will be up about 1% this year, compared with gains of 3% to 5% for the food industry's best performers.
Mr. Miles says he is "not happy" about the profitability of the company's huge Maxwell House coffee business, despite its recent share gains.
Post cereals is experiencing serious erosion of market share while Kraft's core margarine and salad dressings businesses are under pressure too. 

"There is an honest appraisal within the company that we are the biggest food company in the U.S., but nowhere near the best," says one company insider. "The vast majority of our volume comes from food brands that peaked a while ago and the question is how do we get a product portfolio that takes us into the '90s, into a growth mode." 

To better align its huge array of products with today's consumer tastes, KGF is now making a concerted effort to become a leader in the low-fat to no-fat foods arena. 

Earlier this spring, the company launched cholesterol-free mayonnaise and Miracle Whip.
Last week, it introduced Sealtest Free, which it bills as the first national brand of "nonfat" ice cream and began testing a line of fat-free salad dressings.
In the offing: An array of Entenmann's fat-free and cholesterol-free baked goods, which owe their existence to fat replacement research pioneered by Kraft. (Until the merger, Entenmann's was a General Foods' brand.) 

But despite these strides, some analysts believe that KGF will have to unleash many more new products to make good on its bid to be biggest and best. "Now that the consolidation is complete, the challenge is to restore growth by weeding the garden and planting new trees.
They need to crank up their technical research and light a fire under their marketing force because their stream of new products is too slow," says David Goldman, an analyst at Nomura Securities. 

One area that has proved less fractious than anticipated is the merging of Kraft and General Foods' corporate cultures.
Kraft managers tend to be faster moving and more focused on cost cutting and productivity than was case at General Foods.
But John Tucker, senior vice president of human resources at KGF, says, "If there is a difference it's not in the culture {of the two companies} as much as the style." 

Even so, the Kraft way of doing things prevails. "What it really is at this point is more an acquisition of General Foods by Kraft than a merger," quips James Tappan, a former group vice president at General Foods. "Kraft management has emerged as the dominant force and the real reason for that is that none of the senior management of General Foods are left." 

For the moment, Philip Morris seems well satisfied with its huge food merger and is displaying its characteristic hands-off attitude.
Mr. Miles says he detects little change at Kraft in the aftermath of the merger. "Basically the names have changed, but the mission remains the same," he says. 

For its part, Philip Morris, the world's largest consumer goods company, does seem to be making a concerted effort to downplay the Marlboro Man as it seeks to broaden the perception that people have of the company. 

For example, an employee in Philip Morris' aviation department recently ordered KGF to withdraw from participation in the Corporate Angel Network, which arranges free flights to treatment centers for cancer patients aboard corporate jets.
Now a company spokesman terms the incident a "dumb mistake," stressing that the employee actions didn't reflect the wishes of Philip Morris' Chairman Hamish Maxwell.
Last week, Philip Morris offered to provide 12 of its planes to help the non-profit organization. 

