.START 

Americans need the Individual Retirement Account.
When Congress passed the 1986 Tax Reform Act that pulled the teeth from the effective IRA program, then in place, my office rang loud with phone calls from angry Delawareans who had trusted Congress's earlier IRA legislation.
These people were upset that a program which had grown to represent a quarter of personal saving was being cut.
They were upset that Congress was attacking their nest egg, stripping them of a good program that led toward self-reliance. 

Congress has seen the consequence of the mistake it made by cutting the program: Annual contributions declined by almost $25 billion, a serious drop that adversely affects our gross national product and America's ability to compete in the global community.
The time has come to bring back the IRA.
To correct the mistake, in June I introduced an expanded IRA, known as the IRA-Plus, and earlier this month Senate Finance Committee Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas) also supported the expansion of IRAs.
Both plans represent significant steps toward reviving this important program. 

However, the Bentsen plan is proposed as an alternative to President Bush's capital gains tax cuts, another measure needed to encourage investment in America.
To exchange one for another would be like trading the tires on a car for a tank of gas.
Both are needed if the machine is to work properly and progress is to be made.
More important, the IRA, if properly crafted, could be combined with the capital gains tax cut, instead of being a substitute for it.
Handled correctly, the IRA-Plus could actually raise revenues in the early years after enactment, a necessary and attractive feature in this time of deficits. 

Where Sen. Bentsen's plan will cost the federal government around $8 billion in its first three years, my IRA-Plus should actually raise revenue for the government while providing a greater payoff for the contributor.
This is done by shifting the contributor's benefit to the time of withdrawal, rather than offer the tax deduction up front (as the Bentsen plan does) and by allowing current IRA depositors to transfer their funds to an IRA-Plus -- provided that they pay a tax on the previously deductible contributions.
My IRA-Plus requires after-tax contributions, but then allows the contributor to withdraw the earnings after age 59 1/2, completely tax free.
This gives our senior citizens the security of knowing that once they have paid taxes on the earned income during their working years, the money saved in an IRA-Plus, and all interest, will be tax free at the time of retirement.
Also, the IRA-Plus offers a tax credit for low-income taxpayers of up to 25% of their contribution. 

Even if the money is withdrawn before retirement -- to purchase a home, pay for education, or cover catastrophic health care bills -- the withdrawal remains tax free.
Sen. Bentsen's proposal allows for early withdrawal, without penalty, only for paying for a home and or for education. 

The differences between my IRA-Plus option and the Bentsen plan seem even more poignant with this example: 

If a couple contributes $2,000 a year from the time they're 30, and receives an 8% yield on their investment, they could, under my plan, withdraw $23,080 tax-free each and every year after reaching age 59 1/2.
Under the Bentsen plan, the same investment would yield $19,618 in annual after-tax retirement income, if the couple is in the 15% bracket; $16,617, if the couple is in the 28% bracket, and $15,454 a year if they are in the 33% bracket. 

These examples do not take into account the effect of the future value of the annual tax deduction offered under the Bentsen plan.
If the tax saving were invested, the Bentsen IRA might prove more attractive, but still would not yield as well as the IRA-Plus.
And the sad truth is that for most workers the income from saving with the current IRA program, or through the Bentsen plan, will be taxed more heavily after retirement than it would have been taxed during the earning years, largely due to the Social Security Benefit Tax and the Medicare surtax.
Consequently, at a time when American seniors need a tax break the most, they will be faced with a higher tax bill on their retirement income. 

The IRA-Plus rewards thrift, encourages self-reliance and creates incentives to save for retirement while providing the flexibility to cover many of life's necessary demands.
And by helping Americans save, the IRA-Plus, combined with the capital gains tax cut, will help America secure its industrial leadership into the future. 

Sen. Roth (R., Del.) is a member of the Finance Committee. 

(See related editorial: "I'll Take the Tax Break Now" -- WSJ Sept. 27, 1989) 

