.START 

The Soviet Union took President Bush's chemical-weapons reduction plan a step further, offering to totally eliminate these weapons if the U.S. agrees to do the same. 

In a speech before the United Nations yesterday, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, who welcomed Mr. Bush's initiative, proposed that the two nations "radically reduce or completely destroy" chemical-weapons stocks even before a treaty is agreed upon by 40 nations currently negotiating a chemical-weapons ban in Geneva. 

But after the speech, a senior Soviet arms-control official, Victor Karpov, said that Moscow would insist the U.S. stop producing chemical weapons before it would sign such an agreement with Washington.
Mr. Karpov said the Soviet Union already has ceased such production.
At a news briefing Monday, National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft said the U.S. would continue to modernize its chemical-weapons stocks until a multinational treaty is signed. 

On Monday, President Bush offered to cut the U.S. stockpile 80% even before a multinational treaty is signed if the Soviets would reduce their stocks to an equal level.
Mr. Bush also said that after a multinational treaty is signed, the U.S. would cut 98% of its chemical-weapons stockpile within eight years if the Soviets sign the pact.
Mr. Bush added that the U.S. would eliminate the remaining stocks in the next two years if all nations capable of producing chemical weapons -- including those that aren't part of the Geneva negotiations -- sign the total-ban treaty. 

Mr. Karpov criticized the last requirement, saying that the Bush proposal to eliminate all chemical weapons could be thwarted if one maverick nation refuses to sign the pact.
The Soviet proposal apparently is based on the belief that once the two superpowers agree to a ban, Moscow could deal with any potential aggressor by using its vast arsenal of other weapons.
Mr. Karpov said the Soviet Union was ready to begin negotiations with the U.S. immediately, and that actions by the two nations would spur the negotiations in Geneva. 

In yesterday's speech to the U.N. General Assembly, Mr. Shevardnadze also proposed that all nuclear powers agree on measures to reduce the risk of war.
Currently, the U.S. and Moscow have such an agreement.
The Soviet official mentioned several other arms-control proposals that Moscow has proposed before, including banning all nuclear testing and prohibiting the production of nuclear materials.
The U.S. in the past has rejected these proposals. 

Mr. Shevardnadze pointed to the cooperative spirit of his meeting last weekend with Secretary of State James Baker in Wyoming, and said that by the time the two superpowers hold a summit by next summer, "we may have passed the last turn on the road" toward reaching an agreement reducing long-range nuclear missiles.
Mr. Scowcroft, sounding slightly more optimistic, said last Sunday that such an agreement could be struck in time for the summit. 

Mr. Shevardnadze's speech was interrupted by applause only once, when he took an indirect poke at the U.S.
He said that while Moscow wasn't "enthusiastic about the Polish communists' election setback," in which an East European communist government lost power in an election for the first time in more than 40 years, the Soviet Union wasn't threatened by the development and was "ready to cooperate" with Warsaw's new government.
Then he asked why other nations were so intolerant of Cuba and worried about the possibility of communist governments in the West. 

