.START 

Crude oil prices rose slightly as traders grappled with interpretations of the production accord struck yesterday by members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries following a five-day meeting in Geneva. 

Prices initially fell when an attempt to revamp the quota system failed and a limp agreement to raise the production ceiling by one million barrels to 20.5 million barrels a day was adopted in its place.
Although industry experts hadn't expected any major developments from the meeting, they were nonetheless disappointed by the apparent discord among the cartel members. 

Following completion of the unwritten agreement, an Algerian official called the informal accord "illegal." In addition, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates indicated that they would continue to violate their quotas and overproduce. 

But prices edged up in later trading as market strategists began to conclude that the agreement "doesn't really change the status quo," said Peter Beutel, analyst for Elders Futures Inc.
He added that "any accord is better than no accord." 

Despite a production ceiling of 19.5 million barrels a day, OPEC members prior to the meeting had been pumping almost 22 million barrels of oil into the market.
Strong demand has been sopping up those excess barrels.
Mr. Beutel estimates that in the last 13 weeks, demand for heating oil has risen by 4.25% over last year while demand for gasoline increased by 1%. 

Crude oil for November delivery rose six cents to $19.59 a barrel.
Heating oil prices increased as well, while gasoline prices declined. 

Industry experts hoped that a plan fashioned by the Iranian oil minister to revamp the quota system might serve as the framework for a broad and stronger accord at the next OPEC meeting scheduled in November.
Only two cartel members -- the United Arab Emirates and Libya -- dissented at this meeting. 

But some market strategists are bearish on the agreement attained yesterday.
Michael Rothman, vice president for securities and futures research at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, called the accord "very negative -- an agreement of the lowest denomination." 

Mr. Rothman, as well as some other analysts, have concluded that actual output by OPEC could increase as some cartel members continue to cheat on the new and higher quotas. "There's very little to inspire enthusiasm here," he said. 

In other other commodity markets yesterday: 

GRAINS And SOYBEANS: Prices of wheat contracts at the Chicago Board of Trade for December and March delivery rose slightly in the wake of reports that Morocco bought 210,000 metric tons of subsidized U.S. wheat and that the U.S. Agriculture Department has agreed to subsidize the sale of up to one million metric tons of U.S. wheat to Egypt, said Victor Lespinasse, a floor broker at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Chicago.
Under a program designed to boost U.S. wheat exports, the department compensates exporters that sell wheat at a discount to certain nations.
Corn futures prices dipped slightly, while soybean prices closed mixed.
After the close of trading today, the Agriculture Department is slated to release its quarterly estimate of U.S. crop stockpiles.
The estimate will be based on Sept. 1, which reflects the amount of grain in the U.S. before the harvest of crops this fall.
Because the 1988 drought slashed that year's harvest, analysts expect the government to report that the total supply of soybeans in the U.S. has fallen about 47% to 159 million bushels from 302 million bushels on Sept. 1, 1988.
The government is expected to put the corn supply at 1.889 billion bushels, down about 56% from 4.259 billion bushels on the same 1988 date.
Because the 1988 winter wheat crop wasn't damaged as severely by the 1988 drought, the government is expected to report a Sept. 1, U.S. wheat supply of 1.993 billion bushels, up slightly from 1.908 billion bushels a year ago.
Damage caused by another drought this past spring was largely concentrated in Kansas, a major wheat-growing state. 

COPPER: Futures prices recovered from four days of declines.
The December contract ended with a gain of 1.50 cents a pound at $1.2120.
There were no significant developments or labor news and the market's potentially bullish fundamentals remain in place, one analyst noted.
However, he said, the market in recent days has gone through a shakeout after being overbought and is now bottoming out.
One of the price-supporting factors was that inventories in warehouses of New York's Commodity Exchange declined 730 tons to 12,058 tons, the analyst said.
Another analyst noted that many copper users were confused about the economy and held back placing orders for the metal. "Now, they're finding the economy better than expected and their interest in buying copper is increasing," he said.
Technically, he said, the December contract found support around the $1.19 level and tended to level off.
More demand for contracts can be attracted if the price rises above $1.25, he said.
But, he added, if the December contract doesn't climb above that level, the price could remain in a trading range between $1.19 and $1.25.
Attention will focus increasingly on Japan this month, as its copper needs increase, and two of its principal sources of material, the Highland Valley mine in Canada and Bougainville in Papua New Guinea are closed, according to the analyst.
Late in the day, a news service report said Japanese smelters were concerned about the lack of supplies from the two mines but thought there were several ways around the problem. 

PRECIOUS METALS: The mixed trading pattern of futures prices continued, with gold and silver declining and platinum rising again.
December delivery gold was off 80 cents an ounce at $372.30, while December silver dropped two cents an ounce to $5.3350.
January platinum gained $4.90 an ounce to settle at $498.80.
Gold continued to react impassively to the dollar, an analyst said.
As the dollar was buffeted by selling by central banks for the third straight day, traders -- instead of buying gold, as traditional behavior would suggest -- sold it instead, the analyst said.
A possible price-weakening factor in gold also might have been the new OPEC pact controlling oil production, which, the analyst said, "was very tenuous and a source of dissension among oil-producing countries." An agreement strongly limiting output would have been inflationary and a firming influence on precious metals prices, he said.
In platinum, technical considerations prevailed, he said, as the January price rose above the key $500-an-ounce level, and up to $504.50, a two-month high, before it ran into profit-taking and finished just below $500. 

