.START 

In another effort to prune skyrocketing costs, the three major television networks and Turner Broadcasting System Inc. 's Cable News Network are considering a proposal that would consolidate a portion of their political polling operations. 

Warren Mitofsky, the executive in charge of polling at CBS News, a unit of CBS Inc., has sent letters to executives at ABC, a division of Capital Cities/ABC Inc., General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co. and CNN, suggesting that a company he would form conduct the polling that enables the networks to make projections on election nights. 

CBS and NBC appear close to agreeing to this plan. 

So-called exit polling, based on interviews with individuals after they vote, has become "repetitive" for the networks, Mr. Mitofsky said.
Instead of each network spending "multimillions of dollars" on exit polling, Mr. Mitofsky said, they could better allocate their news budgets for analysis of polls.
This arrangement wouldn't affect other polls conducted by the networks, often in conjunction with newspapers, that measure the public's attitude toward various issues. 

"The talks are pretty far along," said Mary Klette, director of election and polling at NBC News. 

An official at ABC News, who didn't want to be identified, said "there is no response yet." And the political director at CNN, Thomas Hannon, said that although he and Mr. Mitofsky had spoken about the project for several months, he had only received the actual proposal on Monday. 

"We have several options before us to hold down costs," Mr. Hannon said, "and this is just one of them.
We'll make a decision shortly.
We're in the middle of our budget process for next year and beyond." 

Mr. Mitofsky said he would leave CBS and form a private corporation, tentatively titled the Mitofksy Organization, which would conduct the exit polling and projections for any network that wishes to become a client. "I would charge each network a share of what it costs to conduct a poll," said Mr. Mitofsky. "There would be no repetition in costs between the networks." 

According to a network official who didn't want to be quoted by name, each network temporarily employs as many as 4,000 people to conduct exit polling. 

It wasn't long ago that each network prided itself on being the first to project the winner in any election, especially the presidential vote.
Network officials repeatedly have testified before Congress about being able to project a winner based on exit polls as soon as the polls close on the East Coast but before voting has stopped on the West Coast. 

"We used to be in the business of being No. 1 with calling races," said NBC's Ms. Klette. "That has stopped.
Our ratings on election night last November were not affected by the fact that we were third in calling Bush the winner.
Each network calls the race within minutes of one another." 

Mr. Mitofsky acknowledged that some people might be "uncomfortable" having one company supply exit-poll data to more than one network. "But no one is forcing them to sign up for this," he added. "It just makes economic sense." 

Mr. Mitofsky said he hopes to have the operation running "shortly, certainly in time for the 1990 elections." There will be about 30 races for governor that year, and a third of the seats in the Senate and 435 seats in the House of Representatives will be contested. 

"As the networks become more responsible fiscally, this is a good idea," said Ms. Klette. "This is the wave of the future." 

