.START 

IBM SAID ITS PROFIT for the third quarter and full year will be well below analysts' expectations.
The computer giant blamed delayed introduction of a new disk drive, a shift toward leasing and the strong dollar.
Many analysts said IBM didn't lower its sights enough and that the problems might continue into 1990. 

Sony signed a definitive agreement to buy Columbia Pictures for $3.4 billion, or $27 a share.
Sony also acknowledged discussing putting Hollywood executives Peter Guber and Jon Peters in top Columbia posts. 

Braniff grounded its fleet of planes, and one source said a Chapter 11 filing was probable as early as today.
Such a filing would be the carrier's second in this decade. 

OPEC ministers failed to work out a new method for dividing up the oil market, settling instead for a higher production ceiling under the old formula.
Several members said they planned to ignore the decision. 

Paul Bilzerian was sentenced to four years in prison and fined $1.5 million on nine felony counts related to his takeover activities. 

The House voted to repeal the Section 89 tax provision that compels firms to give comparable fringe benefits to top executives and workers. 

The FHA's financial problems are much worse then previously estimated, the GAO said, putting the blame largely on mismanagement. 

Four big securities firms, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Shearson Lehman Hutton and Salomon Brothers, have been trying to form a consortium to sell securities price data. 

Apple Computer decided against investing in U.S. Memories Inc., a consortium formed in June to attempt to retake part of the computer chip market from the Japanese. 

Toyota is raising prices on its most popular car lines for 1990 by 2.5% or less in an aggressive attempt to increase its U.S. market share. 

Pepsi-Cola Co. will begin test-marketing in the Midwest next month an extra-caffeine version of its flagship soft drink, to be called Pepsi A.M. 

Kraft General Foods said that its president, Michael Miles, will become chairman and chief executive.
Mr. Miles, a marketing expert, takes over from John Richman, who originally was expected to leave at year end. 

General Dynamics picked William Anders, a Textron executive and former astronaut, as its next chairman. 

Saks Fifth Avenue's chairman said he intends to lead a leveraged buy-out of the specialty retailer.
Saks's parent, B.A.T Industries, said Tuesday it plans to sell its U.S. retail group. 

Henley Group plans to spin off its land holdings, leaving the company with interests in laboratory supply operations and industrial products. 

The dollar fell sharply as central banks continued to sell the U.S. currency.
Stock prices moved higher but long-term bond prices slipped. 

Markets -- 

Stocks: Volume 158,400,000 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 2673.06, up 9.12; transportation 1427.63, up 2.67; utilities 215.17, off 0.31. 

Bonds: Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3287.17, off 

Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 129.94, off 0.23; spot index 129.46, off 0.51. 

Dollar: 140.15 yen, off 2.25; 1.8794 marks, off 0.0144. 

