.START 

Groupe Videotron Ltee, Canada's second largest cable-television concern, has taken a powerful and unlikely partner for its move into the United Kingdom cable market. 

Groupe Videotron and BCE Inc. said BCE will acquire a 23% stake in the Videotron Corp. British cable subsidiary.
Terms weren't disclosed.
The companies said the transaction is subject to approval of the U.K. Cable Authority.
After the transaction, Groupe Videotron will hold 61%, BCE 23% and European investors, who weren't identified, 16% of the unit, formerly known as Southhampton Cable Ltd. 

BCE is a Montreal telecommunications, financial-services, energy, printing and real-estate concern.
Its Bell Canada unit is Canada's largest telephone company.
Groupe Videotron is a Montreal cable-television concern. 

BCE said it expects its stake in Videotron Corp. could increase to about 30% during the next three years and amount to about #30 million ($48.6 million).
The companies said BCE will have the right to name two of Videotron Corp. 's nine directors and will provide a senior-management representative to assist the company. 

Videotron Corp. has four cable franchises in Britain -- one in Southhampton and three in the London area -- and has applied to the Cable Authority for two more franchises.
All told, the franchises, or territories, include 1.1 million households. 

In Canada, Groupe Videotron and BCE's Bell Canada unit are going head-to-head in the videotext market.
This month Groupe Videotron launched Videoway, an add-on to its cable service that will deliver various information and other services to cable subscribers.
Bell Canada applied to Canadian regulatory authorities for permission to introduce its Alex videotext service nationally, which delivers similar information services over telephone lines. 

A Groupe Videotron spokesman denied the companies are competitors in Canada's videotext market, saying Videoway is a "mass-market" system that includes a standard cable converter, games and information services with broad appeal while Alex "is more for somebody already familiar with computers." 

A BCE spokesman said the investment in Groupe Videotron's British subsidiary doesn't indicate BCE is considering other cable investments, including buying a stake in Groupe Videotron itself. 

