.START 

The House, in the first of what is expected to be a series of retreats from major initiatives of the past three years, voted to repeal a tax-law provision that compels companies to give comparable fringe benefits to top executives and rank-and-file workers. 

The vote was 390 to 36.
The wide margin stems from the united opposition of business to the provision, called Section 89.
Thousands of small businesses in the lawmakers' districts complained that the provision was overly complicated, too costly and an inhibition to executive recruiting. 

Today, the House will decide the fate of a proposal, backed by President Bush but opposed by Democratic leaders, that would reinstate a lower tax rate for capital gains.
The capital-gains differential was eliminated by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which also included Section 89.
Proponents of the capital-gains tax cut said they expect to win, and private vote counts on both sides of the issue suggest they are clearly ahead. 

But even if the capital-gains measure fails, the Democratic leaders' alternative also represents a retreat from the tax-overhaul measure.
It would expand the tax benefits for individual retirement accounts, which were sharply pared in 1986.
The alternative plan also would raise the top tax rate for individuals, which was lowered in 1986. 

On another issue, the House next week is likely to vote to repeal the program passed just last year that provides federal insurance for catastrophic illnesses.
Senior citizens have complained bitterly that the income-tax surcharge that helps fund the program is too high. 

Yesterday's vote itself was a retreat from an earlier fallback position.
The House Ways and Means Committee had proposed to repeal most, but not all of Section 89.
It had retained anti-discrimination rules for health-insurance plans for "executives only" and for professional service corporations.
The committee had judged these to be the plans that discriminated most against lower-paid workers. 

But the House decided to excise all of the law in what Rep. Byron Dorgan (D., N.D.) called "a triumph of common sense over sophisticated theory." Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.) disagreed, calling the "full retreat" an "enormous mistake" that benefits executives at the expense of the rank-and-file worker. 

The Section 89 law was a little-noticed provision of the mammoth tax-overhaul legislation enacted in 1986, but it since has become one of the most controversial sections of the tax code.
Designed to encourage employers to give rank-and-file workers the same benefits as the top brass, it says tax-free fringe benefits should be taxable unless they are given to most lower-paid employees. 

But the law ran into trouble because it required companies to do complicated tests of their benefit plans to determine whether they discriminated.
Both business and labor groups complained that the requirements of the provision were too complex, and businesses claimed they would have to pay large sums to consultants, accountants and attorneys to understand the mechanics of the law.
Small businesses, in particular, complained the testing process and fines for violating the law would be extremely costly, and many said it would force businesses to stop offering health insurance. 

The Bush administration, which has twice pushed back the compliance date of Section 89 and called for simplification of the law, had no immediate comment on the repeal vote. 

The battle over capital gains heated up yesterday, with House Democratic leaders making increasingly vigorous appeals for their alternative.
But they were meeting with resistance from liberals, conservatives and even members of the leadership.
House Appropriations Committee Chairman Jamie Whitten (D., Miss.) said he was leaning toward the capital-gains tax cut, though he hadn't made a final decision.
And liberal Rep. Charles Rangel (D., N.Y.) said he will vote against the alternative in part because it expands IRAs, which he thinks mostly help higher-income people.
Perhaps as many as 10 liberals might oppose the substitute. 

In a separate issue, the House voted 250-173 to eliminate a provision that would have required equal representation of employees and employers on the trustee boards that administer single-employer pension plans.
Multi-employer plans already are subject to a requirement. 

