.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

BUFFALO GROVE AIR EQUIPMENT, formed Dec. 4, 1967, was a nonentity to the public but important indeed to A. H. Gordon, chairman of Kidder, Peabody & Co., and 66 other rich folk. 

Buffalo was one of many new, legal private partnerships being formed for people in the 50% to 70% tax bracket in 1967 to shelter their income from taxes.
Lee Iacocca, then a Ford Motor executive; John Cowles Sr., a Minneapolis publisher; and affluent doctors, lawyers and other joined in these pools to lease out everything from boxcars to oil tankers. 

Buffalo's partners made the $2,982,000 down payment for the $13.5 million purchase of three jetliners that were leased to United Airlines.
The partners over 15 years were allowed to deduct from their personal taxes the interest on the borrowings, depreciation and 7% investment tax credit. 

In addition to equipment leasing, private tax shelters were formed in the 1960s and '70s to breed cattle, product motion pictures, own apartment houses and drill for oil and gas.
With their growth came some later abuses, with investors reaping more tax benefits than their investment in them.
Internal Revenue Service Commissioner Roscoe Egger Jr., himself a tax-shelter owner of a 100-ton rail car, in 1982 said abusive tax shelters cost the U.S. $3 billion a year, adding that investors might find tax shelters "hazardous to your wealth." 

Such Wall Street houses as Kuhn Loeb, Salomon Brothers and Lazard Freres, among others, erned big fees by setting up the shelters, including one that bore the name Suemeg -- named after two flight attendants -- which leased truck trailers. 

The investment value of private equipmwent-leasing partnerships hit its peak in 1985, then fell more than 75% in 1986 when tax laws, among other things, ended the investment tax credit while putting a 33% ceiling on personal taxes. 

