.START 

By now the signs are everywhere that human beings are wrecking their own planet.
A friend who recently sailed the Atlantic in a small boat reports finding garbage strewn all the way across.
Overhead, we have damaged one part of the atmosphere so that dangerous radiation can seep in and another part so that solar heat can't get out.
On the equator, we're hacking away and burning the dense forest where most of Earth's plant and creature species live. 

The litany of ravages is long and familiar.
The underdeveloped world continues to multiply and the overdeveloped world continues to need its amenities.
Where this is all headed is the subject of two new books.
Both paint a predictably grim future, one with broad strokes and the other with fine. 

Bill McKibben's subject is "The End of Nature" (Random House, 226 pages, $19.95) itself, which he claims humans already have brought about.
The subject is important, the notion is arresting and Mr. McKibben argues convincingly.
But in the end he probably is preaching a familiar text to the previously converted, many of whom are readers of the New Yorker in whose pages this book was first serialized.
Dale Peterson's "The Deluge and the Ark" (Houghton Mifflin, 378 pages, $24.95) is a far richer book on a narrower subject: the plight of monkeys, gorillas and other primates as people whittle away their habitat.
While the focus is on endangered primates, Mr. Peterson is able to involve gene pools, pharmacology, farming, lumbering, animal experimentation, nutrition and the intelligence of beavers.
And through all of this it's clear that whatever happens to the baboons today is likely to happen to the rest of us tomorrow. 

Mr. McKibben warns that his apocalyptic thesis is complex and subtle, but in fact it can be stated quite directly.
Human activity, especially in the past century, has released staggering amounts of carbon dioxide and other gasses into the atmosphere.
These gasses collect into a layer, trapping solar heat that otherwise would waft away.
The planet already is warmer than it was 100 years ago, he says (though not all scientists agree), and this is only the beginning.
Nature, which we have always considered to be steady and eternal, seems to be wearing down like a machine now that man sets the global thermostat. 

Mr. McKibben gets off to a great start with an essay on our delusions about how slowly nature changes.
We think of nature as evolving over eons that stretch eternally backward, but the perception is misleading.
Civilization began fewer than 400 generations ago.
It's a short hop from the present back to the Renaissance, a shorter one to the Industrial Revolution, and practically nothing to World War II and the wide use of plastic.
The curve of change grows ever steeper. 

Mr. McKibben's imagery is vivid.
For example, a car emits its own weight in carbon each year.
And he conjectures plausibly about what only a couple more decades of warming may bring: Oceans rising to swallow coastal cities, crops dying off in the Corn Belt, a real-estate boom in Canada. 

One trouble, though, is that not much of this is new.
Mr. McKibben has done a useful job of pulling together and popularizing what others have said about global warming.
Beyond that, he can't do much more than ruminate, and before long he just fizzles out.
He grows repetitious, then preachy and even trivial: He says the mere thought of an altered nature has spoiled his hikes in the woods. 

His conclusion is either bleak or weak, depending on whether you think Mr. McKibben believes his own thesis.
If nature has irrevocably reached its end, that's pretty grim.
So why bother to write a cautionary book about it?
With nods to Rachel Carson and Jonathan Schell, who warned the world about DDT and nuclear war, Mr. McKibben must be hoping to rouse his readers to some kind of action.
So maybe nature isn't really finished, he suggests.
Maybe instead of trying to conquer nature, people will come to see themselves as part of nature. 

Dale Peterson works similar ground in an entirely fresh way. "The Deluge and the Ark" is first an appreciation of primates, the intelligent and beautiful animals who are our closest relatives on Earth.
The title refers to the primates' threatened demise under numerous, often needless, pressures from humanity and the many small efforts to save them.
But the book also is a good travel adventure yarn, as Mr. Peterson, who teaches English at Tufts University, treks through Central and South America, Africa and Indonesia to find and describe a representative dozen species and their fates.
Interwoven throughout are Mr. Peterson's constructive reflections on what he observes. 

Early in the book Mr. Peterson enters his first tropical rain forest.
By now most of us are at least dimly aware that these forests are important and ought to be saved, even if we aren't precisely sure why.
Mr. Peterson tells why in detail.
From the high canopy perhaps 160 feet overhead to the snarl of roots below, the tropical forest is an incredibly rich, diverse, complex, yet extremely fragile, reservoir of plant and animal life.
Once the trees are cut down to create grazing lands for cattle, the soil dries up after a few years, probably never to be revived.
Meanwhile, the rancher moves on to slash and burn another hunk of forest, further encroaching on the primates' home. 

The irony is that tropical forests are abundant potential sources of human nutrition.
With intelligent management, Mr. Peterson argues, the forests could provide far higher yields of other foods, even if as he concedes, they wouldn't taste like steak au poivre. (Though he doesn't mention it, an experimental program in Costa Rica run by the Green Iguana Foundation is showing considerable success breeding iguanas in the rain forest, letting them sit on branches until nice and chubby and ready for the pot.) 

"The Deluge and the Ark" is almost as rich and diverse as the rain forest itself.
While Mr. Peterson is plainly full of fury, he remains graceful, polite and even somewhat optimistic.
He has written an important book that is also a pleasure to read. 

Mr. MacDonald is a writer living in High Falls, N.Y. 

