.START 

Goldman, Sachs & Co., Morgan Stanley & Co., Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. and Salomon Inc. -- have been secretly attempting to form a consortium to sell securities price information. 

The talks, initiated by Salomon and held over the past six to nine months, could have major implications for the dissemination of the world's stock, bond, currency and commodities-related price quotations. 

Wall Street executives familiar with the discussions say the four firms are trying to restore some of their diminishing control over the flow of electronic market data.
These big firms, and others, have been growing increasingly defensive about losing their traditional grip on such information -- as well as some of the revenue from producing it -- as independent electronic services grow more powerful. 

Jon S. Corzine, a senior partner at Goldman Sachs, confirmed that he and his counterparts at the three other Wall Street firms are discussing a joint venture to pool market data, but he declined to comment specifically. "We're still at an early stage," Mr. Corzine said. 

A Salomon spokesman declined to comment specifically on talks it is having with other firms. "We are continuously involved in discussions with people inside and outside the industry on the uses of technology," he said. 

Spokesmen at Morgan Stanley and at Shearson, which is 62%-owned by American Express Co., declined to comment. 

Any joint project from the four firms would be at least months away, said an executive familiar with the discussions.
But he said the firms have already shelled out $5 million each, which one participant in the talks called "seed money." 

The four securities firms are particularly concerned about the $4 trillion global bond market.
Bond data once was nearly impossible to get outside of Wall Street, but is now readily available through high-tech vendors of prices and market analysis, such as Bloomberg Financial Markets, which was created eight years ago.
Control of information about securities prices used to give the big firms a valuable edge in trading bonds and stocks and setting trading commissions. 

But terminals provided by the Bloomberg company, which is 30%-owned by Merrill Lynch & Co., are now being used world-wide by securities firms, institutional investors and central banks.
The Bloomberg system has become a major pipeline for the world's bond market data among sophisticated investors.
Bloomberg, in particular, has aroused the concern of big Wall Street firms. 

At a recent dinner meeting in Morgan Stanley's executive dining room, Mr. Corzine of Goldman joined high-level Wall Street bond market executives, including John J. Mack of Morgan Stanley, Shearson vice chairman Richard S. Fuld Jr. and Salomon managing directors Thomas W. Brock and Richard F. Leahy, according to individuals familiar with the meeting. 

There were immediate ego and technical problems to deal with. "It was like trying to shepherd a group of wild animals into a straight line," said one of the participants, who asked not to be named. 

The Bloomberg system was created by former Salomon partner Michael Bloomberg, who was a big trader and a technology specialist.
Executives at Salomon and the other firms insist they aren't out to "get" Mr. Bloomberg.
But one participant in a recent meeting notes a growing fear that "if he becomes big enough, the key market-making firms will become just players in the system." 

Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Shearson and Salomon all see independent electronic vendors making money from information that derives from the firms and their trading desks.
In the future, the firms see themselves getting more into the electronic publishing business just as entrepreneurs such as Mr. Bloomberg have. 

Mr. Bloomberg says he isn't ruffled by potential competition from these large firms. "Customers, who are the buy side, don't want to be beholden to a system owned by Wall Street, the sell side," says Mr. Bloomberg. "Customers prefer to have a system that is independent of Wall Street." 

The product the Wall Street firms envision would threaten any of several competing services, including Citicorp's Quotron unit, Reuters Holdings PLC or Telerate Inc. However, one of these other services could get a slice of the action if it is tapped as an electronic vendor to distribute it. 

Salomon and Quotron have already had discussions about such an arrangement, Salomon executives said.
And a Telerate spokesman said he was contacted just last week by a consultant claiming to be working for Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs and Salomon and other firms.
Telerate is 67%-owned by Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal.
Dow Jones has launched a tender offer to buy the remaining 33%. 

A Telerate spokesman said the Wall Street firms discussing an electronic system will need a distributor, and "we'd be happy to talk to see if there are any synergies for both sides." 

