.START 

Li Lu, an exiled veteran of the democracy demonstrations crushed in June by the Chinese communists in Tiananmen Square, examines his ballot, then writes in his choices for the leaders of the Federation for a Democratic China (FDC).
Behind him sits a delegate from Hong Kong.
Nearby are other Chinese from places as far-flung as Taiwan and California, Canada and Australia.
From behind long tables stacked with notebooks they watch as the votes are tallied on an easel at the front of the room. 

Thus is the leadership being installed, here in a blue-carpeted hall far from Beijing -- for a new organization that intends over the coming years to finally liberate the Chinese mainland.
Only a handful of China's leading democrats have been able to escape from China itself to cast their votes.
They are among 167 Chinese delegates who have come from more than a dozen countries to found the new federation.
This group aims to carry the torch for, among millions of others, the millions of Chinese who demonstrated and the thousands who died this past spring in the Tiananmen uprising for democracy. 

The calm scene, which took place Sunday in this Paris suburb, was a world away from the ragged tent encampment in Tiananmen Square, where the 23-year-old Mr. Li and his fellow demonstrators made their stand against the Chinese army.
Then, Beijing's citizens were dying in the surrounding streets, trying to protect the leaders of China's democratic movement from the approaching soldiers.
The Paris meeting featured French biscuits and a helpful hotel staff.
The determination was the same, however, as that which caught the sympathy of the Free World when TV cameras focused on China's 1989 protests. 

The Evry meeting generated intense debate about the best way to preserve the democratic aims of the movement.
A draft charter drawn up by some older delegates was revised to provide a more balanced leadership.
For several days after the conference ended Sunday, small groups were still thrashing out ways to resolve their differences.
Their aims are of the democratic and capitalist variety that deserve support not only from the French, but also from the U.S. State Department -- which in its eagerness to stay cozy with the Chinese regime has at best played pickup to the French in aiding China's democratic movement. 

The prime concern of the Bush administration so far seems to be the preservation of a "stable" situation in China.
The FDC's new general secretary, exiled Chinese businessman Wan Runnan, addressed this issue Sunday evening at a news conference held by the group's board of directors. "We understand that a stable China is in the interest of the United States," said Mr. Wan.
But he questioned whether it is possible now to have a stable China.
Both he and the FDC's new chairman, Yan Jiaqi, pointed out that communist rule has produced a corrupt, inefficient and repressive regime -- facing yet another massive power struggle when Deng Xiaoping dies.
Internal power grabs in the past have produced such horrors as the Great Leap Forward and the 1965-75 Cultural Revolution, in which millions died and hundreds of millions suffered. "China is hopeless without democracy," said Mr. Wan, adding, "I believe that making a democratic and stable China will be in the interest of the United States." 

The list of FDC delegates included a virtual who's who of the Chinese liberal thinkers who helped lead the protests in Beijing and were lucky enough to escape into exile: people such as Mr. Yan, who in China was the head of the Beijing Academy of Social Sciences; Beijing student leader Wuer Kaixi, just elected vice chairman (his name sometimes appears as Uerkesh Daolet); Nanjing student leader Li Lu, recently enrolled at Columbia University in New York; another social scientist, Chen Yizi; and film director Su Xiao Kang.
Since the June 3-4 attack on Tiananmen Square, many of their colleagues back home have been arrested or killed.
It is a sign of the will driving this movement that less than four months after some of these delegates fled China, they already have regrouped in exile, set up a world-wide federation, and vowed in their manifesto "to advance the cause of democracy" at home. 

It's hardly the first time that Chinese political outcasts have sought refuge and support in France.
China's 85-year-old supreme leader Deng Xiaoping came to Paris to meet fellow communists in the 1920s.
Some of Asia's other notorious communists also studied or sought support in Paris in their day, including Vietnam's Ho Chi Minh and Cambodia's Pol Pot.
This time the emigre dissidents have got themselves on the right course.
They have seen enough of the wreck the communists have made of China during the past 40 years; at their meeting in Evry they did not even give lip service to building a "better communist system" -- as some cautious reformers tend to do when playing to the secret police and party toughs back in Beijing. 

The FDC manifesto signed by Mr. Yan and Wuer Kaixi is fundamentally anti-communist.
It recognizes the link between property and liberty.
Among its statements: "Taking away the property rights of the citizens in the name of the state is one of the important causes of economic stagnation and political dictatorship in all countries dominated by a communist party." The manifesto adds another crucial insight: "Returning society's wealth to the people and developing private enterprise is the only road that will let China find a way out of its difficulties and achieve modernization." 

This, of course, is what many in the West had hoped Mr. Deng and some of his fellow cadres were aiming to achieve with China's economic liberalizations of the past 10 years.
That ambition now seems to have survived only underground in China or among Chinese abroad. 

What the FDC might do next is vague.
The federation's goals for now are to publicize the arrests and general persecution continuing inside China, try to drum up world pressure for change by the Chinese regime, and try to ensure that news of this gets back to the people of China.
The group says it plans to stick to peaceful methodsm -- but is still mulling over just what these might be.
A visitor to the FDC press office just set up at 10 Rue Faraday in Paris finds stacks of boxes yet to be unpacked in the four-room apartment, and two personal computers yet to be hooked up.
The first priority has been to get the organization up and running; now comes the tough business of taking on -- somehow -- the Chinese government. 

The manifesto of the Federation for a Democratic China does acknowledge drawing inspiration from the Nationalist government on Taiwan. "The FDC," it says, "is intimately concerned with the democratization process of Taiwan, and sees it as a profound influence for the cause of democracy in China and the rebirth of the Chinese nation." The FDC is also well aware that a failure to adhere to democratic principles cost the Nationalist regime the support it otherwise might have enjoyed -- in China and abroad -- in its own campaign to topple the communist dictatorship on the mainland. 

Miss Rosett is editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. 

