.START 

The treasurers of 10 states are pledging to invest public pension money to spur each other's local economies and defend hometown companies against hostile takeovers. 

The cross-investment agreement is a significant attempt by public officials to harness the tremendous wealth of rapidly growing public-employee pension funds, whose assets now approach $700 billion nationwide. 

Many politicians feel that public funds have done too much to assist takeovers, which they believe threaten local companies and jobs, and not enough to finance projects helping state and local economies.
As a result, they are focusing on ways to tap the funds' massive assets in ways that they say won't hurt the funds' returns. 

Catherine Baker Knoll, Pennsylvania's state treasurer, says public pension funds are "sleeping giants" that need to be awakened to spur economic growth.
She says her message to other states is: "Where can you get money to reinvest in America and in your state?
One place to look is in your pension funds." 

Treasurers of six of the states committed so far -- Maine, Nebraska, Delaware, North Dakota, Idaho and Pennsylvania -- are scheduled to meet today in Harrisburg, Pa., to sign the investment pledge, called the Reciprocal Investment Commitment of Conscience.
Signers agree to "use their moral leadership . . . to make their state pension funds aware of investment opportunities" in other states in exchange for those states' investments, according to a draft version of the pledge. 

Also endorsing the "golden rule" investing approach are Oklahoma, Rhode Island, New Mexico and Kentucky.
More states are expected to climb aboard later. 

The pledge is an example of so-called "social investing," in which pension fund money is used to prompt social goals such as financing local housing or small-business development. 

But critics are concerned that politicians want to use public pension funds to build roads and jails and to finance other social programs that ought to come directly out of state budgets.
The danger, critics say, is that pension funds will sacrifice safety and higher investment returns. 

"We're concerned about the trend of the states focusing on public fund assets as if they were state tax dollars," says Sarah Teslik, executive director of the Council of Institutional Investors, whose members are mostly public pension funds. 

Abbott Lebans, general counsel for Pennsylvania's three statewide funds, says that automatically opposing takeover bids from whatever source "amounts to protectionism for in-state institutions." He adds that "it's not in the nation's interest or in any one state's interest to protect the management of a company that's not doing well" from possible takeovers. 

Pennsylvania already has experience in using state powers to aid a local company.
In last year's bid for Pittsburgh's Koppers Co. by Britain's Beazer PLC, Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. was cut off from handling Pennsylvania's state securities business in retaliation for aiding Beazer as a bid adviser and lender.
Pennsylvania's public pension funds also asked Shearson to sever its role, but the matter was dropped when Koppers accepted a sweetened Beazer offer. 

More recently, Pennsylvania officials have intervened on behalf of Armstrong World Industries Inc. of Lancaster.
Canada's Belzberg family said in July that it owned a 9.85% stake in Armstrong and might seek control. 

"I don't think all hostile takeovers are bad, but I think that foreign hostile takeovers seem to have repercussions that are not conducive" to state and U.S. economic growth, said Mrs. Knoll, the Pennsylvania treasurer who took office in January and is a prime mover in the cross-investment agreement drive. 

The mutual assistance pledge doesn't commit the signatories to any specific actions or investment levels in each other's state.
Indeed, most state treasurers, while wielding broad financial powers, don't have sole discretion over their state pension funds. 

In Pennsylvania, for example, Mrs. Knoll holds one vote on the governing boards of the three statewide funds, but each board has 10 or more voting members.
None of the boards has taken a position on the cross-investing pledge. "I'm not sure what legal significance it has," says Mr. Lebans, the Pennsylvania funds' general counsel. 

The agreement reflects stepped-up efforts by officials in numerous states to put a shorter leash on the investment practices of their public pension funds. "The operation of every public pension fund in the country needs a thorough review and analysis" to see what they can do to assist their state economies, Mrs. Knoll says. 

Real estate is a major area where states can help each other by cross-investing, the pledge says.
In Pennsylvania's case, its three statewide funds for public employees have earmarked 10% of their $25 billion in assets to buy real estate.
Many other public funds also have 10% investment targets for real estate. 

Other states are taking different tacks in trying to redirect the investment policies of public pension funds.
In New York, a commission appointed by Gov. Mario Cuomo last summer urged legislation banning new investments by the state's public funds in leveraged buy-out pools unless they could withdraw from LBOs they didn't like. 

