.START 

Sony Corp. reached a definitive agreement to buy Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., marking the largest and most significant entry of a Japanese firm into the U.S. entertainment industry. 

Under the agreement, Sony will begin a tender offer valued at $3.4 billion, or $27 a share, ending two days of speculation about the details of the latest Hollywood mega-deal. 

Sony moved to secure the transaction by signing an option agreement with Coca Cola Co. to purchase its 49% interest in Columbia, which is due for ratification at a Coke board meeting Monday.
Sony also entered into an option agreement with Allen & Co., which owns a 3% interest in Columbia. 

Columbia stock climbed 25 cents to close at $26.50 a share yesterday, on volume of about 4.9 million shares, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Some Wall Street observers noted that until Coke ratifies the option agreement, another bidder could emerge at a higher price. "For the next three business days it could be open season for another bidder," said one large Columbia shareholder.
But insiders at Coke and Sony dismissed such speculation. 

Sony said the tender offer will begin next Tuesday, and will be scheduled to expire in 20 business days. 

Coke shares rose 50 cents to close at $64.625 a share in Big Board trading.
Selling Coke's 53.8 million-share stake in Columbia would give Coke proceeds with an indicated value of $1.45 billion. 

Meanwhile, Sony Corp. of America's vice chairman, Michael Schulof, acknowledged reports that the company is in discussions with Peter Guber and Jon Peters, co-chief executive officers of Guber-Peters Entertainment Co., regarding an arrangement whereby Mr. Guber would succeed Victor Kaufman as chairman and chief executive of Columbia, and Mr. Peters would also join the company in a senior position. 

Sony is also apparently discussing a purchase of Guber-Peters, which until recently was called Barris Industries.
The two executives own a 28% stake in the company, valued at about $39 million, based on Guber-Peters's latest price of $12.75 a share in national over-the-counter trading.
The issue didn't trade yesterday. 

A big stumbling block, however, is Guber-Peter's arrangement with Columbia rival Warner Communications Inc. 's Warner Bros. unit, for which Guber-Peters has produced such hits as "Batman," Warner's highest-grossing movie ever.
Just last month, Guber-Peters signed a new five-year exclusive movie production and distribution agreement with Warner, and the company has a number of films in production and development for Warner, including "Bonfire of the Vanities." 

Warner officials declined comment yesterday, and neither Mr. Gubers nor Mr. Peters returned calls seeking comment.
But the Guber-Peters talks with Sony apparently took Warner officials by surprise, even though the two producers are close friends with Warner Bros.
Chairman Robert Daly and President Terry Semel. 

Even if Warner decides to release the two from their exclusive arrangement, it is likely to prove extremely difficult for the producers to extricate themselves from their commitments at the studio, where many of their projects are already under way. 

Mr. Schulof of Sony said yesterday that "it wouldn't be appropriate" for him to discuss the relationship between Warner and Guber-Peters, saying the two sides would have to work the situation out. 

Sony's move into Hollywood provides the company with a crucial third leg for its global strategy of becoming an integrated entertainment software and hardware company.
Its purchase two years ago of CBS Records Inc. for $2 billion made it the world's largest record producer; it is already the leading manufacturer of audio hardware equipment, such as compact disk players and stereos. 

Sony has been eager to buy a movie company, to get its hands on a steady supply of filmed entertainment product to marry with its vast array of video hardware such as video recorders and TV sets.
With the control of a large motion picture library, it hopes to help boost sales of such new video technology as laser disks and 8mm video. 

Although Columbia has had a poor record at the box office in recent years and a revolving door in its motion picture executive suite, the studio has a huge library of films and one of the most profitable television production and syndication businesses in Hollywood.
Sony had joined on-again, off-again negotiations over price for more than a year with Coke and Columbia, but it wasn't until Sony decided to come up a few dollars per share in price and Coke decided to lower its expectations somewhat that the two sides were able to reach agreement. 

Mr. Schulof of Sony and his advisers at Blackstone Group began talking actively to Coke and its representatives at investment bankers Allen & Co. over the last several months and negotiated the definitive agreement last weekend.
Yesterday, Mr. Schulof said, "We felt it was an excellent quality library and a company with great potential." 

He added, "While we are fully aware of problems with the current slate of movie production, the basic qualities in the company are very solid and we don't think there's anything that's fundamentally a problem." As for the movie side of the business, "problems in movie production take only a few hits to turn around," he said. 

As part of the announcement yesterday, Columbia's president and chief executive, Mr. Kaufman, and the company's chief operating officer, Lewis J. Korman, said they would leave the company to pursue other interests, probably in the entertainment industry. "We're going to remain in the entertainment business," Mr. Kaufman said in an interview.
He added that leaving Columbia "was not an easy decision to reach, but both of us felt it was the right time to do different things." Mr. Kaufman stands to make about $30 million in the sale. 

Speculation yesterday centered on whether Dawn Steel, hired less than two years ago as the head of the Columbia Pictures movie studio, would stay on if Mr. Guber becomes head of the parent company.
Ms. Steel and Mr. Guber worked together on the movie "Flashdance" and are said to have good relations.
Ms. Steel declined comment.
Mr. Schulof, meanwhile, said that while he hasn't spoken to any Columbia executives, "I would hope that she would want to stay on, just like all management." 

Mr. Schulof noted that Sony's track record with CBS Records was "that management stayed, satisfied we were a good corporate parent." Although CBS Records has been struggling to regain lost market share, Sony has stayed out of the company's day-to-day affairs. 

Mr. Schulof said that Sony planned to run Columbia as an independent subsidiary with its own board; the studio will "interface" with him in the U.S. but not report directly to him. "We give a major subsidiary independent authority," Mr. Schulof said. "Our involvement tends to be encouragement." 

