.START 

Hit by a third-straight day of coordinated central-bank intervention, the dollar sank against all major currencies except the pound. 

The main central banks intervened in each other's markets and staggered their dollar sales, continuing a newly practiced approach designed to extract maximum effect from their actions. 

But for the most part, foreign-exchange traders said they don't believe the central banks' unrelenting assault has knocked the market to its knees.
They said the dollar can't be pushed much lower unless the interest-rate premium the U.S. enjoys over other major countries is trimmed. 

Also, the sheer size of the dollar's fall this week -- more than seven pfennigs since Friday -- may force central banks to pause to let the market digest the tumble, or their tactics could backfire, traders said. 

Although many dealers said some revision in central banks' tactics must be near, uncertainty over the potential war chest of new approaches ensures trading remains thin and jumpy. "You have to use reverse-reverse psychology to figure this thing out," said a foreign-exchange manager with a major U.S. bank. 

In late afternoon New York trading, the dollar was at 1.8794 marks, down from 1.8938 marks Tuesday, and at 140.15 yen, down from 142.40 yen.
Sterling was at $1.6173, down from $1.6180. 

In Tokyo Thursday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 140.70 yen, down from Wednesday's Tokyo close of 141.35. 

On Wednesday, the market awoke to intervention in Asian trading, where the Bank of Japan was joined by the West German Bundesbank and reportedly the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Bank of Canada.
The Bank of England sold dollars during Australian dealings.
At least eight European banks joined the Fed and the Bank of Canada in intervention through the European and early U.S. day.
The banks intervened jointly in two major waves and occasionally launched solo dollar selling missions.
The Fed reportedly sold dollars against yen and then against sterling through clandestine intermediaries during the New York afternoon. 

Pressured by the coordinated onslaught, the dollar fell to its intraday low of 1.8718 marks, but rebounded by the start of New York dealings and managed to climb about a pfennig off its lows despite the continued central-bank opposition. 

With many of the participants currently active in the market holding sizable short-dollar positions, they are hesitant to sell more and have begun to buy the central-bank sales in order to take profits. 

According to Donald Hubbard, treasury officer at Midland Bank PLC: "The lower you go, the less it will have an effect.
Right now, it looks as if the only real sellers down here are central banks. . . . You may, in fact, see the dollar rebound within the next 48 hours." 

Traders said the Bundesbank's central-bank council meeting, scheduled for Oct. 5, may provide some reinforcement for the struggle against the dollar. 

If the Bundesbank raises its key interest rates, many other European central banks are likely to follow suit.
The increased payback in interest-bearing European investments should draw money away from the dollar, dealers said. 

Most traders consider a West German rate increase increasingly likely, though by no means a sure bet. 

Sterling was hurt by the market's initial reaction to comments made by British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson, who is in Washington attending the annual International Monetary Fund and World Bank meetings.
He said the pound's fall since Tuesday was small. 

Dealers interpreted Mr. Lawson's statement to mean he wasn't concerned with the pound's recent decline.
But the British Treasury, elaborating on his remarks, said that a "a firm exchange rate remains an essential plank of our policy." 

On New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery settled at $367.60 an ounce, down 90 cents.
Estimated volume was a moderate 4.4 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Thursday, gold was quoted at $366.55 an ounce. 

