.START 

The U.S. declared South Korea's import quotas on beef to be an unfair trade barrier but said it is deferring retaliation until the ruling body of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade completes its assessment of the issue. 

The U.S. announcement signaled a long-delayed victory for the American Meat Institute, a Washington-based trade body representing U.S. meat packers and processors.
The institute filed its complaint against the quotas in February 1988, but U.S. action was stalled by the separate GATT investigation. 

A GATT dispute-settlement panel ruled in Washington's favor last summer, but that decision won't be binding until the Geneva-based body's highest authority, the GATT Council, votes on it.
Seoul several times has blocked consideration of the issue by the council, claiming that its unstable balance-of-payments condition justifies the existence of the quotas. 

The council is expected to take up the issue at its next meeting Oct. 11.
U.S. trade officials said a favorable vote would strengthen Washington's demands that the quotas be scrapped.
If Seoul still refuses to cooperate, the Bush administration has the authority to impose punitive duties on a number of South Korean products. 

After banning beef imports for more than three years, South Korea set a quota of 14,500 metric tons for the second half of 1988 and increased it to 39,000 metric tons in 1989.
The meat institute has charged that these curbs are costing U.S. packers several million dollars of potential sales. 

U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills said she is delaying retaliatory action to "allow additional time for the GATT process." She warned, however, that the U.S. will draw up a list of South Korean products to be subject to sanctions by mid-November "if substantial movement toward resolution of the issue in the GATT has not occurred by that time." 

The statement clearly was intended to caution Seoul against attempting to block the council's action again.
U.S. trade law allows Ambassador Hills to delay retaliation for 180 days under certain circumstances. 

