.START 

Braniff suddenly grounded its fleet of planes, triggering speculation the once high-flying carrier would file for bankruptcy-law proceedings for the second time this decade. 

A person familiar with Braniff's plans said a Chapter 11 filing was probable as early as this morning in Orlando, Fla., where the company recently moved its headquarters.
The airline's lightning-like cancellation of flights and widespread talk of a court filing baffled airline-industry officials.
But they pointed to Braniff's weakening financial position, caused -- ironically -- by overly aggressive expansion after emerging from its bankruptcy reorganization in the early 1980s. 

Last night, a Braniff spokeswoman said that she couldn't confirm the airline was planning a bankruptcy-law filing.
She added that she didn't yet know the airline's plans, and she and others declined throughout the evening to answer any questions about any of yesterday's activities.
Other people familiar with the situation said corporate directors met last night in Orlando. 

Braniff, a unit of BIA-COR Holdings Inc., abruptly began canceling flights at 2 p.m. yesterday, and employees at its Orlando and Kansas City, Kan., hubs were sent home.
Industry officials said Braniff aircraft arriving at those airports remained grounded. 

An official at Orlando's airport, where Braniff flies about 25 flights a day, said the airline told her only that flights were canceled for yesterday afternoon.
Linda Desrosiers, director of community relations at the airport, said Braniff didn't tell her anything about flights today. 

Pilots telephoning Braniff's scheduling office were told not to report to work and that the airline is scaling back operations, and eventually expects to fly only its 20 or so Boeing 727s. 

One source said the company, ranked 13th among the nation's 22 carriers based on capacity, will attempt yet another comeback as an even smaller carrier.
After slashing service, it hopes to gradually resume flights to 16 cities instead of the 40 it served until yesterday.
Included are typically high-volume destinations -- San Francisco, Los Angeles, Chicago, New York and Las Vegas, Nev.
Also in the plan are San Diego, Phoenix, Ariz., Dallas, Newark, Milwaukee, Detroit, Kansas City, Washington, Philadelphia, Boston and greatly reduced service through its Orlando hub. 

A top Braniff executive yesterday reassured worried Kansas City municipal officials that Braniff has no plans to permanently close down. "He told me that they are in the process of redoing and rescheduling the airline to create a viable, healthy airline," said Bob Lewellen, chairman of the city's aviation committee. 

Braniff officials remained closeted in meetings much of the day, and didn't return telephone calls seeking comment.
Their silence did nothing to quell the rumors that roared through the airline industry. "We have had an unconfirmed report that they have filed Chapter 11," said Lora Manlove, a travel agent at Ask Mr. Foster in Kansas City.
She said her travel agency began protecting all its clients booked on Braniff by rescheduling them on other airlines. "Everybody is," she said, referring to other travel agencies. 

A check of courts in several cities that might be likely venues for a Braniff bankruptcy-law filing disclosed none.
Still, rumors of an impending bankruptcy-law filing swept Wall Street, knocking down Braniff's stock.
The shares closed at $3, down $1.75, in over-the-counter trading. 

Braniff has been on shaky footing throughout the 1980s.
In what was then a historic filing, the company in a move not unlike today's suddenly closed down operations in May 1982 and then filed for bankruptcy-law proceedings.
At that time, Braniff also was regarded as a victim of over-ambition as it leaped into the fray of the newly deregulated airline industry. 

In its heyday, the airline made expansion moves as flashy as its planes, one of which was painted by renowned artist Alexander Calder.
Its flight attendants wore uniforms by Gucci and seats on all its planes were made of leather. 

The bargain-hunting Pritzker family of Chicago bought Braniff while it was still in bankruptcy court in 1983, and the once-proud airline returned to the skies in 1984.
But it began its comeback attempt almost too fast.
Critics said it tried too much service to too many destinations at once and had to back off. 

Then, last year, the Pritzker family sold Braniff for $105 million to a group led by Philadelphia investor Jeffrey Chodorow.
The transaction was arranged by PaineWebber Group Inc., which received a minority holding.
Mr. Chodorow installed as senior management three executives freshly departed from Piedmont Aviation, which had been bought by USAir Group Inc. 

Recently, Braniff once again moved for quick expansion, part of a strategy by its new chairman, William G. McGee, to transform the carrier into a $1 billion-a-year airline by 1991.
In January, Braniff unveiled plans to acquire as much as $3 billion of new Airbus Industrie planes.
Then it moved its corporate headquarters to Orlando.
And just two weeks ago, it agreed to lease $600 million of Boeing 737-300 aircraft.
Earlier it had concentrated its flights into Kansas City, just as Eastern Airlines left, complaining it was racking up losses of $1.5 million a day. 

In fact, Braniff blamed efforts to restructure its fleet and to build its Kansas City hub for the $42.8 million loss it posted for the six months ended July 31.
That was almost a dozen times larger than the $3.6 million deficit of a year earlier, even though revenue rose to $293 million from $226.5 million. 

Earlier this month, Braniff announced still more plans to increase its flights out of Kansas City, to 101 from 93.
Ultimately, the carrier planned to have over 200 flights operating out of the city. 

Calls yesterday to Braniff's passenger-reservation number illustrated the confusion caused by the sudden halt in service.
A reservations employee said there were some canceled flights but didn't know how many.
The airline "isn't telling us a number," he said. "I have been getting some irate calls" from customers.
Another employee at the company's Dallas reservation center said she hadn't received any explanation from Braniff management.
Repeated efforts to reach the toll-free reservation number late last night resulted in busy signals or no answer. 

In sharp contrast to Braniff's 1982 grounding, when it stranded travelers and caused considerable ill will, the airline this time apparently made some effort to minimize such damage.
It sent a message through its computer reservation system instructing managers at various airports to switch customers showing up for Braniff flights to "preferred carriers" such as Pan Am Corp., Continental Airlines Inc., Trans World Airlines, Midway Airlines, America West Airlines, Alaska Air Group and USAir.
Braniff, like most carriers, has certain ticket-transfer arrangements with other airlines. 

In recent weeks, Braniff had been cutting fares, such as reducing its seven-day advance-purchase fare between Chicago and Orlando to $176 from $236.
Executives at other airlines said they wouldn't match the reductions, viewing them as a distress signal rather than a competitive threat. 

