.START 

The Securities and Exchange Commission is squaring off with two big exchanges over options trading that the agency contends is fueling program trading and stock-market volatility. 

So far, the exchanges are refusing to back down. 

The SEC has asked the American Stock Exchange and the Chicago Board Options Exchange, in letters the agency hasn't made public, to have certain stock-index options expire in the morning rather than the afternoon.
The problem, the SEC argues, is that trading in the options creates increased volume and volatility in the Dow Jones Industrial Average between 3:30 p.m. and 4 p.m. Eastern time on the Fridays that the options expire. 

Moreover, the commission told the exchanges that having some futures and options expire in the morning while others expire in the afternoon "can give rise to the potential for abuse." Indeed, some traders and money managers say that expiration-related abuses are increasing -- and even starting to take on names of their own. 

At issue are so-called stock-index options, which are tied to a basket of stocks.
While many investors use the products as a bet on where the market is going, large professional investors can play the slight variations between the options and the underlying stocks -- a practice known as index arbitrage.
The SEC is concerned that these trades are whipsawing stock prices. 

Two of the more popular index options -- the CBOE's S&P 100 Stock Index option and the Amex's Major Market Stock Index option -- expire at the close of trading on their expiration day.
New York Stock Exchange data show that the index options increasingly are being used for index arbitrage.
The commission noted that exchange data show the two products each are used in 4% to 19% of the index arbitrage share volume.
The SEC argued that moving to morning options expiration would allow the stock market to correct order imbalances caused by waves of trading, usually by delaying the opening in a stock and finding a balance between buyers and sellers.
That process is used frequently in stocks that are affected by morning announcements for such things as takeovers. 

The commission said in its letters that it has "repeatedly" asked the exchanges since the spring of 1988 to switch to a morning expiration.
And it calls the exchanges' refusal to change "troublesome." 

Nevertheless, the exchanges aren't exactly jumping to comply.
In response to the requests, the CBOE and the Amex have commissioned a study to determine whether the options actually are contributing to volatility.
That study, by the same professors who studied "triple-witching hour," should be completed in January. 

But the exchanges aren't eager to switch. "We've consulted with our member firms," said CBOE Chairman Alger Chapman, "who without exception have told us leave it where it is." He added that tinkering with a product that has garnered 87% of the index-options market would be "foolish." 

That opinion is echoed by the Amex. "We want to see some statistical analysis," said Kenneth Leibler, the exchange's president. "We have seen no evidence . . . which would indicate that our option is the cause of that kind of stress at the close." 

But both executives added that they would be willing to reconsider the decision if the study conclusively shows the options caused added volatility. 

Program trading will be a focus of a hearing today by the House Telecommunications and Finance Subcommittee, whose chairman, Edward Markey (D., Mass.), has expressed concern about the stability of the markets. 

The options markets may have a bigger worry if traders prove to be right about abuses that they allege are prevalent. 

For example, the SEC told the Markey subcommittee in a recent report that "continuing rapid expansion of trading in index products raises significant surveillance and enforcement concerns." In particular, the agency is worried about "intermarket manipulation," where a firm pushes the futures price out of line with the prices of the underlying stocks, and "front-running," where a big player places an order in one market just before placing a big customer order in another market. 

While the SEC says it hasn't found instances of these activities, it remains concerned. 

One expiration abuse that money managers have seen this year has even acquired a name of its own.
It's called the "Paris march" -- named after the German army's inexorable entry into Paris in World War II. 

"It is a very, very tight domino effect," says one Chicago-based futures trader. "If you stand in their way during the expiration, you are going to have tire tracks on your back." 

The firms use a complex strategy of "shorting" the stocks underlying the S&P 100 options and both buying and selling options on the same stocks. (Shorting is a bet that the stocks will go down.) 

By abusing the strategy, the firms can move key market measures, in turn forcing other trading firms to begin to respond.
The gain to the firm engineering the "march" strategy comes from its ability to buy back its stock cheaper and boost the price of its own call options. 

