.START 

When word got out early this year that the Federal Asset Disposition Association might be put on the auction block by the government, eager banks, accounting firms and real-estate companies began lining up to bid. 

But now that a government official has recommended that FADA be sold next month without its most coveted asset -- contracts to manage and sell $1.8 billion of real estate taken from insolvent thrifts -- potential buyers are starting to put away their checkbooks. 

With the contracts, which generated $30 million in revenue last year, a buyer would have received a leg up -- if not a clearly dominant market share -- in the increasingly competitive business of managing real estate for the government. "Without the contracts, I'm not sure it's worth anything," says Stuart McFarland, chairman of Skyline Financial Services Corp., Falls Church, Va.
Mr. McFarland adds that he would bid for FADA only if the management contracts were included. 

Before FADA was created in 1985 by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the conservators and receivers appointed to take control of insolvent thrifts were responsible for disposing of the institution's foreclosed properties.
The now-defunct Bank Board hoped FADA would manage properties more efficiently, but from the start, it was plagued by bad publicity about the large salaries paid its top executives and for its seeming slowness in selling foreclosed properties. 

Although many of those problems had been resolved by new management, FADA was at the top of Congress's hit list when negotiations started earlier this year over the restructuring of the Bank Board and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. 

With the recent passage of the Bush administration's thrift-rescue package, responsibility for dealing with $400 billion in assets was handed to the newly formed Resolution Trust Corp.
And when the RTC said that it would contract out much of that responsibility, it was hit with a flood of applications from companies claiming real-estate management expertise. 

With assets and expertise in place, FADA seemed like a plum for anyone interested in competing for some of that business.
But many potential buyers were interested primarily in the valuable management contracts.
Although the full details of the package won't be known until the bid solicitations go out as early as next week, Steve Seelig, head of FDIC's liquidation division, says he has recommended that FADA be sold without the contracts. "It's our belief that that was Congress's intent" in ordering the agency's dissolution, Mr. Seelig says. 

Without the contracts, FADA would go on the block as a property-management company with four regional real-estate offices, an extensive computer system and a staff of about 275 people, including lawyers, appraisers and salespeople.
The computer system has attracted the attention of NCNB Corp. 's Texas banking unit, according to an NCNB spokesman, but Mr. Seelig says the FDIC wants to review bids for all of FADA before considering a piece-by-piece liquidation. 

Other bidders who were interested in FADA and its contracts, including Dallas-based BEI Foster Real Estate Services Inc., say they will think twice about making an offer for FADA as just another real-estate company. "You're basically selling an organization without much to work with," says Rob Adair, chairman of BEI Foster. 

But at least a few potential buyers say they're still willing to look at the bid packages.
Doug Brown, chairman of Grant Thornton's national real-estate industry committee, says the accounting firm may yet consider FADA for its staff and some of its fixed assets. 

And Joseph Robert Jr., chairman of J.E. Robert Cos. of Alexandria, Va., says he'll stay in the market for FADA although he concedes that he's unsure that FADA "in its present structure, can be competitive." Mr. Robert says he believes the agency can be made competitive, but he declined to share his strategy. 

Mr. Robert also cites FADA's staff and its experience in dealing with troubled real estate as a selling point, as does FADA President John W. Wills, who has been pushing for a prompt decision on FADA's future to help stem defections from the agency. 

Mr. Wills may have a point.
Just last Friday, Gene C. McQuown quit as regional manager of FADA's Dallas office, the largest of the agency's four real-estate offices.
Mr. McQuown started work Monday as vice president and Dallas regional manager of J.E. Robert Cos. 

