.START 

The Commodity Exchange plans to begin testing hand-held, computerized order-entry devices for floor traders by early next year. 

The Comex test would be the first for such futuristic devices.
They've been developed as part of a new push for automation in the futures industry amid the federal investigations of alleged fraud on commodity exchange trading floors in Chicago and New York. 

Comex, the major gold, silver and copper futures exchange, notified member traders of its planned test and said it should occur by the first quarter of 1990.
The exchange wouldn't comment publicly, but a spokesman said a news conference is set for today to introduce a new technology product. 

In August, Chicago's big futures exchanges, beset by the Federal Bureau of Investigation's undercover probe of alleged trading fraud, announced they were developing their own hand-held order entry terminals for floor brokers.
But the Chicago exchanges said the terminals probably won't be available for at least a year. 

Nearly every U.S. futures exchange has been developing computerized order-entry devices.
The devices will automatically record the precise time a trade is entered, replacing the handwritten trading cards used by brokers.
In past trading-fraud cases and in charges brought in August against traders on the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the government alleged that brokers often changed the size or time of a trade on their paper cards to disguise wrongdoing. 

The Comex system will operate using a diskette.
Traders will punch in trades on the hand-held device, which will record the time of the trade.
The diskettes will be collected periodically and information on them fed into the exchange's trade-processing computers. "You can't tamper with the input," said a Comex official familiar with the planned test. 

Separately, the New York Mercantile Exchange, the major oil futures marketplace, announced a pilot program in early October to test an off-hours automated trading system.
For three months, New York Merc member traders will test a system called ATS/2 developed by International Commodities Clearing House and currently being used on exchanges in London and in Ireland. 

The New York Merc had been in talks to join the Globex electronic trading system developed by the Chicago Merc, but in June those talks were suspended.
The New York exchange angrily vowed it would pursue electronic systems of its own. 

