.START 

On Sept. 17, Stratus Computer Inc. sounded like a safe bet.
Securities analyst Jeffrey Goverman of Soundview Financial Group was calling the company's stock "grossly underpriced" and rating it a "strong buy." John B. Jones of Montgomery Securities Inc. had Stratus as an "aggressive buy." 

Then came Sept. 18.
Stratus disclosed that its galloping growth had slowed, and that sales and earnings would fall well short of predictions.
Shocked investors bailed out with a wave of sell orders that drove the stock down 22% in a single day. 

Neither analyst wants to talk about it much now. "These days, if you're bullish, you're wrong," offers Mr. Goverman.
Mr. Jones, despite his poor timing, still likes Stratus. "Good companies are hard to find," he says. 

So are good stock pickers.
The Stratus rout wasn't the first time Wall Street's well-paid technology watchers have been wide of the mark.
It was but the latest in a series of embarrassing bad calls by computer analysts.
It's hard to find another industry where securities analysts are so wrong so often. 

Consider this list of stock-price plunges largely unanticipated by the technology gurus.
The shares of Sun Microsystems Inc., a Wall Street darling, fell 9% on July 28 -- not long after a 6.3% one-day drop in early June.
Unisys Corp. lost 9% of its market value on July 24.
Ashton-Tate tumbled 19% on June 13.
Cray Research sank 11% May 16.
And Microsoft shares fell 14% on March 7. 

Yesterday brought the latest setback.
International Business Machines Corp. jolted investors with the news that it expects sharply lower earnings for the current quarter, citing product transitions and the strength of the U.S. dollar.
The stock, which had been recommended by scores of analysts, fell 5% on huge volume. 

"Computer analysts might as well be walking around wearing 'kick me' signs," says James Cramer, a New York money manager.
At Cowen & Co., whose stable of stock pickers is often ranked among the best in the business, technology analysts award a symbolic hard hat to the latest colleague to see a recommended stock sour.
These days, no one keeps the hat for very long. 

In their defense, computer-stock pickers and some major investors argue that technology stocks have become alarmingly unpredictable, with management's own projections often coming nowhere near a company's actual performance. 

"I don't like having to strap on a seatbelt at my desk," says Peter Lynch, the head of Fidelity Investments' $11 billion Magellan mutual fund and one of Wall Street's most celebrated money managers.
He says he gets burned about five times a year by unanticipated drops in the prices of his computer-industry investments, and he poses the question: "If a computer company's president can't know what's going to happen in the next six months, how can the analysts know?" 

Regardless of who's most to blame for faulty forecasts, several banks, insurance companies and other big investors have recently given up on technology stocks or scaled back the amount of research they do in the area.
Dreyfus Fund, the big mutual fund, no longer does primary stock research in technology.
And Cigna Investments Inc., a unit of Cigna Corp., the insurance giant, says it is considering cutting back its technology coverage. "The carnage from being wrong is simply more than some institutional money managers are willing to bear," says David Readerman, a computer-industry analyst at the securities firm Shearson Lehman Hutton. 

Such wariness is reflected in the market.
Technology stocks have lagged behind the overall market by a wide margin of late.
In the past 12 months, Hambrecht & Quist's technology stock index is up 11.31% -- less than half the 28.28% increase in the Standard & Poor's 500.
There are many reasons besides the performance of stock analysts, of course, such as the sluggish sales of computers and software and the possibility of a recession somewhere down the road.
But there seems little doubt that the uncertainty added by faulty predictions has enhanced investors' wariness of the volatile field. 

Why do technology analysts so often miss the mark?
One explanation heard is that computer analysts, daunted by the complex nature of the computer industry's products, tend to delve too much into the technology itself and tend to neglect broader stock-market psychology. 

"Having vast and detailed knowledge of the technology or a company doesn't necessarily make you a great stock picker," says D. Larry Smith, a senior C.J. Lawrence analyst and former research director at Smith Barney. "The market is an emotional creature.
A stock price at any moment reflects a balance of negative and positive perceptions that join at a pinpoint." The fundamentals of a particular company may not matter a great deal if those perceptions shift suddenly, as they often do in technology, he says. 

With much of the computer industry in a slowdown, it isn't easy to find stocks to recommend, and many analysts have neutral or negative ratings on many of the stocks they follow.
But some critics complain that analysts -- under pressure to deliver "buy" recommendations that generate commissions and help pay their compensation, often more than $250,000 a year -- can lead investors astray by their willingness to believe that companies will do well largely because the companies themselves say so. "Analysts too often let themselves get carried away by unrealistic expectations of management," says Perrin Long, himself an analyst following the brokerage industry at Lipper Analytical Securities Corp. 

At the same time, the computer and other high-tech industries can change with extraordinary speed, and product cycles are short.
Lately, a broad shift toward new semiconductor designs and standardized software has rewritten the rules of the game.
Changes like this -- and the confusion they have wrought among buyers -- have made it hard for companies to forecast results even into the next quarter. 

Revenue forecasts are further complicated by the tendency among technology companies to close many sales in the final days of a quarter.
That amplifies the effect of any problems that crop up. 

In other cases, a company's problem is an inability to deliver a new product on time, a difficulty that has long dogged the technology world.
Microsoft's stock drop in March came after it announced that delays in two word-processing programs would hurt its profits. 

Even more than most companies, technology concerns depend on the individual people who develop their new products.
Truly creative computer jocks are hard to find.
Cray Research's stock dropped in May on news that its founder, Seymour Cray, would leave the company. 

Another problem is that many up-and-coming technology companies, especially software makers, rely on a single product for most sales.
On May 10, Bahar Gidwani of GE's Kidder, Peabody & Co. noted in a report on Ashton-Tate Corp.: "Investors seem to have only one big concern about Ashton-Tate's future -- will its new dBase IV product be successful? . . . We believe Ashton-Tate will put these fears to rest in the second half of 1989 by reporting strong sales." 

A month later, Ashton-Tate, which gets most of its sales from such personal-computer database software -- discovered bugs in dBase IV after the product had been shipped.
Its stock dropped $4.25 a share to $18.50.
Since then, the company has reported a second quarter loss and said it expects to post a third quarter loss as well. 

"It's been a very tough year," Kidder's Mr. Gidwani acknowledges, adding in his defense that he has warned customers away from other stocks that ran into problems. 

While no one keeps statistics, many Wall Street watchers agree that technology analysts strike out more than analysts following other industries. "The batting average of a computer analyst is inherently lower," says Barry S. Graubart, manager of information services at Nelson Publications, which tracks stock research. "The shelf life of an earnings estimate is much shorter, too, because things change so fast and the competition is so intense." 

The range of analysts' earnings estimates is broader in technology stocks than in almost any other industry, says Benjamin Zacks of Zacks Investment Research Inc., which monitors earnings forecasts.
And, he adds, "in the current environment of rapid change and uncertainty in the industry, the range of estimates has gotten even wider than usual." A broad range of estimates generally shows that analysts aren't sure what will happen to a particular stock. 

Even veteran analysts are falling victim to bad calls.
Jay P. Stevens, a senior analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., had a "buy" on Digital Equipment Corp. last March, on a day the stock lost $10 a share, or nearly 10% of its value. "Computer analysts have been getting clocked this year," he says. "It's no fun." 

PaineWebber Inc. 's Stephen Smith, who consistently places among the top computer watchers in Institutional Investor magazine's annual ranking, issued an "attractive" rating on Wang Laboratories in February.
He raised his earnings estimate for the year ended June 30 and declared that "the downside risk is low" on the stock.
Investors heeded his advice, and the stock jumped $1 the next day, to $10.125, with a huge volume of seven million shares traded. 

It's been downhill for Wang ever since.
Within weeks, Wang made the first in a series of negative disclosures -- including losses, layoffs and a prolonged debt crisis -- and went on to end the fiscal year with a $424 million loss.
The stock, meanwhile, has lost a third of its value since Mr. Smith urged buying it. 

Mr. Smith calls his recommendation of Wang "a classic case of bottom-fishing, in a clearly risky situation.
One of the toughest things to do in this business is realize when you're wrong, and we saw that within weeks in this case.
It was a humbling experience." 

IBM's surprise disappointment yesterday is likely to add to investors' caution about technology stocks.
First Boston Corp. 's Steven Milunovich, who like many other analysts had a "buy" rating on IBM just before it plunged, called IBM stock "the best of a bad lot." 

Nearly every technology analyst has been wounded. "I've dodged a few bullets," says Dean Witter's Mr. Stevens. "But if you're not getting shot once in a while, you're covering some other industry." 

