.START 

Sir John Nott will retire as chairman and chief executive of Lazard Brothers & Co. at year end, handing the reins to Michel David-Weill, who will become the first person to head the Lazard group's British, French and U.S. operations concurrently. 

Mr. David-Weill already exercises effective voting control over half the equity in Lazard Brothers, the investment-banking group's British operation, according to a Lazard official.
Pearson PLC, the British media group, owns the rest of Lazard Brothers.
Mr. David-Weill also is senior partner of the Lazard group's French and U.S. arms, Lazard Freres & Cie. and Lazard Freres & Co.
The three Lazard firms are linked through complicated cross-shareholdings. 

Mr. David-Weill, 56, will become chairman of Lazard Brothers.
David Verey, 38, a rising star in Lazard Brothers' mergers-and-acquisitions department, will move up to chief executive from deputy chief executive.
Marcus Agius, 43, and John Nelson, 42, both London-based managing directors, will become vice chairmen of Lazard Brothers. 

Sir John, a 57-year-old former British defense secretary who has headed Lazard Brothers for five years, initiated his own departure, Lazard officials said. "His record has always been spending five years at something and then moving on," said a colleague. "He feels now it's time to move on." Sir John didn't return phone calls yesterday. 

Mr. David-Weill said Sir John "indicated he had done what he set out to do, and now he wants to do something else." 

Sir John helped steer Lazard away from the pitfalls encountered by many competitors that acquired British securities-trading and sales operations prior to the deregulation of London's financial markets in 1986.
Instead, he focused on boosting fee-producing operations like mergers-advisory services.
Lazard Brothers ranked eighth among British bid advisers in the first half, up from 11th a year earlier.
Combined with the Lazard Freres operations, it would have ranked third.
One Lazard Brothers client is B.A.T Industries PLC. Mr. Verey helped mastermind B.A.T's current restructuring plan, aimed at defeating a #13.35 billion ($21.62 billion) bid from Sir James Goldsmith. 

Mr. David-Weill, who represents the fourth generation of a French banking family, said in an interview from Paris that his assumption of the Lazard Brothers chairmanship reflected the increasing "globalization of industrial thinking" that is bringing the world's financial and business markets closer. 

"Our clients want to have the advantage of speaking to two and sometimes the three firms combined.
Having a {single} chairman will make that easier," he said.
The three firms, he added, "have difficult sorting-out to do, all the time.
If it is done for a time with one single voice, the sorting-out will be very easy." 

What Sir John will do next isn't clear.
Mr. David-Weill and other Lazard directors said Sir John hasn't told them what he plans, though some speculate he may be appointed chairman of a major British company, or perhaps re-enter politics. 

Energetic, outspoken and at times impatient, Sir John entered British politics in the mid-1960s after training as a lawyer and investment banker.
He rose to become defense secretary during the Falklands War, only to quit in 1983 in a dispute over the future course of the Thatcher administration. 

