.START 

Lifeguards cavort in swimsuits, sharp-jawed young men run around with guns, shapely models-on-the-way-up shimmy through New York.
They're the warp and woof of network television, the images that have danced through living rooms for years.
They win ratings, and more importantly, they help sell products to advertisers' favorite consumers. 

This new TV season is no different.
Except on CBS.
There you'll find a 42-year-old career Marine major; a congressman; a zookeeper; Richard Chamberlain playing a doctor in Hawaii.
They join such CBS stalwarts as Angela Lansbury, Bob Newhart and Jane Wyman. 

In a striking denial of conventional programming wisdom, CBS Inc. 's TV network has elected to virtually ignore the teen and young adult market in prime time and deliberately gear its shows to a bedrock audience of older viewers.
Now program executives have new marching orders for Hollywood producers: If the show sounds like "Miami Vice," we're not interested. 

"They're telling every producer to add 15 years to their characters," says a rival network executive. 

In the past, CBS tried hard to attract viewers aged 18-34.
But the network just couldn't get it right.
Even when it was No. 1 in overall "household" ratings earlier this decade, it was known as the "gray" network.
The morbid joke was that CBS was losing 5% of its audience a year -- to death. 

CBS came to its new strategy this past spring when it picked the fall schedule premiering now.
Though executives had ordered shows involving youth icons Eddie Murphy, Dan Ackroyd, Julie Brown and Moon Zappa, none were picked up as regular series for September. 

Instead, CBS scheduled shows like "Major Dad," "Island Son" and "Peaceable Kingdom," while renewing marginal shows like "Paradise," "Tour of Duty," and the aging "Dallas," "Knots Landing" and "Falcon Crest." 

CBS research guru David Poltrack has been preaching the virtues of older viewers for years, arguing that their discretionary income is high and will rise even more as the baby boom generation ages. "Thirty-five plus is where the action is," he keeps saying. 

For years, that seemed like an afterthought, the lame refuge of desperate CBS ad sales people.
NBC Entertainment President Brandon Tartikoff nicknamed Mr. Poltrack CBS's "vice president of excuses." But Mr. Poltrack kept proselytizing, and his ideas have finally found favor. 

Some advertisers are still baffled by the strategy. "I'm not knocking CBS," says John Sisk, a senior vice president at J. Walter Thompson, "but the main arena for network television is still 18 to 34." 

Some Hollywood producers aren't very happy with the new CBS approach, either.
They won't talk on the record -- they still have to sell shows to CBS -- but their argument runs like this: Shows that cater to older audiences tend to be more traditional, more formulaic.
They elevate the familiar and the comfortable. 

These producers say that CBS is the No. 3 network, and it should follow the prescription used successfully by NBC in the early 1980s and by ABC more recently, when each network rose from the ashes.
With more open slots on their schedules, the networks became more experimental and gave slow-building shows a chance.
That's what NBC did with "Hill Street Blues" and "Cheers" and what ABC did with "Moonlighting" and "thirtysomething." 

Nowadays, No. 1 NBC uses older-skewing shows like "Matlock" only for counterprogramming purposes.
Mr. Tartikoff has compared the shows' demographics to a "cancer" or "virus" -- better to quarantine them on particular nights so they don't bleed all over the schedule. 

But taking risks in this era of dwindling network share takes more guts than ever. "When failure was a 20 share, it was OK to experiment," says Robert Harris, president of Imagine Entertainment. "Now, failure's an 8.
The definition of the bottom has changed.
It's a disaster as opposed to a problem." He says CBS renewed the low-rated but older-skewing "Tour of Duty" and "Paradise" because they had a "floor" audience of loyalists. 

Mr. Poltrack concurs: "When people ask me if we'll beat ABC this season, I say that the race for No. 2 will be determined not by the shows at the top of the ratings but the ones at the bottom." 

As young viewers increasingly sample MTV, Nickelodeon and the Fox network, the competition for youth is even fiercer.
Last year's CBS attempts were particularly catastrophic: "TV 101" (high school), "Dirty Dancing" (from the movie) and last summer's "Live-In" (about an Australian au pair) all bombed. 

Part of the problem is promotion.
How can you plug a program geared to young people during "60 Minutes" or "Murder, She Wrote"?
Last year CBS was forced to buy ads for its young-skewing target audience on MTV because there were so few places on its own schedule to advertise; this season only one show, "The Famous Teddy Z," requires MTV.
And on that show, about a young man just out of the army who winds up working at a Hollywood talent agency, CBS's suggestion to producers was to add a grandmother. 

"Major Dad" is CBS's flagship show this season.
It scored higher than any other among test audiences, and the network chose it to lead off its key Monday night comedy lineup.
Gerald McRaney plays a ramrod-straight Marine major who marries his opposite, a liberal reporter.
He moves in with her houseful of kids and conflicts ensue.
Normally, executives would pray that one of the kids would "break out" and win a young following -- like a Michael J. Fox or a Kirk Cameron. 

But when MCA Inc. 's Universal Television first brought the show to CBS, Mr. McRaney played a widower with children.
The network suggested the producers add the wife and not let the kids take over. "The adults," executive producer Earl Pomerantz says firmly, "are the focus." The network has coaxed another new comedy, "The People Next Door," in the same direction. 

These moves dovetail neatly with CBS's theories on other fronts: It has more prime time news than competitors, it bid more to air baseball games and the Olympics, it has been aggressively buying theatrical motion pictures and it has begun a major cross-promotion with K mart Corp. 

CBS executives also say that because many older viewers live alone, programming to an older audience will improve CBS's overall "household" ratings.
Advertisers may buy demographics, not households, they say, but there is still an important psychological advantage to finishing first or second in the household ratings race. 

CBS has its supporters.
Betsy Frank, a senior vice president at the Saatchi & Saatchi ad agency, says network television itself is increasingly the province of older viewers. "For years, David Poltrack was a lone voice in the wilderness, and a lot of it came across as self-serving.
But I'll tell you, the man was right." 

Adds Jack McQueen, the senior vice president at Foote, Cone & Belding's FCB/Telecom: "When you're No. 3, you have to have a strategy that differentiates you from the other guys." 

CBS doesn't want to differentiate itself too much, though, lest it feed the idea that it is abandoning the mission of being a traditional broad-appeal network like NBC and "narrow-casting" to its mature niche.
CBS Entertainment President Kim LeMasters says that episodes of several shows that appeal to young people have been ordered as midseason replacements. "We're dedicated to having a full-spectrum demographic," he insists. 

But Mr. McQueen counsels consistency.
He cautions that troubled networks have a tendency to panic, to pull the plug on new shows too quickly, to shift gears without warning. 

"They have a new strategy," he says of CBS. "Now I hope they'll stick to it." 

