.START 

Toys "R" Us Inc., which has been gobbling up market share by aggressively expanding operations abroad, is ready for another bite -- this time in cooperation with McDonald's Co. of Japan. 

The two children's market giants plan to jointly open four to six toy stores in Japan in 1991 and up to 100 stores in the years following, said Robert Nakasone, vice chairman and president of Toys "R" Us's world-wide toy stores. 

Under terms of the agreement, Toys "R" Us, based in Rochelle Park, N.J., will own 80% of the new venture.
McDonald's of Japan, which is 50% owned by McDonald's Corp., Oak Brook, Ill., will own the remaining equity and have the option of operating restaurants on toy store sites. 

The plan would mark the first move by Toys "R" Us into the Japanese market.
It expanded into the Canadian and European markets five years ago and has grown rapidly since. 

The concept of combining a fast food outlet with a retail store isn't new.
In the U.S., Woolworth Co. has been operating 19 Burger King restaurants alongside its department stores.
Like other franchisees, it pays Burger King a percentage of its sales. 

In Japan, where U.S.-style shopping malls are a rarity and mom-and-pop stores dominate retailing, such business combinations could make even greater sense, analysts said.
At least initially, Toys "R" Us, which had been looking for a Japanese partner for two years, will rely on the expertise of McDonald's of Japan in picking sites. 

Den Fujita, president of the 675-store McDonald's Co. of Japan, "has a pretty good reputation in Japan," said Dan Barry, toy analyst for Kidder Peabody. "Toys "R" Us is looking for him to open a few doors." 

Although its goal is to open about 100 stores in Japan eventually, Toys "R" Us officials expect growth in the first few years to be gradual.
While stores might do twice the volume of stores in the U.S., margins are expected to be about the same, due in part to the high cost of real estate in Japan. 

Toys "R" Us declined to name specific store locations but said they would be in "major cities." 

Toys "R" Us changed the concept of toy retailing by offering consumers "a supermarket" of toys at low prices.
Its stores are stuffed to the rafters with 18,000 toys, and shoppers use shopping carts. 

Five years ago it took that concept to Canada and Europe, where the toy supermarket was almost nonexistent.
Since 1984 the toy chain has opened 27 stores in Canada, 41 in Europe and six in Asia. 

For the year ended Jan. 29, 1989, Toys "R" Us reported net income of $268 million, or $2.04 cents a share, on sales of about $4 billion.
About 9% of its sales come from foreign markets. 

In Japan, as in other parts of the world, about 80% of the toys on the shelves will be the same as those sold in the 

Under terms of the agreement, McDonald's won't participate in the management of the toy stores. "Our position is that of a passive investor," a company spokesman said. 

Analysts point out that the strategy is similar in part to an agreement between McDonald's of the U.S. and Sears, Roebuck & Co., which sells children's clothes and toys through its McKid's division.
In the Sears-McDonald's deal, certain clothes and toys carry the McDonald's trademark.
In the Toys "R" Us arrangement, however, toys won't bear the McDonald's label. 

