.START 

Apple Computer Inc. said it won't invest in U.S. Memories Inc., the consortium set up last June in a bid to retake part of the semiconductor market from Japan. 

The move deals a setback to U.S. Memories, which is seeking major investors to back its efforts to enter the $10 billion market for dynamic random access memory chips (DRAMs), which store data in everything from cars to computers. 

Separately, Cypress Semiconductor Corp. 's chief executive officer, T.J. Rodgers, launched a new assault against U.S. Memories by urging International Business Machines Corp. to transfer its chip-making technologies to Cypress instead of to U.S. Memories. 

An Apple spokeswoman said that "after looking over our many options," that it became clear that "the U.S. Memories option doesn't fit into our priorities at this time.
There's no direct benefit to our customers." She said Jean-Louis Gassee, president of the Apple products division, made the decision. 

U.S. Memories President Sanford Kane said Apple hasn't given him its final word yet.
LSI Logic Corp. Chairman Wilfred Corrigan, chairman of U.S. Memories, plans to meet with Apple officials next week to try to persuade them to invest. 

Still, U.S. Memories officials contend Apple's decision isn't a major blow.
Mr. Kane said he expects to announce three or more new investors within three weeks.
That, he said, would provide a catalyst for other companies to join. "It will be a month before all this comes together, then it will take off," Mr. Corrigan said. 

The Apple decision "is not a major setback from the standpoint of the numbers" of companies or dollars, Mr. Kane said, but "it could be a political setback." It would be a political setback because Apple, with a large share of the personal computer market and a prominent corporate image, was seen by observers as a key potential ally to U.S. Memories. 

Apple said it isn't likely to change its mind.
Unlike many chip makers, the company doesn't need memory chips to fill out its product line, the spokeswoman said.
Apple has a policy of buying its chips from a wide range of suppliers around the world and feels its resources are better directed toward research and development spending, she said. 

Mr. Kane became president and chief executive of U.S. Memories last June, when the consortium was set up by a group of big electronics concerns: Advanced Micro Devices Inc., Hewlett-Packard Co.; Intel Corp., IBM, LSI Logic and National Semiconductor Corp. 

Each investing company will purchase a 1% to 10% share, or make a $5 million to $50 million investment, in U.S. Memories, which will be run as a for-profit venture.
Members will commit to buying a total of 50% of chip production.
The $1 billion venture, which will make chips based on IBM technology, seeks to grab a 5% to 10% share of the world DRAMs market. 

In 1977, the U.S. had a commanding 70% share of the DRAMs market, but it lost out to a fierce market share push by Japanese conglomerates in the mid-1980s.
The Japanese now command about 90% of the market for the lastest DRAMs. 

Mr. Kane has crisscrossed the country with his gospel, imploring chip makers and chip users such as Apple to join up and help restore the U.S. strength in DRAMs.
Computer makers, he has said, were hurt by U.S. weakness in DRAMs last year, when chips were in short supply and Japanese vendors didn't provide enough chips for U.S. companies.
Mr. Kane said he has met with top officials of 17 companies and plans to meet with 28 more companies. 

The meetings, he said, have been "highly enthusiastic.
I have no reason to be anything but optimistic." 

Companies other than Apple haven't said whether they will join.
A Sun Microsystems Inc. spokeswoman said the company is still evaluating the venture.
AST Research's president and chief executive, Safi Qureshey, said he met with Mr. Kane last week but hadn't decided yet whether to invest in the venture.
Still, companies like AST have welcomed U.S. Memories as a new supplier. "If U.S. Memories has quality, availability and price -- if those things are met -- we'd love to do business with them," he said. 

U.S. Memories will finish a detailed business plan later this month, Mr. Kane said, and the consortium will select a factory site shortly thereafter.
Fifteen states have submitted siting proposals, he said. 

Mr. Kane is scheduled to testify today before the House Judiciary Committee's subcommittee on economic and commercial law.
Mr. Kane said he plans to say that consortiums such as U.S. Memories need changes in laws to keep them from being accused of antitrust violations.
Although Mr. Kane said he won't ask for federal funding, he said he plans to call for Congress to take action to "remove obstacles that prevent the precompetitive cooperation needed" among U.S. companies to meet the challenge from Japan. 

Mr. Rodgers of Cypress, a virulent critic of consortiums, earlier testified that U.S. Memories posed a threat to competition in the U.S. 

A Cypress spokesman said Mr. Rodgers sent a letter to IBM yesterday in which he proposed that IBM transfer its four megabit and 16 megabit chip technologies to Cypress instead of to U.S. Memories.
In exchange, Cypress would provide royalties and a guarantee of supply. 

Mr. Rodgers said in an interview that Cypress can make the same chips "faster, better and cheaper by a factor of 50 without having to jerk around the antitrust laws in the U.S." 

