.START 

International Business Machines Corp. said it has asked computer-accessory makers to produce adaptor cards for its PS/2 line of computers that will enable them to transfer data two to four times faster than they currently do. 

IBM said the cards will unlock capabilities already built into its PS/2 line, which features the so-called Micro Channel data pathway.
The cards won't be available until at least some time next year, IBM said, although officials added that some cards currently available can speed data transfer in PS/2 models, which first hit the stores in 1987. 

The announcement by IBM, Armonk, N.Y., represents the latest escalation of the marketing battle between it and a group of rival personal-computer companies known as the Gang of Nine.
The battle is over whose data pathway, IBM's Micro Channel or its rivals' Extended Industry Standard Architecture, or EISA, will become the industry standard.
The battle stems from offices' growing reliance on personal computers, as opposed to work stations, which has resulted in a need for more flexible, faster-working PCs. 

Not surprisingly, Michael Swavely, president of the North America division of Gang of Nine leader Compaq Computer Corp., wasn't impressed with IBM's announcement. "It's the same old stuff," Mr. Swavely said, adding, "IBM doesn't have any new products to announce," thus, "it's trying to fight the market-share war with words." 

IBM said that, with certain of the 29 different adaptor cards it's asking manufacturers to produce, Micro Channel PCs will be able to double the rate at which they transmit data.
The speed will be added by eliminating the need to send information on where the data are going before the data are actually transmitted.
With the card, IBM said, the two functions will occur simultaneously. 

Meanwhile, other adaptor cards will enable PS/2s to transmit data four times faster, using a technology known as multiplexing.
A telephone term, multiplexing is a way of compressing data so that more than one conversation can occur on the same line at the same time. 

In a related development, IBM said it entered into agreements with Chips & Technologies Inc. and with Intel Corp. to develop chip sets to facilitate the use of the new adaptor cards. 

