.START 

Robert D. Kaplan ("Correcting Carter's Ethiopian Disaster," editorial page, Sept. 7) obviously labors under the misapprehension that events around the world take place only in the straitjacketed framework of U.S. politics and in consequence of the argument between liberals and conservatives in this country.
To say that Ethiopia was up for grabs by the U.S.S.R. "because Mr. Carter, appalled at Mr. Mengistu's human-rights abuses, had refused to continue Henry Kissinger's Ethiopia policy" is simply absurd.
Ethiopia went over to the Soviet Union because that was where President Mengistu wanted to take it.
He tried mightily to do so during 1975 and 1976, which coincidentally were the Ford-Kissinger years in this country, but never quite managed, both because he was not then fully in charge in Ethiopia and because the Soviets weren't yet convinced that he was a solid bet. 

Mr. Mengistu was able to achieve his goal only after he shot down Gen. Teferi Bante, the head of state chosen by the Ethiopian military junta, and a dozen or so of his associates at a meeting on Feb. 3, 1977, that had been arranged to discuss differences between the two men.
Well before that, Messrs.
Ford and Kissinger had given up on what Mr. Kaplan calls "Kissinger's Ethiopia policy." The budget proposal submitted by the Ford administration in its closing days carried no provision for further military assistance to Ethiopia.
After Mr. Mengistu's bloody takeover, which not coincidentally he accompanied with a speech violently denouncing the U.S., the Carter administration simply ratified its predecessor's decision and slapped a human-rights rationale onto the political one.
When Mr. Mengistu did get around to breaking off with the U.S. in April 1977 (when he expelled most U.S. diplomatic personnel and denounced the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement), the reason involved was not the U.S. cutoff of military assistance but the closure of the U.S. military communications station in Asmara, a move planned since early in the Nixon administration. 

As for U.S. famine-relief aid to Ethiopia, a small number of officials in the Reagan administration did in fact try in 1982 and 1983 to cut off supplies channeled to Ethiopia through Catholic Relief Services, but did not succeed.
When the administration, much to its credit, launched its massive relief program for Ethiopia in the fall of 1984, after the drought that struck earlier that year, it did so principally in the humanitarian belief that people should not be left to starve no matter what the politics of their government.
I should add that quite a number of people in the U.S. -- both senior Reagan officials and liberals -- entertained for some time the unrealistic hope that the U.S. program would influence Mr. Mengistu's policies. 

David A. Korn 

Washington 

(Mr.
Korn was permanent U.S. charge d'affaires in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 1982-1985, and is the author of "Ethiopia, the United States and the Soviet Union," Croom-Helm, London, and Southern Illinois University Press, 1986. 

