.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

TELEVISION AND THE RUSH TO SUBURBIA, two post-World War II phenomena, would eventually spell big trouble for big-city newspapers.
Giants like William Randolph Hearst could hang on to a 26-paper chain but after he died in 1951, his heirs folded, merged or sold dailies in Los Angeles, San Francisco, Milwaukee, Chicago, Detroit, Pittsburgh and Boston.
May 7, 1967, was a day of foreboding, particularly for afternoon papers, long the dominant force among daily newspapers. 

On that day, Hearst lost his voice in New York City, as did two other major publishers, the Scripps-Howard chain and John Hay Whitney. 

The last gasp for all three was an afternoon paper called the World-Journal-Tribune, an eight-month old amalgam of Hearst's afternoon Journal-American and Scripp's World-Telegram & Sun and Whitney's morning Herald-Tribune.
The Journal and the World-Telegram had been flagships of their chains and Jock Whitney's Trib was one of the most respected papers in the country. 

All three papers had been plagued by falling and volume and rising labor costs.
In desperation, they merged in 1966 into the World-Journal-Tribune, "The Widget." Symptomatic of their troubles was that after merging in April, labor bickering kept the Widget off the newsstands until September.
The end came when Whitney refused to keep subsidizing the paper's $700,000-a-month losses.
Its death left the afternoon field to the ever-dying, everlasting Post, and the mornings to the New York Times and the tabloid Daily News as general newspapers. 

The balance between morning and afternoon dailies would remain constant until the mid-1970s, but television and the newer suburban dailies were taking their toll.
It was to be death in the afternoon.
In 1975, there were 339 morning papers and 1,436 afternoons.
By 1980, the AMs were up to 387 and the PMs down to 1,388, and by 1988 morning readers could find 529 papers while the going-home crowd was down to 1,141. 

