.START 

For pure theatricality playwright Tennessee Williams has met his equals in Vanessa Redgrave and Sir Peter Hall.
Ms. Redgrave is the star and Sir Peter the director of a new production of Williams's "Orpheus Descending," which was produced in London last season and has just opened here at the Neil Simon Theater. 

Williams always had a penchant for melodrama; his first piece of writing, at age 16, was a horror story published in "Weird Tales," and his later writing was filled with mutilation and cannibalism.
At the same time, there was always a tender, sensitive streak in him that came out in characters in all his plays.
In "Orpheus Descending" there is a story of a bird who is on the wing all its life.
It has no legs, and once it touches ground, it dies.
This is clearly Williams's symbol for the poetic soul that cannot survive amid the violence of life. 

All of this is in "Orpheus Descending" virtually every theme and every type of Williams character is crammed into the play.
Perhaps this is why it was so important to him.
An earlier version, called "Battle of Angels," was produced in 1940 by the Theater Guild but closed in Boston without ever coming to New York.
Williams never gave up on it, though, and 17 years later it emerged on Broadway as "Orpheus Descending" directed by Harold Clurman. 

The play revolves around Lady Torrance, daughter of an Italian wine grower in a small Southern town who angers the Ku Klux Klan by selling wine to blacks.
The Klansmen burn his vineyard and outdoor garden cafe and he perishes in the fire.
Jabe Torrance (Brad Sullivan), one of the men responsible for the fire, marries Lady and together they run a general store and confectionery.
As the play begins, Jabe is dying, surrounded by a gaggle of true Williamsesque eccentrics: two old-maid sisters (Bette Henritze and Peg Small) who hover around Jabe like black crows, two town gossips (played with wicked relish by Sloane Shelton and Patti Allison), and a black conjur man (Doyle Richmond).
Added to this gallery are characters who stand for the wild, creative spirit that Williams feels gets trampled in small Southern towns: the sheriff's wife (Tammy Grimes), who sees visions and paints primitive pictures, and Carol Cutrere (Anne Twomey), the free-spirited daughter of the richest family in town. 

Enter Val Xavier, the Orpheus of the title and also a symbol of the Savior, as his name is meant to suggest.
Val is a drifter who plays the guitar, but he understands the aspirations and the distress of the sheriff's wife, of Carol Cutrere, and most of all, of Lady Torrance.
These desperate women cling to this young, vulnerable musician like Spanish moss to an oak tree. 

This may sound like the kernel of a realistic play, but Williams makes it clear in the script that the play is not meant to be realistic at all.
At the very beginning, when one of the town gossips is giving us the background of the story, he states that she should speak directly to the audience. "This monologue," he writes, "should set the non-realistic key for the whole production." Director Hall has taken Williams at his word and made not only the monologue but the entire play non-realistic. 

The curtain rises to the sound of angry dogs baying and ominous bass chords sounding.
The cluttered Torrance store is silhouetted against a ghostly, cloud-flecked sky.
And the stage lighting is totally arbitrary: One moment a single character is spotlighted, the next moment the full stage is burning with light.
This is all unsettling and endlessly exciting, true to the Williams vision and supporting the performance of Sir Peter's leading lady, Ms. Redgrave. 

Always a risk taker, she pulls out all the stops here, reckless of the spectacle she might make of herself.
As it turns out, she provides one of the most riveting, electric performances of recent times.
Running the gamut from wild, uncontrolled laughter, to barely concealed contempt, to tender pathos, Ms. Redgrave is acting from her inner gut to the edges of her fingertips every moment of her three-hour performance. 

In a scene near the end of act I, Ms. Redgrave confronts her former lover, the rich hometown boy David Cutrere (Lewis Arlt).
In revealing to Cutrere for the first time that she had aborted his child, she becomes alternately angry and ashamed, desperate and determined, and also displays a deep longing for what might have been.
The ability to convey such a turmoil of emotions all at the same time is the difference between a great instinctual actress and a merely talented one. 

As Val, Kevin Anderson can be forgiven if he does not fully match Ms. Redgrave's performance pitch.
All the same, he gives an extremely good account of himself, showing both tenderness and dignity as the "fugitive kind" who was so central to Williams's work. 

The production is not, however, without its problems.
Ms. Redgrave affects a heavy Italian accent one must get past to appreciate the full measure of her accomplishment.
The minor characters, particularly the rednecks, often are stereotypes, both in the playing and in the writing.
And Williams did try to crowd too many characters and ideas onto his canvas. 

But these are just minor considerations when set against the rich tapestry of theatricality that unfolds on stage, a tapestry in which hypocrisy clashes with blazing truth and rank corruption with purity of soul.
If, in the end, the hero and heroine are defeated, one leaves the theater hoping that the truths for which they stand somehow will triumph in the end. 

