.START 

Corporate raider Paul A. Bilzerian was sentenced to four years in prison and fined $1.5 million on nine felony counts related to his takeover activities. 

The sentence is the harshest penalty to come out of the government's Wall Street crackdown, which began with the arrest of investment banker Dennis Levine in 1986. 

In addition to the prison term, Mr. Bilzerian was ordered to serve two years on probation while providing 250 hours of community service.
The former chairman of Singer Co., which Mr. Bilzerian took over in 1988, was convicted in June on charges including securities fraud, conspiracy to commit tax fraud and filing false disclosure statements to the Securities and Exchange Commission. 

In federal court in Manhattan, Judge Robert Ward said Mr. Bilzerian could remain free on his own recognizance pending the appeal of his conviction.
But the judge ordered Mr. Bilzerian, who has a net worth of $81.4 million, to pay the fine within 30 days. 

Mr. Bilzerian's attorney, Arthur Mathews, had urged the judge not to impose a prison term, arguing that Mr. Bilzerian was an outstanding citizen who could better serve society through a rigorous community-service program.
But the judge said a prison term was necessary.
In the course of explaining his sentence, Judge Ward accused Mr. Bilzerian of lying under oath during the trial. 

From the bench, the judge said he had received "a substantial array of letters and other documents" praising Mr. Bilzerian for his community work and his service as a soldier during the Vietnam War.
But, the judge said, "there is another side of the defendant's personality.
The lure of money has caused him, an intelligent young man, to lose what I perceive to be proper perspective.
In short, he lies. . . . The case was replete with falsified documents, {including} a tax return that omitted $4 million in income." David E. Brodsky, one of the assistant U.S. attorneys in charge of prosecuting the case, called Mr. Bilzerian "the Joe Isuzu of corporate takeovers," referring to the pathological liar who stars in the Isuzu car commercials. 

Mr. Bilzerian was convicted of the nine felonies in connection with four different multimillion-dollar stock transactions in 1985 and 1986.
His unlawful conduct included concealing the sources of his takeover financing and engaging in rigged stock trades for the purpose of evading federal income taxes.
As part of those schemes, prosecutors said, he submitted false SEC documents, filed false tax returns and exchanged phony invoices with a stockbroker. 

At the sentencing, Mr. Brodsky said Mr. Bilzerian had "perverted the purpose of the SEC" by deliberately disseminating false information about particular stock transactions through SEC disclosure documents.
None of the charges against Mr. Bilzerian involved his takeover of Singer. 

New federal sentencing guidelines don't apply to Mr. Bilzerian because his crimes occurred before the guidelines took effect.
But Judge Ward apparently took the guidelines into consideration: The four-year sentence falls in the range of 46 to 57 months that Mr. Brodsky said the defendant would have faced under the guidelines.
Mr. Brodsky said Mr. Bilzerian would likely serve a third of his sentence before being eligible for release. 

Mr. Bilzerian's attorney, Mr. Mathews, said the sentence was unduly harsh for the types of violations that were found.
And in a sentencing memorandum on behalf of Mr. Bilzerian, he said it would be unfair for his client to serve a longer prison term than defendants convicted of more serious securities-law violations, such as insider trading. 

"At its core, this case involves a failure to comply fully and in a timely manner with SEC disclosure regulations.
There is nothing here akin to theft or breach of fiduciary duty, the type of conduct most associated with insider trading or other securities 'fraud' offenses," Mr. Mathews said in the sentencing memorandum. "The conduct at issue in this case is readily distinguishable from those crimes: It involves no malice and injures no victims." 

The memorandum named several people who were convicted of what Mr. Mathews called more damaging crimes -- yet ended up with lighter sentences.
Mr. Levine, for instance, is serving a two-year sentence.
Insider trader Ivan F. Boesky, the former stock speculator, was sentenced to three years. 

Mr. Mathews saved his strongest criticism for Boyd Jefferies, former head of the Jefferies & Co. brokerage firm and the key witness in the government's case against Mr. Bilzerian.
In July, Mr. Jefferies received a suspended sentence, a fine of $250,000 and five years' probation on two felony counts.
Mr. Mathews, at the sentencing, said Mr. Jefferies had "worked out a deal for a life of misdeeds" in the securities field. 

Mr. Brodsky said Mr. Bilzerian's sentence was appropriate.
He said Mr. Bilzerian had expressed no remorse for his crimes and had shown "arrogance and utter disregard for the legal system," while Mr. Jefferies had cooperated. "Bilzerian still maintains that he has done nothing wrong," Mr. Brodsky said. 

In a separate civil suit, the SEC is seeking $31.3 million from Mr. Bilzerian in alleged illegal profits from several stock transactions from 1985 to 1988.
Mr. Mathews said that case will test the government's claims that investors were hurt by Mr. Bilzerian's actions.
Mr. Mathews said investors actually benefited from Mr. Bilzerian's alleged violations because the takeover strategist's efforts "shook out the white knights at a premium." 

