.START 

Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) accounted for nearly one-third of total personal saving in 1986.
Tightened eligibility rules in the Tax Reform Act of 1986 cut back contributions in 1987 by 62%, but IRAs may rise again, because they are widely viewed in Congress as an appealing saving incentive and as an alternative to capital gains tax reductions. 

IRAs were nearly written out of existence in the 1986 Tax Reform Act because of the widely held view in Washington that they provided no new saving.
For example, a canny taxpayer could shuffle $2,000 from his taxable saving account into an IRA and deduct the $2,000 from income on his tax return -- with no increase in private saving.
If anything, total saving would fall as the revenue loss exacerbated the government deficit.
Even worse, a taxpayer could borrow the $2,000 for his IRA, take the tax deduction, and deduct the interest paid on the loan] Headlines in the press such as "Short on Cash for an IRA?
Not To Worry, Says S&L, Just Use Your Credit Card," fueled the suspicion that IRAs were a tax dodge with no effect on national saving. 

In a recent study, co-authored with Daniel Feenberg of the National Bureau of Economic Research, I found support for the view that IRAs represent new savings.
We analyzed a sample of 2,400 tax returns filed between 1980 and 1984, expecting to find that taxpayers who opened IRAs during 1982-84 gradually reduced their reported interest and dividend income as they shuffled assets out of taxable accounts and into IRAs.
To our surprise, we found the opposite.
Taxpayers who purchased IRAs during each of the years 1982-84 tended to increase their taxable saving by far more than those who did not purchase IRAs. 

We were still concerned that shuffling may be taking place at a more sophisticated level.
Suppose that thrifty households shuffle the first $4,000 of savings into IRAs, and deposit the rest into taxable money market accounts, while profligate households neither save nor open an IRA. Comparing a thrifty household with a profligate household, one might find a positive relationship between IRAs and saving, and mistakenly conclude that shuffling hadn't occurred.
We corrected for this by comparing taxpayers with the same initial wealth -- which is a good proxy for thriftiness -- and our results still held. 

One puzzling question remains: Why should IRA enrollees go on savings binges?
Perhaps IRA advertisements during the 1980s encouraged all types of retirement saving.
Supporting evidence for this view comes from our finding that one-third of all IRA enrollees contributed exactly $2,000, when in fact they were eligible to contribute up to $4,000.
Why $2,000?
Advertising may have conveyed both correct information about the high rate of return on IRAs, and incorrect information that the legal limit was $2,000. 

One strong predictor of IRA enrollment was whether the taxpayer owed money to the IRS on April 14.
We interpret this to mean that a taxpayer in a 40% bracket preferred to open a $2,000 saving account rather than write an $800 check to the IRS.
The instant gratification of deducting IRA contributions both increases the popularity of the program, and overcomes any shortsighted bias for consumption over saving.
The recent Merrill-Lynch proposal, which provides future tax breaks but no current tax deduction, lacks this appealing feature.
Even the prospect of higher tax rates during retirement (when the principal plus interest is finally taxed) may do little to damp the joy of denying the IRS its due. 

The revenue cost of IRAs looms large in political debates.
It should be remembered, however, that the tax deducted from the IRA contribution is deferred, and not lost forever.
Of course, future tax revenue may hold little appeal to politicians concerned with Gramm-Rudman, but the future tax payments represent a valuable source of future revenue.
The $350 billion in IRA wealth represents $70 billion in future tax revenue at a conservative 20% marginal tax rate. 

IRAs cannot be viewed as the single cure for the nation's low saving rate.
They have never accounted for more than 1% of GNP, so they are unlikely by themselves to bridge the savings gap between the U.S. and other countries.
And some new IRA proposals make it easy to withdraw money before retirement, which would make shuffling more tempting to taxpayers.
But in comparison to proposed capital gains tax reductions in Congress, IRAs are both more equitable and direct in encouraging domestic savings. 

Mr. Skinner is a University of Virginia economist associated with the National Bureau of Economic Research. 

(See related editorial: "A Better Plan Than Bentsen's" -- WSJ Sept. 27, 1989) 

