.START 

General Dynamics Corp. picked William A. Anders, an aerospace-industry manager and former government official with an eye-popping resume, as its next chairman and chief executive officer. 

The former astronaut -- who from 1973 to 1976 also headed the Atomic Energy Commission and, when it was renamed, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission -- will succeed Stanley C. Pace. 

Mr. Pace, 68 years old, joined a scandal-wracked General Dynamics in 1986 and helped calm the turmoil stemming from several government investigations of the St. Louis-based defense contractor.
Long ago, he signaled his intention to retire. 

Mr. Anders, currently senior executive vice president for operations at Textron Inc., will join General Dynamics as vice chairman at the start of the new year and assume the top two posts Jan. 1, 1991. 

Analysts said such a timetable should afford an easy transition and give Mr. Anders ample opportunity to familiarize himself with General Dynamics's diverse products, including various missiles, the M-1 tank, Trident submarine and F-16 fighter. 

Mr. Anders was traveling yesterday, according to a Textron spokesman, and couldn't be reached for comment. 

In an interview, Mr. Pace described his 55-year-old successor as "quiet and self-confident" -- the kind of person who doesn't bluster on every subject, but is eager to speak up when he truly has something to offer. 

The two men met through an aerospace trade association.
Mr. Pace said that only candidates from inside the company originally were considered to succeed him at the helm, but eventually he was persuaded by the board to look outside as well. 

Though Mr. Anders has been at Textron for five years and was a senior executive in General Electric Co. 's nuclear energy and aircraft businesses before that, he seems largely unknown on Wall Street. 

Nonetheless, his credentials alone enraptured analysts yesterday. "Is this guy for real?" asked Jerry Cantwell, of Wertheim Schroder & Co. Besides participating in the first manned flight into deep space -- when Apollo 8 orbited the moon 10 times -- Mr. Anders also has been an Air Force test pilot and fighter jock. 

He was a backup pilot for Apollo 11, the first lunar landing.
After his glory days as an astronaut, he became executive secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council before taking the Atomic Energy seat.
He served as U.S. ambassador to Norway in 1976 and 1977. 

Colleagues described Mr. Anders as a straightforward, no-nonsense leader who believes in a team approach to get things accomplished. "He's very intense, very logical," said James Lovell, who flew with Mr. Anders on Apollo 8. 

All told, it seems, Mr. Anders should have little trouble maintaining the clean-cut image Mr. Pace has fostered since his arrival at General Dynamics from TRW Inc. 

Mr. Pace was brought to St. Louis after numerous contretemps, including a headline-grabbing episode in which General Dynamics billed the government for an executive's dog kennel fees.
Then-Navy Secretary John Lehman characterized the corporation's philosophy as "catch us if you can." Though no convictions resulted, David S. Lewis was ousted as chief executive. 

Today, there are entirely new challenges.
The biggest one, Mr. Pace said, may be in bringing along the programs in which the company has invested heavily in recent years.
Among them: the Navy's A12 Advanced Tactical Aircraft; the Air Force's Advanced Tactical Fighter; and the National Aerospace Plane. 

Mr. Anders, given his experience in the nation's capital, could be an ideal choice to take on such a task. "I was in Washington for six years, and I'm still alive," he said in a 1986 interview with New England Business. "I've learned how to keep out the way of Machiavelli's knife." 

Roy J. Harris Jr. contributed to this article. 

