.START 

Primerica Corp. said it agreed to sell its PennCorp Financial insurance unit for $300 million to an investment group led by DJS/Inverness & Co. 

PennCorp Financial includes Pennsylvania Life Insurance Co., Executive Fund Life Insurance Co. and Trans Pacific Life Insurance Co.
For the first six months of 1989, the group earned about $10 million, or about 9% of total Primerica first-half profit.
The group had been projected to have full-year net income of $20 million to $25 million, a Primerica spokeswoman said.
All three insurance firms underwrite and market specialized individual life, accident and health insurance. 

Primerica, a financial services concern, said sale proceeds would be used to reduce debt or buy back common stock.
The spokeswoman said no decision on how the proceeds will be spent will be made until after the company completes the purchase of a minority interest in A.L. Williams Co., another insurance concern.
Williams's holders are scheduled to vote on the proposed transaction in late October. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Primerica stock rose 87.5 cents a share to close at $28. 

Thomas Mitchell, a partner in Weiss Peck & Greer in New York, a Primerica holder, said the deal "looks OK," but that given the size and complexity of Primerica, "it's kind of a non-event." 

DJS/Inverness is a closely held financial services company.
It said William M. McCormick, a former chief executive officer of Fireman's Fund Insurance Co., will become chief executive of PennCorp Financial.
Mr. McCormick also is a member of the buy-out group, DJS/Inverness said. 

DJS/Inverness's principal, Donald J. Stone, said the purchase of PennCorp Financial will give DJS/Inverness an entree into the insurance arena, "a business in which we hope to have an expanding presence," he said. 

DJS/Inverness has been involved in leveraged buy-outs both as a principal, as with PennCorp Financial, and as an intermediary, as with the recent acquisition of CBS Inc. 's magazine unit by Diamandis Communications Inc. 

