.START 

Treasury bonds recouped a little lost ground after Monday's rout, but the rally in stocks faded late in the session.
Relentless hammering by central banks around the world meanwhile kept a lid on the dollar. 

Although the dollar managed a small gain against the yen, it fell a little further against the mark.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed 4.75 points higher at 2663.94 in moderate trading after being ahead as much as 23 points.
The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond's price gained about half a point, or $5 for each $1,000 face amount. 

The dollar was the focus of the financial markets as central banks continued to wage war on the U.S. currency.
Intervention began as the trading day opened in Japan and continued through the European and U.S. sessions.
The intervention is part of an agreement reached last weekend by finance ministers and central bankers to try to curb the dollar's rise. 

Currency traders conceded that the massive coordinated intervention took them by surprise Monday, but they noted that the effort to force the dollar down had less of an effect yesterday.
Although the mood on the dollar still isn't bullish, the currency's modest rise against the yen was heartening, some said. 

While bond and stock investors kept a wary eye on the dollar, they also tried to sort out conflicting data in the August durable goods report.
New factory orders for durable goods rose 3.8%, far beyond the 1% gain that most investors expected.
But new orders for nondefense capital goods, a measure of future plant and equipment spending, plunged 9.8% in August.
Thus, the data added to the confusion that has paralyzed investors in recent weeks as they attempt to figure out which way the economy is headed. 

In major market activity: 

The dollar ended mixed.
In late New York trading, the currency was quoted at 1.8938 marks and 142.40 yen, compared with 1.8993 marks and 142.13 yen late Monday. 

Stock prices rebounded in moderate trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 158.4 million shares.
Advancing issues on the Big Board were ahead of losers, 

Bond prices rose.
The yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue slipped to 8.23%. 

