.START 

Wall Street's big-time dealmakers and takeover stock speculators are grousing about a "lack of catalysts." No, they're not talking about chemistry experiments. 

"Catalysts," it seems, is a Wall Street euphemism for corporate raiders, those bad guys of the go-go '80s who used to put companies "in play" -- up for sale, in other words -- as easily as most corporate chief executives tee up a golf ball. 

Though reviled by corporate managers, the raiders usually boosted the stock prices of their targets and generated big fees for Wall Street.
The raiders hired their own investment bankers; they also created business for investment bankers defending the raiders' targets and for those advising "white knights" who came to the rescue by making a friendly bid. 

But corporate raiding isn't as profitable as it once was; the profession has fallen victim to a rising stock market and changes in tax and takeover laws and disclosure rules.
The raiders, therefore, have moved on.
Some are pursuing companies in Europe and Japan, or running the U.S. companies they bought.
And one former raider, Paul A. Bilzerian, is scheduled to be sentenced today in federal court in New York after being convicted on nine felony counts of securities and tax-law violations. 

Decrying the lack of raiders, by any name, could easily offend important corporate investment-banking clients.
So Wall Street's merger crowd isn't doing its grousing in public. "There is a general absence of catalysts," the head of mergers and acquisitions at one major Wall Street investment banking firm complains in private. "Marvin Davis is the only guy around who makes things happen," says the head of mergers at another firm, referring to the Beverly Hills billionaire who weighed in with offers for two airline companies, NWA Inc. and UAL Corp., that resulted in auctions of both. 

Wall Street's new code word for raiders is catching on, even among those who don't think the trend is bad. "We are having a change in catalysts in the marketplace," says Guy Wyser-Pratte, a takeover stock trader at Prudential-Bache Securities. "Whereas the raiders were the primary catalysts over the last few years, 1992 {when internal European trade barriers will fall} is becoming a far more important catalyst" for takeovers, says Mr. Wyser-Pratte. 

"The strategic buyers are replacing the financial engineers," Mr. Wyser-Pratte says.
Strategic buyers, in Wall Street parlance, are established companies that bid for other companies to expand into new markets or add new products.
Sony Corp. 's $3 billion bid for Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. and Procter & Gamble Co. 's agreement to buy Noxell Corp. for $1.3 billion in stock are just the latest examples of such transactions. 

The raiders themselves, who bristle at that term and prefer to call themselves "entrepreneurial investors," often cite the rise in U.S. stock prices as the main reason for their shifting focus.
Asher Edelman, who now spends more than half his time in Europe, says that during the 1970s and early 1980s, "you could find an asset-rich company and buy your first stock at as little as a third of the real breakup value of the company.
That simply doesn't exist now." 

But Mr. Edelman, in a telephone interview from Paris, also says that changing attitudes in the U.S. toward corporate raiders have caused him to prospect in Europe. "I think the view of what a catalyst does is different from what it was before," he says. "I think that psychology makes it more difficult to do a deal.
In America, it's viewed as overleveraging the economy and creates political difficulty.
From my point of view, I couldn't lose a proxy battle in the late '70s and early '80s, and now I can't win one." 

T. Boone Pickens Jr., who forced restructurings at Unocal Corp. and Phillips Petroleum Co. by bidding for those oil companies, has cast his net overseas.
He now owns 20.2% of Koito Manufacturing Co. in Japan; as its largest shareholder, he's demanding representation on its board.
Though Koito is resisting, and Mr. Pickens has announced plans to increase his stake to 26%, he maintains "there's nothing hostile" about his investment. 

Mr. Pickens says he swore off hostile takeovers more than a year ago because the cost was too high and the rewards too low. "I didn't like all of the wear and tear in that game," he says. 

Mr. Pickens also asserts that even such mainstays of U.S. corporate life as Ford Motor Co. have joined the ranks of corporate raiders.
Ford, he maintains, became a raider last week when it said it wants to buy 15% of Jaguar PLC, despite Jaguar's opposition. "I see other companies trying to do exactly what we did" with Mr. Pickens' Mesa Petroleum Corp. and its successor, Mesa Limited Partnership, he says. 

In addition to high stock prices and political hostility, legal and financial developments have made it more difficult and more expensive to launch a successful raid in the U.S., investment bankers and takeover lawyers say.
By themselves, none of the changes is fatal, but together they have slowed down the takeover business. 

Vital among the changes is the 1986 tax-law overhaul, which tightened the rules governing taxes on asset sales.
Previously, a raider could avoid paying capital gains taxes on profits from breaking up a target company. 

"The '86 tax law has meaningfully increased the cost for the financial raider," says Arthur Fleischer, a merger law specialist at the New York law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson. "That has a very major inhibiting effect." 

Even Mr. Edelman, who claims to be unaffected by other changes, agrees that the new tax law has hurt.
He calls it "double taxation" on buying and selling the same asset, and notes that most European countries don't have such tax laws. 

Evolving takeover laws and court decisions, particularly in Delaware, have also made takeover bidding more expensive by requiring bidders to line up financing in advance.
That means raiders must pay multimillion-dollar commitment fees to lenders. "Today, to be taken seriously by a target company, you have to show the color of your money by paying very substantial commitment fees," says Jack Nusbaum, a merger-law specialist with the New York law firm of Willkie Farr & Gallagher. 

Depending on the type of financing and the size of the loans involved, commitment fees can range from 0.5% to 1.5% of the loan amount.
On a $1 billion loan, the commitment fee alone could be $15 million. 

Until recently, a raider could count on recovering his costs -- and reaping a substantial profit -- by quietly buying a stake of 5% or more in a target company before announcing a bid.
Even if the raider failed to buy the company, he could usually sell his shares at a higher price to the ultimate buyer. 

But the federal government has tightened rules that require that a bidder stop buying at $15 million of stock and seek antitrust clearance to buy more.
Once that clearance becomes public knowledge, as it usually does, the stock price of the target company rises, reducing the raider's potential profits. (The only exception under current rules is for partnerships in which no individual or company has a stake of more than 50%.) 

Finally, financing of all kinds has become more difficult.
The market for high-yield, low-rated junk bonds is in disarray, and investment bank Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. has been less aggressive in backing highly leveraged bidders. 

As a result, the game of raiding has been increasingly left to billionaires such as Mr. Davis and oil heir Gordon Getty -- and there aren't too many of those. 

