.START 

Oil ministers failed to work out a new formula for dividing up OPEC's oil market and settled for a higher production ceiling under the old method.
Several members promptly indicated they would ignore the decision. 

Ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries had been expected to confront an Iranian proposal made at the last-minute on Tuesday that would have effectively revamped existing quotas.
Current allotments are a major irritant to some OPEC members and any redistribution would have had huge implications.
But after sleeping on it, ministers walked away from that issue for now.
They will probably take it up at a scheduled November conference. 

Instead, the ministers concluded five days of sometimes acrimonious talks here by increasing their production ceiling to 20.5 million barrels a day for the fourth quarter from the current 19.5 million barrels. 

Most here said the higher ceiling more realistically reflects the rising demand for OPEC oil and should help maintain oil prices at relatively firm levels -- though it is likely to have little effect on actual output.
OPEC is currently producing about 22 million barrels a day because of widespread quota cheating. 

In fact, the immediate response in oil markets was bullish.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, West Texas Intermediate crude oil for November delivery rose six cents to $19.59 a barrel. 

If nothing else, the new ceiling will mean that more of the oil being produced by the 13 nations will be pumped under the OPEC umbrella -- and thus technically reduce cheating by one million barrels a day. 

At least two countries -- Algeria and Kuwait -- had serious reservations on the increase in the ceiling and refused to endorse it.
Some others questioned whether it was even legitimate since no vote was taken. 

Nevertheless, Rilwanu Lukman, OPEC's president and Nigeria's oil minister, said a majority was in agreement, and announced a new ceiling was in force. "We decided to raise the ceiling from 19.5 to 20.5 million barrels a day," he said. 

"Now, we have something that is binding instead of going home {to a production} free-for-all," he added. 

Ginandjar Kartasasmita, Indonesia's oil minister, also expressed confidence that the ceiling increase, to be divided among the exporters on the usual pro-rata basis, should help improve their production discipline. 

"OPEC's fourth-quarter production won't be much above the level of now," he said in an interview. "I'm optimistic this will work and won't harm prices," he added. 

But Algerian delegates said they "disassociated" themselves from the decision.
They had argued for maintaining the current ceiling with stricter adherence to production quotas to advance prices toward OPEC's target of $18 a barrel. 

And Ali Khalifa Al-Sabah, Kuwait's oil minister, said he would continue to refuse to accept or abide by his nation's quota.
He said at a news conference that he had neither a "legal nor moral" obligation to restrain the output of Kuwait, which has a current quota of 1.1 million barrels a day but is understood to be producing nearly double that.
Kuwait last June declared it wouldn't abide by its quota when OPEC drew up the formal production agreement still in force.
Yesterday's action only changed that pact's ceiling figure. 

Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, a chronic quota cheater, have been the chief reasons for the growing debate over the method of parceling out production.
Both argue that their capacities and other factors entitle them to much larger quotas. 

This meeting originally was expected to work on a permanent allocation system, but well before it began the ministers were backing off from that task because of its complexities.
Then Iran unexpectedly proposed what was clearly a start toward new long-term quotas.
It called for 21.5-million-barrel daily ceiling, but divided differently from in the past.
Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Iran would maintain their current percentages.
Kuwait, the UAE and two other countries would have gotten larger-than-normal increases, while five countries would have received offsetting smaller boosts. 

The hope was that the new system could help restore OPEC's credibility and production discipline, and thus firm up prices for the benefit of those receiving the lesser shares.
But some of those demanded "guarantees" that the countries benefiting from increased shares wouldn't violate their new quotas.
Libya also demanded production parity with Kuwait. 

As a result, the ministers decided to drop the proposal until they could return home for government consultations. "When we decided we couldn't complete the proposal here, we said 'let's sleep on it, '" Isaam Abdul Raheem Al-Chalabi, Iraq's oil minister, said in an interview. 

