.START 

Anybody want to guess how long it will be before the nation starts telling Congress jokes, as it once told Polish jokes and now tells lawyer jokes? 

How does a Member of Congress buy a postage stamp?
He borrows the money from his constituents. 

We suppose something worthwhile will be lost when Congress becomes an object of derision, but after the bottom-of-the-barrel tactics witnessed Monday, it can't be long before the late-night talk-show hosts are chewing on Capitol Hill. 

Consider this pathetic tale.
The Senate recently approved, by an 84-8 vote, Senator Pete Wilson's proposal to ban franked (free) mass mailings and transfer the millions of dollars saved to programs for crack-addicted mothers and babies.
And on Monday the House voted 245-137 to instruct a conference committee to go along with the Senate's language.
So far, so good.
What do you call a congressional crack house?
A conference committee. 

Within minutes of the House vote Rep. Vic Fazio, a California Democrat, convened the conference.
Mr. Fazio declared that the Wilson idea was "not a serious proposal," and proceeded to craft a "compromise" that ignored the will of both the House and Senate votes. 

Mr. Fazio was forced to accept a cut of about 25% in the overall franking budget, but with the tacit approval of congressional leaders, the conferees restored most of the franking money.
Gone is the outright ban on mass mailings as well as a provision requiring that congressional mail carry a notice that it was sent at taxpayer expense.
Ditto an amendment that would force House Members to disclose how much junk mail they send out -- something Senators already do.
Also tossed over the side is a proposal to end Congress's practice of exceeding the appropriations limits for franked mail without a vote. 

Originally intended to help Members answer their mail, the frank has since become a form of sophisticated direct-mail advertising -- but for incumbents only.
Last year, the House and Senate spent more than $65 million on self-congratulatory newsletters -- enough for 650 million pieces of mail or three newsletters for every person in the country in a single year.
Less than 5% of franked mail goes out in response to constituent queries.
Arizona Rep. Morris Udall, a senior Democrat, says, "As chairman of the Commission on Congressional Mailing Standards I have often been appalled by the way some Members have perverted the frank.
There can be no doubt that by the use of slick, highly targeted mailings many Members have greatly enhanced their chances for re-election." Senator David Boren, an Oklahoma Democrat, calls the frank "campaign propaganda paid for by the taxpayer." 

Yesterday, Senator Wilson tried to escort a network TV crew into the congressional mail room to film the towering mounds of junk newsletters being processed and prepared for delivery to the voters who are paying the postage.
Incredibly, Senator Wilson and the crew were barred from filming.
What is Congress's idea of sacred ground?
The mail room. 

The House and Senate could reject the embarrassing Fazio conference report this week, but hardly anyone expects that.
In the end, Members aren't going to kick their addiction until they start hearing a torrent of hoots and catcalls from the voters who subsidize abused freebies like the franking privilege. 

