.START 

BUSH CALLED for a "bold plan" to assist Poland's economic recovery. 

In a speech to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, the president urged the groups to "work rapidly" to help Warsaw's new non-Communist government, saying "there may be no greater opportunity" to aid the East bloc's emerging democracies.
Poland's finance minister, meanwhile, sought $500 million for essential imports and warned of "potentially explosive" social conditions in that country. 

Bush said there is a "good likelihood" that a treaty reducing long-range nuclear weapons will be finished when he meets with Gorbachev next year.
The statement was considered a far more optimistic appraisal than the president has given previously about the prospects for a strategic-arms accord. 

Cheney released the Pentagon's annual assessment of Soviet military might that concluded "Western estimates could simply be too high." 

Papandreou was ordered by Greece's Parliament to stand trial on charges of instigating a $200 million bank embezzlement scandal.
The legislature voted to lift immunity from prosecution for the 70-year-old former Socialist prime minister, who was ordered last week to face separate charges related to illegal telephone wiretapping. 

Bush met with the nation's governors in Charlottesville, Va., to discuss education in the U.S., and he urged them to combat mediocrity in the classroom.
Opening the unprecedented two-day summit, the president appealed for "fundamental changes" in the national school system, which is plagued by illiteracy and a high dropout rate. 

Swedish researchers found that a drug for treating high blood pressure increases some risk factors associated with heart attacks and diabetes.
They said the drug, hydrochlorothiazide, reduced the body's ability to handle blood sugars and increased blood levels of fats associated with coronary artery disease. 

The Senate approved a compromise $3.18 billion anti-drug and anti-crime initiative for fiscal 1990, while trimming domestic and defense spending accounts.
Lawmakers voted 97-2 to attach the package to a measure appropriating $26.4 billion for the Transportation Department and highway and airport trust funds. 

The republic of Slovenia defied warnings from Yugoslavia's federal authorities and proclaimed its right to secede.
While Slovenia's legislature sought to allay fears that it actually intended to break away from the Communist federation, the move deepened the country's political turmoil.
There were protests reported in two other republics. 

Thousands of South Africans staged a peaceful anti-apartheid demonstration in Cape Province.
Unofficial reports said as many as 40,000 people of all races participated, making it one of the biggest protests in a two-month drive against racial segregation.
In Johannesburg, the city council voted to integrate buses and swimming pools. 

Police in Manila clashed with as many as 2,000 Filipinos demonstrating against Quayle and U.S. military bases in the Philippines.
More than 150 people were arrested.
President Aquino accepted a U.S. offer to discuss extending the leases on the six American installations, which expire in September 1991.
The talks are to begin in December. 

Colombia's President Barco said Bogota had reached a peace accord with the M-19 guerrilla group.
The pact calls for the rebels to surrender their arms in exchange for the government giving land to peasants and providing more housing for the poor.
Barco, who is to meet today in the U.S. with Bush, said the anti-drug war would continue. 

A sightseeing plane crashed about a halfmile from a runway at the Grand Canyon airport, killing at least 10 people, authorities in Arizona said.
The 11 others aboard the twin-engine aircraft were seriously injured.
The cause of the crash wasn't known. 

Relief workers distributed food, clothes and building supplies to victims of Hurricane Hugo in South Carolina.
With more than 200,000 utility customers still without power, state officials urged the White House to get aid to the stricken areas.
In Puerto Rico, water flowed to San Juan homes for the first time in more than a week. 

A former high-ranking HUD aide invoked his constitutional right against self-incrimination and refused to answer questions before a House subcommittee investigating influence-peddling at the housing agency.
Lance Wilson, former executive assistant to ex-housing chief Pierce, accused the panel of prejudging him. 

An artillery shell struck a group of about 80 soldiers on a firing range at Fort Sill in Oklahoma, killing at least three soldiers and injuring about 25 others, three critically, officials said.
The shell reportedly went off course as the soldiers were training.
Other details weren't immediately available. 

Baker held talks with Czechoslovakia's foreign minister, the first such meeting in 11 years.
The Czech official indicated that Prague, which has been lagging behind Poland and Hungary in political changes, planned to rewrite its criminal code, a move that could help improve U.S.-Czech ties. 

Senate Majority Leader Mitchell accused Bush of being "overly timid" and urged him to suspend trade restrictions with the Soviet Union in response to Moscow permitting freer emigration.
Bush has said he would consider such a step only when the Kremlin formally codifies its emigration laws. 

