.START 

A Whittaker Corp. subsidiary and two of the unit's former senior executives pleaded guilty to bribing a Marine Corps acquisition official as part of a scheme to obtain electronics contracts totaling more than $7 million. 

Whittaker Command & Control Systems, as expected, agreed to pay $3.5 million in fines and penalties for its role in funneling illegal payments to Jack Sherman, a civilian Marine Corps official previously convicted of receiving other bribes in the Pentagon procurement scandal. 

In addition to the subsidiary and the two former executives -- Scott Lamberth, who was president of the unit, and John Van Tassel, who was operations director of its Arkansas plant -- Donald Illeman, a San Diego consultant, also pleaded guilty to bribery charges involving the unit's successful efforts to garner Marine Corps business.
All three men agreed to cooperate with prosecutors in the continuing grand jury probe of defense contracting. 

Yesterday, the grand jury indicted consultant Thomas Muldoon, who worked for Whittaker and allegedly funneled some of the payments to Mr. Sherman, according to Mr. Muldoon's lawyer, Albert Ahern.
Mr. Muldoon, who was accused by the grand jury of bribery, conspiracy and other charges, also worked for a batch of larger defense contractors and had close ties to some of the central targets of the investigation. 

In an interview yesterday evening, Mr. Ahern said he was told about the grand jury's action but had been informed he wouldn't receive a copy of the charges until this morning. "Mr.
Muldoon has denied from square one that he bribed anybody," the lawyer said. "That's why we are going to trial on the charges." 

Documents filed by prosecutors in federal district court in Alexandria, Va., allege a seven-year conspiracy that funneled nearly $80,000 in illicit payments to Mr. Sherman through a network of consultants, including Mr. Illeman.
In return, the papers indicate, Mr. Sherman routinely violated Pentagon acquisition rules, steered lucrative work to the Whittaker subsidiary and repeatedly promised to lobby inside the service on the unit's behalf. 

According to a company lawyer and court papers, the activities began before Whittaker acquired the unit in 1986 from closely held Lee Telecommunications.
Afterward, Mr. Lamberth deliberately hid the bribery scheme from officials of the parent company, according to the government's filings. 

The Whittaker unit is the third company to plead guilty to charges stemming from the nearly three-year investigation code-named "Operation Ill Wind." More than 20 defense industry executives, consultants and defense officials also have been convicted. 

The criminal charges and other court documents allege that, starting in 1981, Mr. Muldoon agreed to secretly share his consulting fees from Lee with Mr. Sherman.
Later, the documents indicate, Mr. Sherman recruited Mr. Illeman to join in by becoming a Whittaker consultant and passing on some of his fees. 

The Marine official arranged to personally oversee the company's contracts and negotiated his cut of the consultant fees, according to court documents. 

Mr. Sherman, who received an 18-month prison term for taking other bribes, helped Lee get a $600,000 contract in 1982 to build computers for a Marine Corps traffic-control and communications system.
He also authorized several modifications for the work that increased the value of the company's contracts by more than $2.6 million, according to court papers. 

The documents indicate that Mr. Sherman "agreed to continue to look after {the company's} interests regarding Marine Corps contracts," in one case receiving cash directly from Mr. Lamberth. 

After Whittaker took control of the unit, according to court filings, Mr. Muldoon allegedly complained about the legal risks he was running and the others agreed on a new system to pay the consultant in one lump sum.
According to court filings, Mr. Van Tassel agreed that Mr. Muldoon would provide a "study" for Whittaker to justify the $36,000 payment.
In fact, the filings say, the entire study came from Mr. Sherman's files. 

