.START 

New orders for durable goods climbed sharply in August after a big drop in July, the Commerce Department reported, a sign of health for the manufacturing sector, which had been lethargic most of the summer. 

New orders to factories for machinery, household appliances and other items expected to last at least three years jumped 3.8% in August, to $126.74 billion, their biggest rise since December.
In July durable-goods orders fell 2.5%, the department said, a revision from the original estimate of a 2.2% decline. 

August's rise was propelled by a large increase in automobile orders as factories turned out 1990 models for introduction this month.
Nonelectrical machinery -- a category that includes computers -- nearly recouped July's 10.4% drop in orders with a 9.2% rise. 

"I think in total this is another indication that the economic expansion is very much alive," said Norman Robertson, chief economist at Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh. 

The manufacturing sector has been a drag on the economy most of this year.
Numerous government reports showed factory production slowing and growth in manufacturing jobs nearly stalling out.
But the new durable-goods report and other recent data showing renewed strength in automobile demand suggest that manufacturing still remains in decent shape -- keeping the economy's growth intact. 

"We're still looking for a slowdown, but I think the strength of these numbers indicates this slowdown is going to be a soft landing," said Thomas Runiewicz, an economist specializing in industrial analysis at the WEFA Group economic forecasting firm in Bala Cynwyd, Pa. "It's not going be anything major to worry about.
It's going to be a healthy slowdown." 

Many analysts believe that the gains in the automobile industry are temporary and that demand will fall back after the new models are introduced.
But Mr. Robertson noted, "There's been a different special factor every month.
The net effect is to keep output rising." Furthermore, excluding a 6.7% leap in transportation-equipment orders, buoyed mostly by car orders, overall orders for durable goods in August still grew 2.7%. 

One industry that has kept the manufacturing sector going for much of this year is aircraft.
But orders for airplanes and parts declined in August.
Still, analysts said, the earlier onslaught of orders should keep aircraft manufacturers busy for some time. 

That may not be true for manufacturers overall.
Unfilled orders fell 0.3% in August, the first time the order backlog has shrunk in more than 2 1/2 years.
If this keeps up, factories may develop some slack. 

Some economists were also worried by a startling 9.8% drop in capital-goods orders outside the military sector, an area watched closely as an indicator of business investment.
But a Commerce Department analyst said this category would have risen had it not been for the decline in civilian-aircraft orders. 

Shipments of durable goods soared 9.5% in August after tumbling 3.7% in July. 

All the numbers are adjusted to remove normal seasonal fluctuations. 

