.START 

Federal regulators set the level of capital that investors must inject into insolvent thrifts at 4.5% of assets, a level that should make it easier for many healthy thrifts to acquire their ailing brethren. 

As recently as last week, officials of the Resolution Trust Corp., the agency created to sell and liquidate thrifts taken over by the government, had discussed setting the required capital infusion at 6% of assets.
That prompted some worry in the thrift industry that the better-capitalized banking industry would have a stronger hand in buying up the government's inventory of sick thrifts. 

"This will stimulate additional interest among thrifts," said Kip Weissman, an attorney with Silver, Freedman & Taff here.
Mr. Weissman said there are many thrifts that can raise the 4.5% capital but would balk at trying to raise 6% because profits might not justify it. 

Also, the assets on which the 4.5% level will be based will be adjusted for riskiness.
Thus, broke institutions that hold less-risky loans, such as home mortgages, should be less expensive to acquire than thrifts that hold many commercial loans, which are considered riskier. 

It's unclear, however, how the requirements for initial capital infusions will work with other capital standards for all thrifts that regulators are now working out.
In a statement, the RTC said Danny Wall, an RTC board member who is also the top thrift regulator, voted for the 4.5% level but indicated that a higher or even a lower capital rate may be needed to operate the thrift. 

In addition, the RTC said it moved the deadline for bids on five insolvent thrifts to Tuesday because of the announcement of the policy.
The previous deadline had been yesterday.
The thrifts are University Federal Savings Association of Houston; Freedom S&L, Tampa, Fla.; Hill Financial Savings Association in Red Hill, Pa.; People's Heritage Savings, Salina, Kan.; and Pacific Savings Bank, Costa Mesa, Calif. 

Christies International PLC said Tokyo-based Aska International Co. owns 7.2% of the company. 

The London-based fine-arts auction house said the Japanese concern bought 11 million of its ordinary shares from Carisbrook Holdings U.K. Ltd., a company owned by Australian financier Robert Holmes a Court.
Carisbrook, which surfaced as a Christies shareholder last December, retains a small stake of "significantly less than 1 million shares," said Christies Finance Director David Tyler. 

Aska's emergence as a major Christies shareholder puzzled company officials.
Mr. Tyler said Christies had never heard of Aska but believes it might be a privately held company run by Yasumichi Marushita, a Japanese art collector.
Christies officials were trying yesterday to gather information about Aska and its intentions toward the stake.
Aska couldn't be reached for comment. 

"We hope it is a long-term investment," Mr. Tyler said. "We anticipate that is the case." 

Swissair, Switzerland's shareholder-owned flag carrier, said talks are under way with Scandinavian Airlines Systems on a possible cooperation accord.
A Swissair spokesman, who declined to reveal details of the talks, said, "It will be another agreement similar to the Delta agreement, but for Europe." In July, Swissair and Delta Air Lines announced an agreement to take a 5% stake in one another.
That agreement built on a cooperation accord announced in March, in which the two airlines agreed to coordinate flight scheduling, marketing and other operational efforts.
SAS, which is 50% owned by Sweden, Norway and Denmark, has a 10% stake in Texas Air Corp. and is backing an investor group buying 53% of LAN Chile. 

Just as Peugeot SA Chairman Jacques Calvet seemed to be winning a bitter wage dispute with striking workers in two plants, an item appeared in the satirical newspaper Le Canard Enchaine that could give the strike a second wind.
The paper printed copies of Mr. Calvet's supposedly secret tax returns for the past three years, allowing all his employees to see that his salary was 2.22 billion francs last year (about $346,000) and that his raise was 24% in 1988.
Peugeot workers are striking because they want more than the 4.4% offered by the auto company. 

The Soviet Communist Party rebuked two government ministers for failing to produce and deliver basic consumer goods, Pravda said. "Out of 276 basic consumer goods, 243 cannot be found in shops, including soap, toothpaste, razor blades, notebooks, pencils, clothing and shoes," the newspaper said.
The two officials who were reprimanded, Pravda said, were the minister responsible for chemical and timber industries and the minister in charge of social development. 

Japan is underwriting a $25 million, three-month cultural festival to polish its image in the European Community. "Europalia 89" got under way this week and will include such features of Japanese culture as Sumo wrestling and No theater presentations staged throughout Europe.
Japan is the first nation outside Europe to be the focus of Europalia, a biennial event showcasing a single country that began 20 years ago.
The aim of Japan, which is viewed by Europeans as a sometimes-aggressive trading partner, is "to show ourselves from a better angle," says Mikie Kiyoi, first secretary of the Japanese Embassy in Brussels. 

Up to 46,000 highly qualified young people are leaving Ireland every year to search for work. 

"This is a very disturbing and distressing figure.
The last time it was as high as that was in 1958," Communications Minister Ray Burke said when the latest emigration statistics were announced. 

Figures for the past five years show that up to one in five people in the 15-to-24-year-old age group decided to emigrate to Britain, Australia and North America. "The equivalent of the population of Galway left the country last year and will continue to leave.
I think it is absolutely shattering," said Roman Catholic Bishop Eamonn Casey. 

Today's emigrants are computer-literate graduates -- the men and women who might have been Ireland's future architects, doctors, nurses and business executives.
They are leaving a nation where almost 18% of the work force is unemployed -- one of the highest jobless rates in the European Community. 

Ironically, Ireland could prove to be the economic success story of Europe in 1989, with analysts forecasting a 6% growth rate, record exports, a big boost for the crucial manufacturing industry and an excellent year for tourism. 

Sicilian muscatel is the best wine for use during the celebration of the Roman Catholic Mass.
The judgment was pronounced by a panel of priests and wine experts during a conference in Asti, in Italy's Piedmont region. . . . Iraq has banned nightclub patrons from throwing money at dancers and other entertainers.
It says the custom humiliates the national currency. 

