.START 

Securities firms that underwrite stock offerings usually find something kind to say about their corporate clients, and this is the case with Smith's Food & Drug Centers. 

Smith's, a successful and fast-growing supermarket chain based in Salt Lake City, went public in June at 19.
The shares have since risen to 24 1/2, a level at which Rotan Mosle says Smith's shares are overvalued by 50% -- and well worth avoiding. 

Goldman Sachs, on the other hand, has given the stock a plug.
Anything less would have been impolitic.
Goldman was the underwriter in Smith's initial public stock offering. 

Gary Giblen, Rotan's supermarket analyst, says that Smith's stock price, about 21 times bullish estimates for 1989 earnings, is trading at a premium to the industry's best (and proven) chains and that its multiple assumes a level of earnings growth Smith's has yet to sustain. 

Mr. Giblen says Smith's is about to run into a nasty surprise that will put a damper on its earnings.
The company is entering Phoenix, Ariz., its biggest market, on Nov. 1.
It will go head to head with Albertson's, a highly regarded chain that is moving in on the same date.
Within a year or so, Smith's plans on having eight big stores there and Albertson's plans on opening nine or 10. 

When the chains were making their plans, Phoenix was one of the fastest growing cities in the country.
Its population surge, however, has slowed.
And according to a survey by Mr. Giblen, Phoenix has more supermarket square footage per person than any other U.S. metropolis.
He predicts "a long, bloody price war." Mr. Giblen says the four established chains in Phoenix are more modern and tougher than the stores in Smith's other markets. 

Richard Barr, a Phoenix food broker, says "The area is over-stored now." With the new entrants, he fears, "it's going to be a bloodbath." 

Mr. Giblen is the first to concede that Smith's, which operates 94 stores in eight Western states, is well run and a nice place to shop.
Its large, modern stores combining groceries and drugs are full of wide aisles and beaming employees, who seemingly make it their goal for customers to breeze through checkout lines. 

Sales have jumped 21.8% a year since 1984, thanks to newer and bigger stores and higher sales per square foot.
The company strives to couple an upbeat ambiance with low prices. (Its slogan: "When Smith's comes to town, prices go down"). 

While Smith's earnings have risen at a compounded rate of 12%, they haven't climbed as quickly or as steadily as its sales.
Net profit margins have slipped to 1.4% from 1.8% in 1984.
And Smith's return on equity, in the low teens, is well behind the industry leaders'. 

Albertson's has higher net margins (2.4%), higher return on equity (22%) and higher earnings growth -- well above 20% in recent years -- than Smith's.
But Albertson's is trading at a lower multiple (18) of estimated earnings. 

Even Stephen Mandel, analyst with Goldman Sachs, concedes that Smith's stock doesn't appear a bargain.
But it will prove to have been so, he says, after its earnings explode at 25% per annum. 

Mr. Mandel prophesies net of $1.15 a share this year and $1.35 in 1990 and "very significant" gains thereafter.
His reason, simply, is that Smith's "is superb at the supermarket business." (It should be noted that Mr. Mandel has in the past declined to recommend other stocks underwritten by Goldman.) 

Robert Bolinder, Smith's chief financial officer, says Smith's profit margins suffered from the cost of remodeling and opening stores.
But such costs, relative to Smith's growing size, will shrink.
Smith's aims to keep on adding about 14 new stores a year, but it will benefit from synergies and economies of scale.
Mr. Bolinder thus predicts that sales, margins and returns on equity will increase. 

And Smith's debt is low enough, analysts note, to cushion a bit of bleeding in Phoenix.
Mr. Bolinder says Smith's can absorb two years of losses there and still keep pace with Goldman's earnings estimates.
He concedes that population growth has slowed, but adds that Smith's stores are planned for well-populated areas and won't depend on growth.
Asked whether the city is overstored, he says "they said that about Tucson." Smith's entered that city in 1987 and turned profitable there in less than a year. "There are plenty of stores in Phoenix, but they are the wrong kind of stores," he says.
Mr. Bolinder, a former vice chairman at Albertson's, says "the market is ripe" and can accommodate both chains.
Mike Reuling, executive vice president of store development at Albertson's, is a bit less generous.
He says "we intend there to be room for us." 

Smith's Food & Drug Centers 

(NYSE; Symbol: SFD) 

Business: Food and drug supermarket chain 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Sales: $1.39 billion 

Net income: $17.7 million; 91 cents a share* 

Second quarter, July 1, 1989: 

Per-share earnings: 30 cents vs. 24 cents 

Average daily trading volume: 59,217 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 25.3 million 

*Company completed a public offering of 5,975,000 new shares and 1.5 million existing shares on June 21, 1989. 

