.START 

Does the air in your office make you nauseous?
Try sitting next to a plant.
Better yet, sit next to a fan pointed at a plant. 

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration says plants can clean up fumes from paint, furniture and cigarettes that make office workers woozy.
B.C. Wolverton, a scientist at NASA's Stennis Space Center in Bay St. Louis, Miss., calls plants a "promising, economical solution to indoor air pollution." 

"Plants take substances out of the air through the tiny openings in their leaves," Mr. Wolverton said.
He added that plant leaves, roots and soil bacteria also remove "trace levels of toxic vapors." 

After studying plants for two years, Mr. Wolverton concluded that philodendron, spider plant and golden pothos are especially good at removing formaldehyde, which is released in offices from foam insulation and particle-board products.
Flowering plants, such as gerbera daisy and crysanthemum, work well against benzene, which is released from inks, paints and plastics. 

Bamboo palm, peace lily, ficus, mass cane, mother-in-law's tongue, English ivy and Chinese evergreen also make good air purifiers, according to Mr. Wolverton's study. 

To clear rooms of cigarette smoke and organic solvents, Mr. Wolverton suggests installing a planter with a fan at the bottom.
The fan would pull polluted air into a mixture of potting soil and activated carbon.
The carbon filter would absorb the air pollutants and hold them until the plant's roots and micro-organisms in the soil could feast on them. 

NASA studies plants because it wants to find ways to purify air in space stations.
The agency hopes someday to build habitats, maybe on Mars, where plants, bugs and animals would regulate the atmosphere without the help of oxygen and heavy machinery from earth.
Plants may play a role on the planned earth-orbiting space station.
One experiment, called the salad machine, will try to grow fresh vegetables on the station as food for the astronauts. 

The Associated Landscape Contractors of America, a Falls Church, Va., trade association that kicked in $25,000 for the NASA study, has a shorter-term interest: selling more plants.
The trade group represents contractors who install and maintain plants in offices. 

The trade group said it backed Mr. Wolverton's work because his research "was not communicated as thoroughly as it might have been." They co-sponsored a press conference trumpeting Mr. Wolverton's work, and they sent each member of Congress -- and a bunch of reporters, too -- a green plant labeled "clean air machine." 

But the landscapers still have some public-relations hurdles to overcome. "Some skeptics are labeling the use of plants for solving indoor air-pollution problems as voodoo science, witchcraft, pipedreams," the trade group admitted. 

