.START 

Backers of legislation aimed at revising the federal racketeering law are scrapping one of the most controversial provisions in the bill. 

Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D., Ariz.), a chief sponsor of the legislation, has indicated he plans to drop the provision that would make the bill apply to pending racketeering cases, not just future ones. 

The overall legislation is designed to take some of the bite out of the 1970 Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law, or RICO.
A key part of the bill would eliminate the ability of RICO plaintiffs to get triple damages in most civil RICO suits. 

Sen. DeConcini's move followed a flurry of negative press articles in Arizona and in Washington, D.C., highlighting his campaign contributions from Arizona businessman Charles Keating Jr. Mr. Keating was hit with two major RICO suits this year following the collapse of Lincoln Savings & Loan Association, which he owned.
Opponents of RICO reform have argued loudly that the retroactivity provision of the bill would bail out Mr. Keating and other current RICO defendants. 

The business coalition that has fought long and hard for RICO revision is reluctantly going along. "The real issue is halting these suits prospectively," says Richard Moe, who represents the insurance industry. "There is broad consensus that this is the last chance for passing RICO reform.
No one wants to jeopardize it." Similar RICO legislation has died on the vine each of the past four years. 

"They are throwing things overboard to keep the balloon afloat," maintains Michael Waldman of Public Citizen, part of the odd but potent alliance of consumer groups, plaintiffs attorneys and some corporations (most of which are plaintiffs in pending RICO cases) that has so far blocked the RICO legislation. 

The legislation's outlook in the House, meanwhile, is hazy as staffers to Rep. William Hughes (D., N.J.), head of a House Judiciary subcommittee, ponder various approaches. 

"What looked like a done deal earlier this year is now a wild card," says a Washington lawyer fighting the legislation. 

A FORMER SEC OFFICER pleaded guilty to federal stock-fraud charges. 

Sheldon Kanoff, 53, who served as the Securities and Exchange Commission's chief examiner for broker-dealer inspection in the New York regional office from 1970 to 1983, pleaded guilty yesterday in U.S. District Court in Newark, 

The charges stemmed from an alleged stock-conspiracy scheme engineered by Mr. Kanoff and other former officials of F.D. Roberts Securities Inc. Mr. Kanoff was a former president, partner and director of the Paramus, N.J.-based pennystock firm that ceased operating and filed under bankruptcy-law proceedings in February.
None of the charges were related to any of Mr. Kanoff's activities at the SEC. 

Mr. Kanoff, who agreed to cooperate with the Newark U.S. Attorney's investigation of F.D. Roberts, faces a potential prison sentence and fines on two counts of stock-fraud conspiracy and a combined count of stock and tax fraud, according to the agreement read by U.S. District Judge Nicholas H. Politan. 

Albert Weiss, 44, another former president of F.D. Roberts, pleaded guilty to two counts of securities fraud and one count of filing a false income-tax return in 1987.
Mr. Weiss also faces a potential prison sentence and fines. 

Also, three former F.D. Roberts brokers yesterday pleaded guilty to stock-fraud charges.
A total of 12 F.D. Roberts investors and employees so far have pleaded guilty to stock-fraud conspiracy, said Assistant U.S. Attorney Joseph G. Braunreuther. 

Mr. Braunreuther said the former F.D. Roberts conspirators bilked clients out of "tens of millions of dollars" by inflating prices of stocks sold. 

TEXAS PRISON OFFICIALS block publication of inmates' monthly newspaper. 

The officials apparently are concerned about whether legal articles written by inmates have been accurate -- and about whether they have incited other inmates to file more legal grievances. 

The actual censorship started with the suspension of a staff-written legal column in the June issue of the newspaper, known as the Echo.
Subsequently, the newspaper wasn't allowed to be published at all in July and August. 

The columnist, Randy Farrar, a lawyer who heads the Inmate Legal Services office, said he received conflicting information from prison officials about the reason for the ban on legal articles.
Mr. Farrar said the Echo traditionally has been barred from publishing articles about civil rights issues, the basis for many lawsuits by prisoners.
His column deals with recent state court cases on detention and appeals. 

Mr. Farrar said the suspension of his column and other law articles is under investigation by the court-appointed special master who has been monitoring Texas prisons since a federal judge found widespread civil rights violations in the penal system in 1982.
The investigation focuses on whether the censorship violates prisoners' right to access to the courts. 

Prison spokesman Charles Brown, who is also the adviser to the inmate editor and staff of the Echo, said the 35,000-circulation newspaper will resume publication -- under closer scrutiny by the administration -- with a double issue to cover August and September.
Mr. Brown said Mr. Farrar's column will return in the October issue. 

"As long as the information is appropriate and accurate, it will be allowed in the paper," Mr. Brown said.
He said appropriate articles would include almost anything "as long as it's of interest to the inmates." 

But, he added, "you wouldn't want to supply inmates with information that would come back to haunt you." 

AIDS CASES: In the past five years, AIDS has generated enough legal issues to fill a 1,000-page text.
The newly published, "AIDS: Cases and Materials," is the first casebook to cover the impact of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome on the law, says Michael L. Closen, a key editor of the book and a professor at John Marshall Law School.
About 40 law schools in the U.S. are currently conducting or planning to conduct courses on AIDS, and Prof.
Closen estimates that by the end of the spring semester the casebook should be used in courses at 10 of the law schools. 

MYERSON & KUHN DEFECTOR: Albert Halprin, formerly a partner in the Washington office of New York-based Myerson & Kuhn, has joined Verner, Liipfert, Bernhard, McPherson & Hand, of Washington.
Mr. Halprin, 41, specializes in telecommunications and was previously chief of the Federal Communications Commission's common carrier bureau. 

