.START 

Need a second-hand refrigerator?
Maybe a used counter top, calculator or desk?
Better yet, a robot or fire truck? 

Bob Fittro sells it all, everything the Merck & Co. pharmaceutical plant in West Point, Pa., doesn't need anymore.
Like lots of other companies, Merck is discovering there's gold in corporate garbage. 

Last year, the first for Mr. Fittro's program, he sold $500,000 of surplus Merck supplies to wholesalers, retailers and other drug companies.
This year, he expects to move $1.5 million to $2 million of goods out of a 30,000 square-foot warehouse. 

Selling off what might have been thrown out means "getting that final return on your investment," says Paul Wenberg, the "investment recovery" manager for Phillips Petroleum Co. 

Mr. Wenberg has sold $12 million of surplus Phillips goods in the first eight months of this year, up from $11 million for all of 1988 and $7 million for 1987.
Like Merck, Phillips first tries to reuse discarded or surplus items somewhere else inside the company.
Unlike Merck, what it can't reuse it sells directly to the public, opening its "showroom" -- a 66,000 squarefoot warehouse -- one day every other month.
Earlier this month, 3,000 people showed up at its store, buying $60,000 of goods in five hours. 

"The beauty of it is, it all goes directly to the bottom line," says Mr. Wenberg. 

Investment recovery does have its headaches.
Department managers say they are constantly having to convince skeptical senior executives that their operations will be profitable.
Senior officials, they say, frequently ask where buyers will come from, although investment-recovery managers say they are abundant.
And other department heads often have to be begged or bullied into sending their castoff supplies to the investment-recovery department rather than to a garbage bin. 

More than 200 major U.S. companies now belong to the Investment Recovery Association, a nine-year-old organization based in Cleveland.
That membership is up 54% from four years ago. 

In 1988, according to a new recovery association survey, the 93 member companies that responded sold a total $285.5 million of surplus goods at their corporate garage sales.
In addition, the same companies avoided spending a total $157.6 million by reusing old equipment and leftover raw materials. 

Among 12 giant companies with annual sales of $4 billion to $7 billion, the association says the average 1988 return (both sales and avoided costs) was $7.4 million, while the average recovery-program budget was just $496,550.
Among 14 small companies with less than $1 billion in sales, the average return totaled $1.2 million and the average program cost a mere $53,079. 

The value of such a program is actually even higher because it cuts down on garbage-disposal costs.
Indeed, many companies say they are starting investment-recovery programs because of rapidly rising disposal costs brought on by an ever-worsening landfill shortage in the U.S. 

"You just can't dump stuff like you used to," says Mr. Fittro. 

Companies with large capital-equipment needs, plus businesses whose excess raw materials can pose an environmental hazard, dominate the investment-recovery field.
Electric utilities lead the way, followed by chemical, forest products, petroleum, food and computer concerns. 

At Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co., which has one of the most extensive programs, investment-recovery manager M.G. Shaver boasts he can recycle just about anything. 

Mr. Shaver's 15-member department includes two specialists who sell surplus manufacturing equipment to other companies and brokers.
He also has three commodity specialists who sell chemicals and solvents, plastics and resins, metals and waste paper.
And every November 3M holds a clearance sale of lower-value manufacturing equipment.
Last year's take at that event: nearly $300,000. 

All told, in 1988 Mr. Shaver's department generated $34.5 million in sales, up from $10 million five years ago.
At the same time, 3M avoided having to spend another $30 million on new equipment and supplies.
Mr. Shaver's department accounted for 3.7% of 3M's 1988 domestic pretax profit, or nine cents in the corporate per-share earnings of $5.09.
So far this year, Mr. Shaver says his department is running about 30% ahead of 1988. 

At Mead Corp. in Dayton, Ohio, the focus is on surplus mill equipment.
Rosalie Vance, engineering-services administrator, is a one-man band, seeking first to transfer old equipment to other Mead paper mills.
She does this by "advertising" to 25 or so plant managers.
If they aren't interested, Ms. Vance solicits 500 or so potential equipment buyers, half of them dealers. "I'm a bulletin board," she says, adding that even a limited-scale program like hers is "very profitable," returning $10 or so for every dollar spent. 

Mead illustrates another advantage of investment recovery: For industries that are expanding, as the paper industry is right now, lead times on new equipment orders can run as long as three years.
Readily available old equipment can either fill the need temporarily or, with some refurbishing, eliminate the need to order new, Ms. Vance and others say. 

Other companies with active programs include MCI Telecommunications Corp. and the Frito-Lay unit of PepsiCo Inc. MCI has found a ready market for its outdated analog switching equipment among small telephone companies.
Frito-Lay has stressed reusing equipment not just within the division but also at Pizza Hut and Taco Bell, other PepsiCo units.
Ovens, fryers and blenders, for instance, are always in demand. 

Then there's Weyerhaeuser Co., whose 15-year-old investment-recovery program, one of the granddaddies, has evolved into a full-fledged retailing operation.
The company has two stores open to the public, one in Olympia, Wash., and one in Wilson, N.C.
To keep them chock-a-block with used lumbering equipment and other gear, Weyerhaeuser even buys other companies' surplus goods.
The timber products company recently sold the Venezuelan government an entire plywood plant made up of 30% old Weyerhaeuser equipment and 70% equipment bought from other manufacturers. 

This year, the Weyerhaeuser stores will gross about $12 million, says Dennis Knutz, the company's investment-recovery manager.
Besides chain saws and such, Weyerhaeuser sells trains, planes, automobiles, trucks and recently a 500,000-ton cargo ship.
While there are no helicopters in stock right now, Mr. Knutz is quick to say, "I can get you one.
Cheap]" 

