.START 

As the European Community geared up a couple of decades ago to become a trade bloc on the Western scene, the old Council for Mutual Economic Assistance began presenting itself to the world as its Eastern counterpart.
In one sense, that attempt at communist image-making wasn't a total sham.
Comecon certainly does block trade. 

Mikhail Gorbachev might speak, as he recently did in Strasbourg, France, of creating "a vast economic space between the Atlantic and the Urals." And George Bush might speak, as he recently did in Paris, of creating a Western "clearinghouse" of economic aid to the reform communists of Eastern Europe.
But after an East-West estrangement of 40 years, it might well take 40 years more, Cold War or no Cold War, to clean up Comecon's mess and at last put Europe back together again. 

Comecon (pronounced commie con) was Stalin's baby, born in 1949 as his answer to the Marshall Plan.
Its purpose in life was to wrench the six newly subjugated countries of Europe from their natural trading family in the West and chain them to the Soviet Empire. 

Standing colonialism on its head, the Soviets foisted oil and ore on their more-advanced vassals and took home finished goods.
It worked beautifully, for the Soviets.
Paul Marer, an American specialist on East Bloc economies, figures they milked Eastern Europe for $14 billion in the 1950s -- as much as Western Europe got in aid from the U.S. 

Obeying Moscow, East Europeans built heavy industry and have lived ever since under its soot cloud.
Because Soviet raw material was cheap, they became masters of waste.
Because Soviet standards were low, they became makers of junk.
Without real prices or real money, the members of Comecon swapped their crude wares with less know-how than nomads in a 13th-century souk. 

They still do.
Only now, Stalin's vacuum-packed empire has popped its lid.
Knowing his country can't survive sealed off from capitalism, Mr. Gorbachev has opened it to the West.
Nor does he mind if his vassals get to know their Western cousins.
But having knocked on the West's door, Comecon can't expect too warm a welcome.
The West won't take Comecon seriously until it has something decent to trade.
And that won't happen until Comecon turns itself into a serious market. 

For its most eager reformers -- the Soviets, the Hungarians and the Poles -- rehabilitating Comecon will prove even harder than making sense of their own ruined economies.
The organization runs by consensus, and Comecon's other European members -- East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and Romania -- still worship the central plan.
Vietnam, Cuba and Mongolia are also members, and they feel the same way.
Their refusal to give ground deepens a bitter schism in the Soviet bloc. 

Hungarians and Poles now talk of quitting Comecon.
Or they want it partitioned into camps of planners and marketeers.
Mr. Gorbachev may sympathize, but he hardly wants Comecon's unsealing to undo his empire -- not when he still expects Eastern Europe's workers to help pay perestroika's bills. 

"Comecon is a dinosaur trying to find a place in a world that has no need for dinosaurs," says Mihaly Simai, a Hungarian economist who has studied the trade group.
The man who oversees Poland's trade with the West calls Comecon a "deadweight." "We have reached the point where trade is a question of life or death," says Andrzej Olechowski at the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations in Warsaw. "Comecon doesn't give us a window on the world.
It doesn't add to our bargaining power.
We can think about dropping the whole thing." 

In East Germany, though, Comecon is just what the commissar ordered. "We need a strong wall between the world economy and ours," says Karl Heinz Stiemerling, a professor of socialist political economy there. "We have to protect ourselves from the destructive influence of the world market.
We won't risk our socialist achievements." 

The Russians will.
But for all Mr. Gorbachev's longing to share a "common European home," it isn't nearly so certain that he plans to retire as the dominating landlord.
At least one skeptical Pole, Solidarity sociologist Jadwiga Staniszkis, strongly doubts it. 

"The system's main interest is to maintain the empire," she says. "This crisis will keep it together, not make it fly apart.
To guarantee its survival, the Russians will give up everything -- except our belonging to them." 

The nations of Comecon are so at odds now that they canceled their last summit and haven't scheduled another one.
But nothing puts off Comecon bureaucrats.
They go on blocking trade as usual.
Every year, they rig a cat's cradle of barter deals vaguely based on world prices (albeit with thousands of different exchange rates fancifully set for different products and commodities) and transacted in the transferable ruble, a whimsical currency that can't be transferred.
With oil that Soviet reformers would prefer to ship west, East Europeans fuel outmoded factories they would prefer to scrap.
The factories produce hugely subsidized rubbish they can't pawn off on anybody but the Russians. 

The last thing a Comecon dealer wants to end up with in this fantasy land is a trade surplus.
In 1986, the Soviet Union ran one with Eastern Europe of roughly $4 billion.
But when the price of oil dropped, the ink turned red.
East Europeans kept swapping the same goods for oil worth less.
So in 1988, the $4 billion surplus was theirs.
The Russians made up for it in transferable rubles, which won't buy anything anywhere.
Eastern Europe's surplus thus became a gift to the Soviet Union for the preservation of perestroika. 

Protectionism reigns in Comecon, too, but in these empty-shelved economies it serves to block exports, not imports.
This inverted logic was used last February to hobble the only traders Comecon has who behave rationally: smugglers, black marketeers and tourists. 

Liberated to travel abroad, Polish nomads dishing out bribes had been looting the shops of their neighbors for anything short at home.
Over the first 10 months of 1988, Soviet customs officers watched 50,000 washing machines, 200,000 refrigerators and 400,000 televisions drain out of the country.
To calm their angry consumers, the Russians banned exports of those items, throwing in children's shoes, instant coffee and caviar.
The Czechoslovaks, Hungarians and East Germans followed suit, their customs officers beating up a few Poles in the process.
Then the Poles retaliated with export bans of their own. 

The immediate effect was the wondrous reappearance of the Dniepr refrigerator in the department stores of the Ukraine.
And across the border, in the Polish city of Bialystok, the pickings from abroad turned slimmer in the muddy market at the edge of town known to the locals as Nevsky Prospect. 

Television sets were scarce there on a cool Saturday earlier this year.
They had been replaced by a range of lesser rarities laid out over scraps of plastic on the ground: Russian chocolates, curling irons, cutlery, shower nozzles, juice extractors; plus East German fishing rods, a Czechoslovak carpet, a Turkish fire extinguisher. 

"Now that you can't take out much equipment, it's mostly gold I trade," said a man in the crowd with a ring on every finger and a sack filled with jewelry around his neck.
Past him, three Russians stood in the mud, trying to sell an electric meat grinder. 

"It's easy to come over," said one. "We buy jeans here." 

"This works better than Comecon," a Pole put in. "It includes Turkey and Yugoslavia." Said his friend: "We took everything from the Soviet Union -- now we start on England and America]" 

Back when Nikita Khrushchev still thought the Soviet Union would be the one to take everything from England and America, Comecon did start trying to make sense of itself.
Khrushchev wanted one central plan for the whole bloc.
He never got it, or much else. 

In 1971, mimicking the EC, Comecon drew up the Comprehensive Program for Socialist Integration.
Its prospectus noted the utility of two companies in two countries doing business directly, in exchange for money that can actually be spent.
It then forgot the whole idea until Mr. Gorbachev came along with his Complex Program for Scientific and Technological Cooperation Until the Year 2000. 

This is a network of 2,000 joint ventures intended to break the state monopoly on foreign trade and simultaneously smash the West's lead in high technology.
It has failed.
A recent Comecon bulletin wondered, with a touch of glasnost, if the 650 projects already completed have boosted economic growth. "Such an influence cannot yet be observed," it concluded. 

Hungary's joint ventures seem more like far-flung searches for anything, other than oil, to buy from the Soviet Union.
One of them uses supposed Soviet know-how to make semiconductors.
Another has Russians digging a Budapest subway.
In Poland, several companies on an official list profess not to know that their joint ventures exist. 

"It's like marrying kids before they meet," says a Pole who has looked into the ventures. "They don't stimulate the hormones of greed." 

Undeterred, Comecon now has come up with the Collective Concept for the Socialist International Division of Labor.
Designed to mesh the bloc by assigning restrictive production tasks to each country, this is the identical idea that teed off Romania in 1964.
This time, aping the EC again, Comecon pledges to do it in a "unified" market.
But that's teed off not only Romania again, but East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria. 

Never mind.
It won't work anyway. "They don't know what they're talking about," says Prof.
Simai of Hungary. "How can you have a common market when you don't have a market?" 

One answer is to chuck your rubles, forints and zlotys, and do business in dollars.
The Soviets and Hungarians already use the dollar for nearly a third of their trade.
Many a Hungarian also buys his new Lada from West Germany for marks.
Trouble is, nobody in Comecon wants to squander hard currency in the East when everything worth buying is in the West.
Cozying up to the EC makes more sense. 

Last year, after seething over it for years, Comecon finally opted to wink at the status of West Berlin in return for the EC's formal recognition.
Every member, save Romania, has since sent an ambassador to Brussels, the seat of the European Community.
Though it still won't dicker with Comecon as a bloc, the EC has signed separate deals with Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland, and may do as much with the Soviet Union. 

Comecon reformers are elated.
They want to plug into the EC power grid, get a piece of Europe's Eureka high-tech research program and set up as an export platform for South Korea to conveniently manufacture and ship its wares into the EC.
And the trade tide is turning.
Hungary's westward exports rose 20% last year.
The Soviets now sell as much to capitalists as they sell to socialists. 

From the West, though, the view isn't so stirring.
True, EC states and companies are falling over one another (and the Americans and the Japanese) to start joint ventures, train East Bloc managers, advance credit and ease debt.
But the EC still ships less to Comecon than it does to Switzerland.
For now, its preoccupation is politics. 

When it moved in April to harmonize its Comecon contacts, the EC's wary purpose was to let West Germany lead the way, without letting it get too far out in front.
Despite George Bush's July foray into Poland and Hungary, and the rush of Western aid following Solidarity's takeover of the Polish government, making Europe economically whole again remains a matter for some distant date when Comecon learns to do business.
Meantime, as always, the people will do it themselves. 

A Hungarian sells Polish ham in Singapore, buys computers, sells computers in Hungary, buys clothes, sells clothes in Poland.
A Pole sells Russian bedding in Holland, buys computers, sells computers in Russia, buys pianos, sells pianos in Poland. 

And, long after the big export clampdown, the private stalls of Warsaw still stock all the Russian beluga caviar you can eat. 

"No Russian law will stop us," says a man behind a pile of tins one day. "I guarantee it.
We'll fish for it ourselves if we have to -- but in Warsaw we will always have caviar." 

Peter Gumbel contributed to this story. 

