.START 

Tokyo stocks retreated for the first time in five trading days Wednesday, with share prices pressured by profit-taking after Tuesday's record high.
Prices also dropped in London and Frankfurt. 

Morning trading in Tokyo was relatively active, reflecting momentum improved by Tuesday's gains.
The market failed to maintain energy in the afternoon, however, because of a lack of participation by institutional investors, traders said. 

The Nikkei index fell 74.25 points to 35370.57.
The index gained 484.11 points Tuesday.
First section volume was estimated at 1 billion shares, up from 970 million Tuesday.
The last time the trading volume was a billion shares was July 27.
The Tokyo stock price index of all issues listed in the first section was up 6.44 points to 2681.66. 

In early trading in Tokyo Thursday, the Nikkei index rose 128.26 points to 35498.83. 

Traders and fund managers agreed the gains made Tuesday owed much to sales effort by securities firms.
As Tuesday was the first trading day for October transactions, securities firms, which suffered through a sluggish summer, were said to have tried hard to push up sales to start the latter half of the fiscal year. 

Shin Tokoi, deputy general manager of Japanese equities at County Natwest Securities, Japan, said investors were suspicious about whether the market would continue to advance as rapidly as Tuesday. 

These investors didn't change their cautious attitudes toward the market and avoided committing long term to any issues, Mr. Tokoi said.
Their main concern for the time being is to continue profit-taking and retreating quickly rather than buying issues in expectation for future advances, he said. 

Wednesday's main losers were highpriced issues, which made strong gains Tuesday. 

Sony, which advanced 410 yen Tuesday, ended at 8,590 yen ($60.32), down 220 yen. 

Fanuc, a 500-yen gainer the previous day, lost 50 to 7,950.
Kyocera gave up 140 to 5,750.
Pioneer Electronic was down 70 at 5,300. 

Electric utilities fell on profit-taking, traders said.
Kansai Electric Power was down 130 to 4,510.
Tokyo Electric Power went down 30 to 5,890. 

London shares closed slightly lower on continued nervousness over the direction of U.K. interest rates and corporate profitability. 

The Financial Times 100-share index, the most closely watched measure of the market, finished down 4.9 points at 2331.2.
The index, however, staged a modest recovery in late dealings after it opened weaker at 2329.8 and slipped as much as 14.4 points by early afternoon. 

The 30-share index settled 6.1 points lower at 1907.4.
Volume was only 428.9 million shares traded, down from 450.8 million Tuesday. 

Even with the modest rebound before the close, dealers said the market remains under pressure from Tuesday's report showing Britain's third-worst current account and merchandise trade deficits.
The deficits have focused attention on the prospects for an interest rate increase in the coming weeks. 

"The market consolidated a bit today," a dealer with a large U.K. brokerage firm said. "There's a lot of negative talk going around . . . but it can't be a straight line down." 

Composite insurers firmed, which dealers linked to expectations that damage claims arising from Hurricane Hugo won't be as bad as expected. 

General Accident, which was the first U.K. composite insurer to disclose its estimated losses from the hurricane, settled up #1 at #10.96.
It said that losses in the Caribbean and southern U.S. could total #60 million. 

Frankfurt prices fell across the board amid continued rumors the Bundesbank will call for an emergency meeting Thursday to raise interest rates. 

Earlier in the day, a central bank spokesman denied the rumor, which had unsettled some financial markets in Europe.
The DAX index dropped 17.38 points to 1591.65. 

Traders said the Bundesbank-meeting rumor, which originated in London, had been instrumental in making many investors nervous and caused a sell-off in German equities.
While speculation about an imminent rise in German interest rates has been making the rounds for days, it intensified this week, sending the DAX index into a tailspin Tuesday that cost it 2.8% by the end of Wednesday's session. 

Traders said the market seems overloaded with speculative money and is likely to continue shedding for some time the gains it made earlier this month. 

Few market participants however, predict doom and gloom for the coming quarter.
Many say once the rate increase -- seen by some as a given -- is in place, the market will resume its march upward. 

Until then, blue-chip and second-tier stocks are going to suffer from profit-taking, and only special situations are expected to advance.
Wednesday, the retailer Horten was among the latter, helped by the announcement Tuesday that B.A.T Industries intends to sell its 51% stake in the German retailer.
Horten shares went up 5.5 marks to 322.5 marks ($171). 

Other retailers were mixed.
Kaufhof lost 3 to 572, but Karstadt gained 4 to 682. 

Elsewhere, prices closed higher in Paris and Stockholm, lower in Zurich, Amsterdam and Milan, and mixed in Brussels. 

Zurich prices tumbled in moderately active trading as jitters about domestic interest rates and the bleak mood on other European stock markets prompted widespread selling, brokers said.
One broker said the negative sentiment affected all sectors, although industrials, chemicals, food shares and machinery stocks were hardest hit. 

Among Asian and Pacific markets, shares closed lower in Taipei, Seoul, Hong Kong and Singapore, were mixed in Manila and higher in Sydney and Wellington. 

Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end. 

