.START 

It's back to the future at Burger King. 

Nine months after acquiring the fast-food chain, Grand Metropolitan thinks it knows how to get Burger King on track again: By letting the customer, and the franchise operator, have it their way. 

Sound familiar?
While not resurrecting the "Have It Your Way" slogan that Burger King once used successfully, Grand Met says it will "break the rules" and become unconventional to lure customers back into Burger King's 5,989 stores world- wide. 

The idea is to please the customer. "This is about successful retailing in the 1990s," says Barry Gibbons, Burger King's chief executive. "Do whatever it takes to create a positive, memorable experience." 

Whether Burger King can deliver on its promise, and whether that notion will stand up against the overwhelming marketing clout of giant McDonald's, much less a lunch-hour rush with hurried patrons, is debatable.
Yet Mr. Gibbons says Burger King hasn't lost market share in recent months and actually has begun turning a profit.
Burger King has about 17% of the quick-service sandwich market. 

The new ad campaign, conceived by Saatchi & Saatchi and D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, was unveiled in Miami.
The campaign goes under the slogan "Sometimes You've Gotta Break the Rules." Reinforcing that idea, the world's second-largest restaurant company says it will reward crew and other employees for daring to do things differently by featuring some workers in a commercial.
Individual crews also are being encouraged to design their own work uniforms. 

Franchisees still smarting from Pillsbury's fitful management of the chain are "holding our breath," says Portland, Ore., operator Joseph Angel. "What's coming through {in the marketing campaign} will be great, but the question is still out there: Can these guys execute?" 

Mr. Gibbons, who had run 2,000 Grand Met restaurants in Europe, insists he already has.
He confirms that Burger King will post a profit for the year ending Saturday and adds that he's cut 30% more in costs than initially anticipated.
In the quarter ended March 31, the chain had a profit of $4.7 million on sales of $415.8 million.
That followed an unprofitable year when Pillsbury, as a defensive measure to deter Grand Met, for a time suggested spinning off Burger King, infuriating franchisees. 

Despite its external message that "Sometimes You've Gotta Break the Rules," Grand Met is keeping Burger King stores on a tight leash.
That's a big change from the past, when store operators were telling Pillsbury what to do.
Now, under Grand Met, says one veteran franchisee, "they come in and say, 'Here's what we're doing, we expect you to applaud, and if you don't, we're still going to do it. '" 

To ensure that store operators get the message, Burger King has enlarged its field staff -- and slashed several layers of management bureaucracy back at headquarters.
Now, field representatives drop by each store every few days, clipboards in hand, to evaluate customer-oriented operations.
Also, to make sure that customers have a direct line to the company, Burger King is installing a toll-free phone number for consumer feedback. 

One chronic complaint from customers has been the unpredictability of a Burger King visit.
Sometimes the place is sparkling clean, sometimes not.
Even Mr. Gibbons admits that until recently too few were watching "the unseen enemy": safety and cleanliness.
Now, restaurant managers are supposed to check bathrooms for cleanliness every 15 minutes during busy periods.
Crew members also are told to wash their hands every hour or so with a sterilizer. 

"They're doing an excellent job in turning the business around," says William Pothitos, a Montreal Burger King franchisee. "They're encouraging the franchisees to get their businesses cleaned up, and they're setting an example within their own stores." Burger King, tapping Grand Met's financial strength, now offers third-party financing for operators who need help in upgrading store decor and landscaping. 

Grand Met also is expanding the chain in the U.S. and abroad.
In the past eight months, it added 110 domestic stores and 28 overseas.
Mr. Gibbons says that a "significant number" of Wimpy's fast-food outlets, which Grand Met recently bought in Britain, will be converted into Burger Kings. 

To help sell the new strategy, Burger King will spend about $215 million on marketing -- roughly one-third of McDonald's budget -- in its new fiscal year. "That's marginally up from where we were," says Gary Langstaff, who came over from rival Hardee's in April to revamp Burger King's marketing.
Franchisees support the promotion with 4% of their gross sales each month. 

Much of that spending will go to win over kids as customers, Mr. Langstaff says.
That effort -- mindful of the tack cereal makers have long taken -- will begin in January.
Franchisees say they've been told to expect to add clubhouses to their restaurants.
Also coming: finger food, including party packs of chicken and fish, to round out the burger-heavy menu.
Sandwiches featuring barbecue and salsa flavors will be introduced shortly.
To communicate the "break-the-rules" ad series, Burger King hired 10 musical acts -- including Paul Shaffer and the World's Most Dangerous Band, crooner Mel Torme and blues singer John Lee Hooker -- and let them write their own songs for radio spots.
While abandoning the standardized jingle, that part of the campaign will be tied together with the line, "Sometimes you just gotta break the rules." 

TV spots feature the popular fast-cut approach to convey vignettes with surprise endings.
In one, an aircraft carrier commanding officer is seemingly in a combat situation, waiting for orders.
They come in Burger King bags; the crew has ordered out.
Another spot, called "Wrong Number," has a teen-ager getting a call on the mobile phone in his father's car from a girl with a sensual voice.
Thinking she's dialed a Burger King, the girl asks, "Do you deliver?" and the boy replies, "For you, sure." 

Mr. Langstaff was beaming over his ads but had some harsh words for his competition. "I think this industry is deplorable in marketing innovativeness," he said, contending that sameness is turning the business into one selling commodities. 

Speaking to employees assembled at Burger King's palatial headquarters, Mr. Langstaff told them: "Don't look back any more.
We're a brand new company." 

First Nationwide Account 

Young & Rubicam's San Francisco office yesterday picked up First Nationwide Bank's $15 million to $20 million ad account. 

First Nationwide, whose parent company, First Nationwide Financial Corp., is a unit of Ford Motor, put its account up for review in July.
A spokeswoman for First Nationwide said it decided to split with its previous shop, the San Francisco office of DDB Needham, after deciding that agency's work with other non-Ford auto makers was increasingly presenting a conflict.
DDB Needham, a unit of Omnicom Group, serviced the account for five years. 

The win raises annual billings for Young & Rubicam's San Francisco operation to about $120 million.
First Nationwide, which operates 245 retail offices in 14 states, considered Young & Rubicam and two other Ford agencies, Wells Rich Greene, New York, and WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson, San Francisco. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

AD SPENDING: Philip Morris took honors as the first company to break the $2 billion mark in annual ad spending, with $2.06 billion spent on advertising and promotion in 1988, according to a survey by Advertising Age magazine.
Procter & Gamble was the second biggest spender, with $1.51 billion.
General Motors, at $1.29 billion, was third, and Sears Roebuck, which spent $1.05 billion, was fourth. 

SEVEN-UP: "We've Upped the Taste of New Diet 7UP" is the theme of a new campaign pitching a reformulated and newly packaged version of the soft drink.
The campaign, created by Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, will be launched during the Super Bowl pre-game show in January.
Seven-Up will also expand its "spot" ad campaign for regular 7UP, which features animated red spots that leap off 7UP cans, with three new executions of the theme. 

HISPANIC MARKETING: Omnicom Group's Tracy-Locke unit, Dallas, formed an association with Ornelas & Associates, a Dallas-based marketing communications firm specializing in the Hispanic market.
Terms weren't disclosed. 

WHO'S NEWS: Patricia Stewart and Alan Saperstein were named executive vice presidents at Saatchi & Saatchi's Campbell-Mithun-Esty, New York. . . . Felice Kincannon was appointed managing director of Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston. . . . Ketchum Advertising, Pittsburgh, named Jan Hedquist managing director of Ketchum International. 

