.START 

All Henry Winkler wants is a chance. 

Sure, Mr. Winkler's resume is impeccable.
After spending a decade as the Fonz on "Happy Days," he jumped a few years ago to producing and directing.
He directed last year's MGM release, "Memories of Me," starring Billy Crystal.
He briefly was director of Touchstone Pictures' "Turner and Hooch," with Tom Hanks, but left early on because of "creative differences." He directed various TV shows.
He's been executive producer of ABC's "MacGyver" for five seasons. 

But sorry.
That just isn't enough to guarantee a job directing commercials.
Not anymore. 

That's right, Mr. Winkler wants to turn his hand to directing commercials.
But now that so many motion picture and TV directors are clamoring to direct commercials -- now that commercials are seen as downright fashionable as well as profitable -- it isn't easy to break in.
Indeed, Mr. Winkler has taken a step that no self-respecting name director would have had to take years ago: like a beginner, he's created a speculative reel of commercials to show advertisers what he can do. 

Mr. Winkler, ensconced in his cluttered office on the Paramount lot, a space crammed with movie posters, paper work and photographs of his family, is clearly nervous as he shows a visitor the reel.
This is the first time an outsider has gotten a glimpse of the still unfinished cut of six commercials.
Soft-spoken, in baggy pants and loafers, Mr. Winkler's only touch of Hollywood is the matching pink of his button-down shirt and slouchy socks. 

"Thirty seconds is a lot more difficult than two hours," Mr. Winkler says. "Every three-second cut is so vital, it's shocking.
Anybody who thinks they can waltz in and do {commercials} from a different discipline is in for a rude awakening." 

While Mr. Winkler calls himself "brand new at this," he actually has more than a passing familiarity with commercials.
He acted in about 30 of them as a struggling young actor, happily taking them on while his former classmates at the Yale drama school turned up their noses and waited on tables instead.
He was a shill for Alberto VO5 and H&R Block, for Talon zippers and Sanka coffee.
More recently, he directed his first two TV commercials, one for Taco Bell via WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson, and a second for Worlds of Wonder's Teddy Ruxpin, a Chiat/Day/Mojo client. 

The idea for creating a reel, though, came in early summer, after Mr. Winkler agreed to direct commercials through Odyssey Filmakers, a unit of Odyssey Entertainment.
Despite his established reputation, Mr. Winkler didn't have much of a track record in commercials.
At the same time, other feature film directors with more film experience than he has were swarming over the TV ad business. 

Clearly, the stigma that once attended TV commercial work is almost gone.
Part of the credit goes to the handsome pay: top commercial directors make from $7,500 to $10,000 a day and really big names can make almost double that.
And directors say filming commercials is a lot like going to the gym -- it keeps them in shape between films. 

Mr. Winkler's bid for entree into commercials is a series of six fake ads for four real products.
There are two funny spots for Le Menu frozen chicken dinners starring his friend Michael Tucker (Stuart Markowitz on "L.A.
Law") with a flock of live chickens.
There's a biker chick for Windex.
And there's a spot with two little boys eating Doritos.
Mr. Winkler, who is active in children's charitable organizations, is known for working well with kids. 

Sitting on the edge of his chair, Mr. Winkler doesn't relax until, at the reel's end, his visitor offers a compliment.
Then he collapses in relief. "I look at commercials with great respect now," he adds. "What it took to get them on the screen is extraordinary." 

Ad Notes. . . . 

ACQUISITION: Young & Rubicam, New York, acquired Landor Associates, a San Francisco-based identity management firm that helps companies manage their corporate and brand images.
Terms weren't disclosed, but industry executives believed it would fetch around $20 million.
Donald M. Casey, 53, who headed Y&R's design and sales promotion operations, becomes Landor's president and chief executive.
John M. Diefenbach, who had been president and chief executive of Landor and who industry executives say has been unpopular with some of Landor's management, will move to Y&R as director of corporate development.
Mr. Casey said Mr. Diefenbach is a "talented" executive and declined to comment on his popularity. 

