.START 

the biggest rise for any stock on any exchange yesterday -- in frenzied trading that triggered an explosive rally in other publicly traded funds that invest in a single country. 

But the rise, which was fueled by continued strong buying by Japanese investors, is triggering charges by some of Wall Street's savviest traders that the Spain Fund is the subject of blatant manipulation. 

"It's my feeling that Japanese brokerage firms are ganging up on" the Spain Fund to drive up its price, said Michael Steinhardt, who runs a well-known New York investment fund. "And what they are doing is ultimately not in the best interest of their clients." 

The price rise is "absolute insanity," said James Chanos, head of Kynikos Associates and another well-known investor. 

Both Messrs.
Steinhardt and Chanos have sold short shares of the Spain Fund.
That means they have sold borrowed stock, betting that the shares will fall and they can later buy them back at a lower price. 

Short sellers have been battered by the tremendous surge in the Spain Fund, which soared 37% last week on the back of strong Japanese buying; the fund's shares are up a phenomenal 265% this year. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Spain Fund rose $12 a share to close at $38.75. 

Yesterday's frenetic activity spilled into other so-called single-country funds.
Germany Fund soared 25%, Malaysia Fund jumped 18%, and Thai Fund and Asia Pacific Fund both rose about 15%. 

What is so extraordinary about the runup is that many of these funds now trade at extremely fat premiums to the underlying value of the foreign stocks in their portfolios.
The Spain Fund now stands at an unprecedented 165% premium, the largest premium of any publicly traded fund.
The single-country funds sell a fixed number of shares to investors and use the money to buy foreign stocks -- Spanish stocks in the case of the Spain Fund.
These so-called closed-end funds trade at a premium or, more typically, a discount to the value of the stocks they hold. 

The Spain Fund's explosive 265% rise has stunned many traders because the Spanish stocks in its portfolio are up only 30% this year.
Other country funds, too, have soared far above the value of their underlying stock assets. 

The reason, traders say, is heavy buying by Japanese investors urged by big Tokyo securities firms.
The firms have been pushing the investment theme of the pending 1992 abolition of trade barriers between the 12 countries of the European Community, which includes Spain and West Germany.
They have also touted the bright economic prospects of Thailand and Malaysia in the Far East. 

Yesterday's rally triggered a wave of buying by investors and speculators who were caught in a "short squeeze" because they had earlier sold Spain Fund shares short, betting the stock would fall.
Instead, the explosive run-up left them scrambling to cut their losses by buying shares to replace those borrowed earlier.
That buying, in turn, fueled further price increases. 

Volume in the fund yesterday was 1.4 million shares, more than 10 times normal turnover. 

Officials at Alliance Capital Management Corp., which manages the Spain Fund, said there "are no fundamental developments to justify the price action." But Dave Williams, Alliance chairman, said: "It's clearly another short squeeze." 

But Alliance officials said the firm doesn't plan to issue any more fund shares. "We're really in a bind," Mr. Williams said, adding: "We continue to believe this is a technical aberration in the market." 

Indeed, analysts say the huge premium at which the Spain Fund and others are now trading leaves investors vulnerable. "The Spain Fund trades on no fundamentals at all; the Germany Fund could end up like the Hindenburg," warned analyst Steven Cress of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. 

The New York Stock Exchange is conducting an inquiry into the activities of several large Japanese securities firms that have been doing the trading.
But officials at the Big Board yesterday refused to elaborate. "We are conducting an analysis of the trading activity, and will take appropriate action, if necessary," a spokeswoman said. 

In the last few days, Nikko Securities Co., Yamaichi Securities Co., Nomura Securities Co. and possibly other firms have received letters from the Big Board compliance department.
Two firms, Nomura and Nikko, said that they are in the process of gathering information to respond to the letters, which involved trading in the Spain Fund. 

Japanese investors may have pumped up the Spain Fund and other country funds in the past two weeks.
But Japanese securities firms contended that their trading volume was nowhere near enough to account for the 12-point advance in the Spain Fund yesterday. 

An executive at Nomura 's U.S. unit said that his firm accounted for about a third of the total 1.44 million shares traded in the Spain Fund yesterday, "not enough to be responsible for a 10 to 12 point runup" that occurred earlier in the day.
The Spain Fund has 10 million shares outstanding. 

Another of Japan's so-called Big Four securities companies -- Daiwa Securities Co., Nikko, Yamaichi and Nomura -- said his firm was responsible for only 5% of the turnover.
A senior executive at a third firm said: "We've not been active on the buy side." 

Executives at several of the Japanese firms argued that they were taking unwarranted criticism, both from short-sellers crying over having made a bad bet and from U.S. investors ignorant of the way Japanese investors look at stocks. 

Explaining the Japanese penchant for Spain as well as other country funds, a Nomura spokesman said: "Individual Japanese investors look at this as a three-year investment; they are looking to 1992." 

Nonetheless, an investor could buy the approximately 50 individual stocks in the Spain Fund's portfolio in the Spanish stock market at well below half the price of the Spain Fund.
That doesn't include trading commissions and the difficulties of settling trades in the Spanish market. 

There are some country funds, unlike the Spain Fund, that trade at premiums to their asset values because foreign investors aren't allowed to buy stocks directly in those countries. 

