.START 

The monetary officials who begin gathering here today represent the world's leading economic powers.
But in their battle to control the dollar, they look increasingly impotent. 

For months, a buoyant dollar has defied efforts by the seven leading industrial nations to keep it within the ranges secretly agreed to in December 1987.
And in recent days, the dollar has taken a wild rollercoaster ride, impervious to government desires. 

As a result, international efforts to stabilize exchange rates now face a credibility crisis -- and U.S. manufacturers may find the export boom stopping dead in its tracks. "The process is in a shambles," charges Fred Bergsten, head of the Institute for International Economics. 

Finance ministers and central bankers from the so-called Group of Seven nations will search for a solution to that crisis tomorrow, when they meet before the start of the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. 

Their chances of success aren't high.
Both the Bush administration and the Japanese would like to see the U.S. Federal Reserve lower interest rates -- a move that would weaken the dollar by making U.S. investments less attractive.
According to some U.S. officials, the Japanese have offered to multiply the power of a U.S. interest-rate cut by boosting their own interest rates at the same time. 

But Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan is unlikely to comply.
The Fed chief is far less concerned than the Treasury about perceptions that the governments have lost control over the dollar.
And any such move would also be strongly opposed by several of the regional Fed presidents who sit on the Fed policy board. "I don't think the dollar in itself should be an issue," San Francisco Fed President Robert Parry said in an interview this week. 

In the absence of Fed action, any internationally coordinated effort to bring down the dollar may have little effect.
Rate boosts in Japan and West Germany could ease pressure on the dollar somewhat.
And the central banks will continue to attempt to drive down the greenback by selling dollars in exchange markets.
But the effects of such intervention are limited. 

"International capital markets have grown so big that the central banks don't have very strong or direct control of the process," says Robert Johnson, vice president, global markets, at Bankers Trust Co. 

At stake in the battle to control the dollar is the health of the U.S. economy.
Most economists believe the drop in the dollar partly engineered by Treasury Secretary James Baker between 1985 and 1987 fueled the boom in U.S. factory exports.
A lower dollar boosts exports by making them less expensive overseas. 

In recent months, however, the dollar has rebounded, rising more than 10% against other major currencies.
Unless it comes down from those heights, many analysts believe the stubbornly huge U.S. trade gap will start growing again. "The dollar is already starting to put a crimp in exports," says Michael Aho of the Council on Foreign Relations, "and if it hangs up there, we are going to have a very difficult time closing the trade gap." 

The dollar's persistent strength is starting to cause worries among U.S. businessmen, and it's raising eyebrows in Congress as well. "By far the biggest disappointment is the rise in the value of the dollar since the beginning of the year," says Rep. Donald Pease (D., Ohio), a member of the House Ways and Means Committee. 

Some critics lay the blame for the problem at the feet of Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.
His predecessor, Mr. Baker, was a master at using a combination of public statements and central-bank intervention to bully exchange markets and create at least the impression that he had them under control.
Mr. Brady, however, seldom mentions the dollar in public.
As a result, he has shown little ability to influence the market's course. 

"Baker is one of the premier cabinet-level policy operators of recent U.S. government," says I.M. Destler, a University of Maryland professor who has co-authored a new book on dollar politics. "Brady certainly hasn't established that sort of reputation so far." New finance ministers and political turmoil in Germany and Japan also have hampered efforts to coordinate policies. 

Moreover, world economic conditions have changed considerably since 1985, when Mr. Baker and his fellow ministers launched their new policy in a famous meeting at New York's Plaza Hotel.
With ample slack in the U.S. economy, Fed Chairman Paul Volcker had room to back Mr. Baker's efforts with an easier monetary policy.
At the time, Germany and Japan could boost demand in their economies with little fear of inflation.
Now, with inflation fears in all three countries, "there's much less room to maneuver," says one U.S. official. 

Central-bank intervention in exchange markets may also be losing some of its punch.
A recent study from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York found that total foreign-exchange trading volume in the U.S. is now $128.9 billion per day -- more than double the level of three years ago.
With such huge sums of money surging through the market, even the record $12 billion spent by the Fed in May, June and July to blunt the dollar's rise seems like spitting into a supertanker. 

Despite the problems, Treasury officials defend the G-7 coordination process, which includes finance ministers and central bankers from the U.S., Japan, West Germany, France, Britain, Canada and Italy. "I think the G-7 process itself remains highly credible," Treasury Undersecretary David Mulford told an economics conference here last week.
Mr. Mulford argues that stabilizing the dollar is only a subsidiary goal of the international policy-coordination effort.
Much more important is maintaining healthy growth in the world economy -- and on that score, he argues, the policy has succeeded. 

David Hale, chief economist of Kemper Financial Services, also says recent efforts to hold down the dollar may have been more successful than they seem. "Intervention has had some effect.
If we hadn't had the intervention we had, the dollar would have already gone to 160 yen to the dollar," he says.
Instead, it has stayed between 140 yen and 150 yen. 

