.START 

Interpretation and translation gobble up a huge hunk of EC's central budget, so the Eurocrats have been trying to save money by using an automatic translation system.
Systran is its name.
Bloopers are its game. 

To the unconcealed delight of those whose jobs it first appeared to threaten, Systran, acquired from the U.S. Navy about 10 years ago, still has a bit to learn about French-English translation.
A few howlers: 

-- Commission President Jacques Delors asked in French whether he could address a certain committee.
Systran had him asking whether he could "expose himself to the committee." 

-- Crown Prince Jean of Luxembourg, invited to offer a royal page of prose to the computer, used the words nous avions, which in context only meant "we had." Systran made it "us airplanes." 

-- In one screed about farming, the writer used the phrase les agriculteurs vis a vis de la politique agricole commune, which means "farmers, in the light of the common agricultural policy...." Systran, suffering either a blown microprocessor or an uncanny flash of insight, rendered it as "farmers live to screw the common agricultural policy." 

Understandably, Systran's use has been limited, and human beings still bear the main burden of putting one language into the other EC tongues.
It is a trying job for everyone, particularly Rene Van Hoof Haferkamp.
As head of the EC's joint interpretation and conference service, she has to schedule the work of more than 700 interpreters handling more than 50 meetings a day, ranging from conclaves of foreign ministers to the less august deliberations of the Bovine Health and Safety Committee. 

At formal meetings, she notes, participants insist on speaking and hearing their own languages -- meaning that perhaps 27 interpreters will be laboring in glass booths to handle the rhetoric of 12 ministers speaking nine languages.
Mrs. Haferkamp prays that ministers decide to work informally, over lunch.
Then everybody relaxes and, while the burgundy and pate are passed, the ministers are willing to speak the French, German or English that they all know anyway. 

Some other meetings are difficult, to say the least.
Addressing a meeting of Danes, the EC's social-affairs commissioner, Vasso Papandreou, who doesn't speak Danish, started off in English -- only to be told to translate everything she was saying into Greek as she went along, because there were Greek-Danish interpreters available but not English-Danish.
She did.
Afterward, she cursed the whole process volubly, in English. 

Over at the EC's mammoth translation service, where Systran has been laboring to dubious effect, the strain imposed by the drive toward 1992 is apparent.
There, 2,000 full-time employees expect to churn out translations of more than one million pages this year.
The service is farming out more work when it can, but the load is growing heavier. 

It doesn't matter that a lot of those pages will go unread; in the matter of translations, demand is ignored.
National pride is what counts.
At the EC Commission headquarters, a bookshelf holds copies of nine versions of the Commission's latest propaganda brochure on 1992.
The shelves for the Greek, Danish and Portuguese versions are bulging.
The only shelf that has been cleaned out of brochures is the one for English. 

