.START 

As the government toughens its stance toward buyers of large, insolvent thrifts, the field of buyers appears to be narrowing to large, well-heeled banks. 

The Resolution Trust Corp., the new government agency that will sell the seized thrifts and their assets, is soliciting plain-vanilla, cash-only transactions, at least for the sales of the first 10 big thrifts on the block, which have $20 billion in assets.
And the RTC's oversight board, which includes Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Jack Kemp, set policies yesterday that indicate subsequent deals also are likely to be much stingier than past transactions. 

Last year, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board sold or merged 221 thrifts, in a series of freewheeling transactions with investors ranging from New York financier Ronald Perelman to the Robert Bass Group of Texas.
Investors were drawn by lucrative tax breaks, generous government assistance, and exemptions from meeting certain thrift industry regulations. 

In contrast, the RTC is looking for investors to make a capital infusion equal to at least 6% of assets -- much higher than the capital of many of their thrift competitors.
The RTC oversight board also decided yesterday to discourage the RTC from taking equity positions in the thrifts it sells, but said transactions could include the use of stock warrants.
Such warrants, which entitle a holder to buy shares at a specified price in the future, would enable the government to benefit from thrift profits but be protected from losses, unlike the loss exposure facing the government for years to come because of the 1988 deals. 

Moreover, the oversight board set a policy limiting to six months government guarantees on returns on bad assets. 

Without the built-in profits of last year's deals, and with tougher regulations, some industry officials say it will be tough to earn profits, and even tougher to secure the highflying returns that some thrift investment funds are seeking.
Joe Robert, president of J.E. Robert Co., one of the nation's largest asset-management firms, said that the 20% to 25% return most opportunity investors are seeking will be impossible unless the RTC offers some sort of guaranteed profits on bad assets. 

"With respect to the acquisition of stripped-down, clean banks, I'm in a quandary as to how many of the thrift opportunity funds are going to achieve their investors' yield expectations," he said. 

Gerard Smith, an official of the Salomon Brothers Inc. fund to buy thrifts, said the fund only recently reached $300 million, but is still far from its initially stated goal of $600 million.
The fund, he said, had made significant progress recently, but, "We are at the minimum level that we said we'd be at." 

The fund is among those likely to sit tight on the initial round of deals, he said, because he doubts whether the RTC will be able to maintain its tough negotiating stance if it can't attract serious bidders. "I'm a firm believer in market forces," he said. 

The RTC already has quietly told bidders it plans "clean bank" transactions with five of the 10 big thrifts on the block now.
These thrifts would be stripped of bad assets, to be sold separately to asset-management specialists.
They are University Savings of Houston; Freedom S&L, Tampa, Fla.; Hill Financial in Red Hill, Pa,; Peoples Heritage, Salina, Kan., and Pacific Savings, Costa Mesa, Calif. 

With the other five big thrifts, the RTC foresees "whole-bank" transactions that would require the buyers to take the entire institution, bad assets and all, while receiving one lump-sum payment from the RTC in return for taking bad loans.
They are San Antonio Savings Association, San Antonio, Texas; Baltimore Federal Financial, Baltimore; Broadview Federal Savings Bank, Independence, Ohio; Bright Banc, Dallas, and Skokie Federal S&L, Skokie, Ill. 

Big banks appear to have deep pockets and could take advantage of the economies of scale to go after the early deals.
NCNB National Bank of North Carolina, for example, is apparently a strong contender to acquire University Savings of Houston, which would be a logical expansion of NCNB's growing Texas market.
First Interstate Bancorp, Los Angeles, Chemical Banking Corp. of New York and others remain the most likely buyers in the RTC's first 10 big thrifts on the block. 

Moreover, the RTC is also, at least initially, following an old policy of banking regulators at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., to first consider bids from parties that aren't already receiving government assistance on transactions.
NCNB, for example, already bought out the government stake in the former First Republic Bank, now NCNB Texas, in July, in anticipation of doing further government deals. 

"That freed us up" for more bids, a spokesman said. "We are anxious to benefit from the great earnings in Texas." NCNB declined to comment specifically on a bid for University Savings. 

