.START 

In a victory for safety advocates, the federal government will require auto makers to install in minivans, pickup trucks and multi-purpose vehicles the same front-seat headrests long required on passenger cars. 

The requirement, effective Sept. 1, 1991, is a relatively small step by itself.
However, it's the clearest signal yet that federal regulators are sympathetic to arguments that many vehicles classed as commercial light trucks actually carry more people than cargo, and therefore should have the same safety features as cars. 

Indeed, in announcing its new rule, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said it is considering imposing more safety requirements on light trucks, which now account for almost a third of all vehicle sales in the U.S. 

The federal actions coincide with rising consumer demands for safety features, and makers of minivans and light trucks are beginning to move in that direction on their own. "I don't know if they {car and truck safety standards} should be common, but they should be closer," says Roger B. Smith, chairman of General Motors Corp. "It's something you should in good conscience do," he added. 

GM already has made front-seat headrests or high-backed seats standard equipment on eight of its 12 truck lines.
In addition, the No. 1 auto maker's new family of wedge-nosed, plastic-body minivans is outfitted with several of the safety features the government said it may require, such as reinforced side doors and rear-seat lap and shoulder belts. 

Nissan Motor Corp. appears to have moved farther faster by equipping its Axxess minivans with passive restraints and by building the vehicles to meet door, hood and bumper strength requirements for cars. 

Meanwhile, Chrysler Corp., the No. 1 seller of minivans in the U.S., said it supports yesterday's ruling and has made front-seat headrests standard equipment on all its 1990 Caravans, Voyagers and Town and Country models. 

Safety advocates praised the agency's action, but said more needs to be done.
Sen. John Danforth (R., Mo.), who for years has pressed for tougher safety standards for light trucks, called the rule "a significant step," but added that "additional steps must be taken to ensure the safety of these vehicles that are now commonly used by families." 

The government, he said, should require stronger roofs, high-mounted brake lights, and air bags or automatic seat belts in the front seats of light trucks.
These measures are required of passenger cars. 

The Senate twice has passed legislation proposed by Sen. Danforth to set stricter safety rules, but the House has failed to act on the bill.
The senator said that last year nearly 8,300 people were killed and 500,000 injured in light-truck crashes in the U.S. 

The traffic safety agency's new headrest rule is intended to reduce whiplash injuries, which totaled more than 17,000 a year among front-seat passengers of light trucks from 1982 to 

Headrests have been required in passenger cars since 1969, but until recently auto makers fought efforts to extend that and other passenger-car standards to pickup trucks, vans and sport-utility vehicles.
The new headrest rule applies to all multi-purpose passenger vehicles, trucks and buses weighing 10,000 pounds or less. 

Despite the voluntary moves on headrests, some manufacturers are balking at the broadening promoted by Sen. Danforth of car-safety standards to trucks. 

The Chrysler spokesman said such standards shouldn't be applied across the board until there is proof that they would improve truck safety. 

Chrysler officials would be skeptical of any proposal to require on some of their trucks the center high-mounted brake lights now required on cars, for example. "It's hard for us to conceive what good it would do," a spokesman said. 

