.START 

Venture, a once-promising business magazine for entrepreneurs and growing companies, is on the brink of folding, according to the publication's staffers. 

Drake Publications Inc., a New York-based publisher of Playgirl, Cheri, and High Society, bought the monthly magazine in June for an undisclosed amount.
Venture staffers said Drake told them that if a new investor or buyer for the magazine is not found by the end of today, the magazine's offices will not open Monday. 

Arthur Lipper III, chairman of Venture, would not confirm whether the magazine is up for sale.
Top Drake executives were said to be out of the country and could not be reached for comment. 

Venture staffers, who requested anonymity, said they were assembled in the publisher's office Monday and told the 10-year-old magazine was up for sale and that a "publishing entity was looking at the magazine," according to one employee. "We were told the interested company had until Friday to make a decision.
If they passed on buying us, the magazine would cease to exist." 

Sources said Family Media Inc., the closely held New York magazine publishing company, could be the interested party.
Robert Riordan, chairman of Family Media, agreed to buy Venture from Mr. Lipper in July 1988.
A month later, Family Media withdrew its offer but did not offer a public explanation.
Mr. Riordan was traveling and could not be reached for comment. 

Hurt by the October 1987 stock market crash and subsequent fallout in financial advertising, Venture's advertising pages have fallen drastically from a peak of 850 in 1986.
According to Publishers Information Bureau, in 1988 Venture had a total of 698 ad pages, a drop of 16% from 1987.
In the first half of this year, Venture had 218 ad pages, a drop of 31% from the first half of 1988. 

Should Venture fold, it will be added to a growing number of special-interest magazines that have had to fold in the past year due to falling advertising revenues and intense competition from other publications.
Some of those magazines include Sylvia Porter's Personal Finance, News Corp. 's In Fashion, and Capital Cities/ABC Inc. 's Modern Photography and High Fidelity. 

Within the past nine months, the magazine has undergone a number of revisions, including changes in its cover tagline twice, from "For entrepreneurial business owners & investors," to "For entrepreneurs and business leaders," to "For entrepreneurs and growing businesses." 

Venture staff members, who asked not to be identified, said since the Drake purchase there has been a "clash of cultures." For example, they said, Louis Montesano, president of Drake, began sitting in on editorial meetings and making decisions regarding cover subjects.
In hopes of building circulation, Drake executives have pushed for more well-known personalities on the magazine's cover.
The magazine's circulation has held steady at about 450,000. 

While the magazine was profitable in the mid-1980s, Venture staff members say it is not profitable now, and currently owes money to its printer.
To cut costs, Venture's June and July issue were combined, and according to staffers, the magazine has missed the printing date for its October issue. 

