.START 

We're having some pretty good baseball pennant races this season and that's fortunate, because we might not have any next year.
I'm not just talking about pennant races.
I'm talking about a season, too. 

The labor contract between the team owners and players expires before the 1990 campaign, and while the two sides have yet to begin bargaining in earnest over a renewal, ominous rumblings already have been heard.
They began last winter when the owners sought, and in many cases obtained, clauses in new multiyear player contracts that would excuse them from payments for the duration of a lockout. 

And in July, the owners moved to define the ground for the coming confrontation by setting out a "concept" -- which looks for all the world like a proposal -- that would eliminate salary arbitration, one of the twin engines of ballplayer prosperity over the last 15 years, in favor of a pay-for-performance pool, and place new limitations on the other engine, free agency. 

The notions were part of a memorandum that owners' representatives presented at a July 19 meeting.
The session was supposed to be secret, but, naturally, didn't stay that way long.
Likewise, while the two sides agreed not to discuss the matter's substance, they've done a bit of that, too, and the sound from the players' side doesn't suggest applause. 

The upshot, says lawyer Donald Fehr, the players' union head, is that the odds for a strife-free settlement are "no better than 50-50." He adds: "I'm hopeful we can wrap things up in time to open the training camps next February, but I can't name a reason why I feel that way." 

And while Fehr notes that his side's proposals in the coming talks probably will be less ambitious than the owners', and that the word "strike" has yet to pass his lips, the players aren't free of complaint. "Our older members went through three years of owner collusion on free-agent salaries, and the younger guys, with less than the three years' service it takes to get to arbitration, aren't being treated terribly well.
A lot of resentment has built up." 

In some industries it might be unusual for management to play the aggressor's role in labor bargaining, but not baseball.
The players have had the upper hand since 1975, when the owners unwisely agreed to arbitrate a dispute over contract duration that went to the heart of the game's "reserve clause," which long had bound players to clubs until they chose to trade or release them.
An arbitrator ruled in the players' favor, opening the era of free agency and sending salaries zooming. 

In contract rounds since, the clubs have succeeded to some extent in stemming that trend, albeit at considerable cost.
The 50-day strike that chopped the 1981 season off at the knees was waged over owner insistence on "warm body" (i.e., active-player) compensation for lost free agents, a plan that proved so unsatisfactory that it later was junked.
A one-day strike the last time around, in 1985, ended in a pact that included an increase in arbitration eligibility to three years' service from two. 

But none of those things, or the collusion on free-agent pay offers for which the owners were adjudged guilty for the 1986 and '87 seasons (a fine of $10.5 million was levied for 1986; testimony about the 1987 damage award and charges regarding 1988 still are being heard), have prevented the average player's salary from climbing to $522,000 this season from $371,000 in '85, and about $50,000 in the pre-emancipation 1975 campaign.
Thus, the present "concepts." 

Briefly, the owners want to create a common revenue pool out of which all players with between zero and six years of service would be paid.
Salaries would be apportioned on the basis of individual performance statistics.
The plan would eliminate not only salary arbitration but also another prime owner bugaboo -- player agents -- for that group. 

Players with more than six years' service still would be eligible for free agency, but other clubs could bid for them only if their total payrolls were below certain levels.
On the other hand, clubs with below-average payrolls would be required to increase theirs. 

The owners made it clear they advanced the salary-pool idea with reluctance; one owner's rep was quoted as saying some clubs regarded this whiff of socialism as "philosophically revolting." From the players' side has come the observation that basing pay in the 0-6 year group solely on individual stats might subvert the game's emphasis on team success. 

And Fehr expresses a common negotiator's concern with the bottom line. "We'd judge any owners' proposal by whether it would make us better or worse off than under our present deal," he says. "A big problem here is that owner collusion has prevented us from seeing how the last contract really works.
We might want a few more years to give it a chance." 

Fehr goes on to say that the players will have their own shopping list when talks start.
A higher minimum salary (it's $68,000 now) or other ways to improve the lot of the under-three-years group will be sought.
So will larger pensions for former and present players, although with levels for the latter group bumping the legal maximum, he says the matter "isn't cosmic." 

The union wants to increase team rosters from the present 24 players, and put limits on a team's ability to maneuver players in and out of the minor leagues in ways that have increased the true arbitration-eligibility term to four years in many cases, he says.
Fehr says he knows that Joe Fan is unlikely to be sympathetic to the union's highly paid members if his baseball-watching pleasure is curtailed, yet he urges some perspective. "Sure, the players earn a lot, but they've had the good luck to work in an extraordinarily profitable industry," he asserts. 

Further, he suggests that when pondering the circumstances of a $500,000-a-year player, the fan should recall George Argyros, who bought the lowly Seattle Mariners in 1981 for $13 million and sold them this year, still lowly, for a reported $77 million. "As a club owner," he reminds us, "George never had a good year." 

