.START 

A sharp drop in private consumption and exports caused the Japanese economy to contract at a 3.1% annual rate in the quarter that ended June 30. 

But the decline has done little to alter expectations that Japan's strong economic expansion will continue.
If anything, analysts said, the June statistics will bring growth in line with government projections of about 4% growth for the fiscal year ending next March.
Moreover, the latest data show that inflation remains subdued. 

The 0.8% drop in gross national product from the January-March quarter was widely expected in response to the introduction on April 1 of a 3% consumption tax on goods and services. (GNP measures the total output of goods and services.) Many consumers cut back on spending after the levy was imposed, although sales of automobiles jumped because they now are taxed at a lower rate. 

The economy's weak performance was in sharp contrast to the March quarter, when it expanded at a breakneck annual pace of 9.6%, according to revised figures released by the Economic Planning Agency.
Much of that high rate of growth was a result of accelerated consumer spending and capital expenditures in advance of the new tax. 

In light of the consumption-tax "distortions," many economists are hesitant to draw conclusions about the economy's longer-term trend. "This is going to leave a lot of questions," said Kermit L. Schoenholtz, an economist with Salomon Bros. (Asia) Ltd. "How long will the consumption tax continue to affect consumer spending?" 

At the same time, economists said year-to-year comparisons of quarterly growth figures show that the economy is continuing to expand at a smooth pace that belies the quarter-to-quarter swings.
In the June quarter, the economy grew 4.8% compared with the corresponding quarter of 1988.
That followed 4.8% year-to-year growth in the March quarter, and 4.9% growth in the October-December 1988 quarter. "That says the economy's still pretty strong," said Peter Morgan, chief economist with the Tokyo branch of Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities. 

The April-June period was the second year in a row that the economy contracted in the June quarter from the previous quarter, partly reflecting the country's increasingly entrenched habit of taking a long Golden Week holiday during early May.
Many companies are now shutting down for the vacation, cutting into production and exports. 

Overall, domestic demand rose at an annualized rate of 0.7% in the June quarter, down from 9.9% in the previous period.
Much of that reflected a contraction of personal consumption.
Meanwhile, housing expenditures fell for the second consecutive quarter. 

But strong growth of capital investment helped to offset the drop-off in personal consumption and housing spending.
Spending on plants and equipment continued to expand in double digits, at an annualized rate of 11.7%.
That was off from 29.9% in the previous quarter, but economists said the figures represented anticipation of the consumption tax and then reaction to it. 

Japanese companies have been on a spending spree for about three years, and they have recently focused on expanding production capacity to meet domestic demand.
Mr. Schoenholtz of Salomon Bros. said that capital spending now comprises 23.7% of GNP. "That reflects the continued optimism on the part of businesses," he said. 

A sharp rise in inventories also helped cushion the effect of declining personal consumption.
Inventories rose 0.5% in the June quarter from the March period as retail stores rebuilt stocks depleted by the pre-consumption tax spending binge. 

Net external demand, which calculates the impact of imports and exports on GNP, plunged in the June quarter.
Exports fell at an annualized rate of 12.3%, while imports rose at a 7.5% pace.
Because the import and export figures include both goods and services, economists said the rise in Japanese travel abroad and a drop in income from overseas investments in the period contributed to the negative pull of external demand on the economy. 

On the price front, the GNP deflator, a key barometer of inflation, showed a 1.4% rise in prices from the year before.
In the January-March quarter the deflator rose 0.8%.
Economists said much of the increase in the April-June period was a result of the consumption tax and a sharp increase in import prices, which were pushed by rising oil prices and a weaker yen.
Still, they said that the 1.4% rate was not a matter of deep concern. 

