.START 

Let us now consider an issue that cuts to the very core of European economic unity, an issue that divided nation against nation for decades, took heroic efforts to resolve, and is still chewed over in conference after conference.
We're talking strawberry jam here. 

First, some essential background.
The Dutch spread jam on bread for breakfast, so they like it smooth.
Sugary, too.
Most Frenchmen, however, wouldn't touch smooth jam with a barge pole, much less a butter knife.
They commonly eat their jam straight from the jar, with a spoon.
They like it lumpy and fruity. 

A quaint commentary on regional tastes, you might think.
Not terribly important.
But it is precisely details like these that have kept negotiators for member nations of the European Community wrangling for more than a quarter-century over the myriad bits and pieces of an issue absolutely essential to free trade throughout Europe: the development of product standards acceptable to all. 

The jam case and others like it (it took 14 years to set standards for toys) illustrate in a small way the larger difficulties negotiators have had to face, and still face, in creating One Europe.
The fact that they've been able to set such standards at all testifies to the overpowering momentum that has built up behind the push for unity -- and to the ingenuity of the Eurocrats, who finally wriggled out of a seemingly limitless morass of petty detail that threatened to doom the whole effort. 

Launched in 1959, the marathon campaign to set jam standards entangled producers, Eurocrats and national governments in 20 years of prolonged argument.
One huge obstacle: How much sulfur dioxide coolant could be used in keeping fresh the fruit used for jam?
The Dutch and West Germans, who rely on imported fruit, wanted a permissive standard.
But the Italian delegation, whose chief was quite literally allergic to sulfur dioxide, refused to tolerate significant use of the stuff. 

The parties might be scrapping yet save for developments in refrigeration that made the chemical unnecessary.
Having crossed this gulf, the negotatiators then spent years more getting the Dutch, who wanted more sugar in their jam, and the French, who wanted more fruit, to compromise.
But just as that happened, Britain, Europe's largest jam consumer, joined the EC -- and tossed a spanner into the works. 

Its name was marmalade.
It seems that low-quality jam in much of Continental Europe was called marmalade, a confusion Britons refused to tolerate.
In the end the Continentals changed their terminology, and low-grade jam became simply "jam." 

After two decades of haggling, everyone finally agreed what jam was and what should be in it, and the Eurocrats proudly unveiled a jam standard in 1979.
Then the French, who have been eating jam since the 13th century and who are extremely picky about it, decided to meditate on the matter for an additional four years or so.
It wasn't until 1984 that they finally got on board. 

It did not escape the Eurocrats that if it had taken 25 years to decide on jam, it could take centuries of nit-picking to do the same thing for the many thousands of other products involved in Continental trade.
Indeed, agreement on some of them simply couldn't be reached; the EC had to give up entirely on mayonnaise, sausage and beer because European tastes were so wildly different. 

There was trepidation in Brussels over this.
How could the EC ever hope to begin unfettered trade in CAT scanners and industrial boilers if it couldn't even agree on what goes into mayonnaise? 

Around 1985, however, an EC expert devised a brilliant shortcut.
Member nations would agree to stop arguing about how best to make mayonnaise, mustard or electric drills.
They would content themselves only with setting basic health and safety standards, things much easier to agree on than, say, exactly how much non-meat could be slipped into a sausage before it no longer deserved the name. 

Beyond the basic, bare-bones standards, market forces would rule.
If an Italian maker wanted to offer its oily mayonnaise in Denmark, where people like it creamy, or if a French brewery wanted to sell its weak beer in West Germany, where they like it strong, good luck and Godspeed, so long as the stuff was judged healthful and its ingredients clearly labeled. 

The new approach wasn't immediately popular.
West Germany, for one, rose up to protect its manufacturers of beer and pure-meat sausages, but was beaten back by European court rulings forcing it to accept imports. (In a sign that the open-market forces may have been right, West German consumers generally have turned up their noses at imported beer, and brewers there are doing fine.) 

With the logjam over detailed standards largely broken, the Eurocrats have been able to move with gratifying speed. "For 20 years we beavered away trying to define the perfect tractor seat," says a top official of the European Commission. "We finally abandoned that, and we've found the market produces lots of fine tractor seats." 

But the field is still not entirely clear.
Some countries continue to resist certain imports.
In Holland, for example, national health standards still rule out France's baguette bread loaf, judged lacking in nutrition. 

And an enormous amount of work remains in standard-setting for industrial goods, the largest and by far the most important class of products.
Even with the simplified EC approach used now, this work is time-consuming; medical equipment is more complicated to use than is tomato sauce. 

Though the EC has already set basic health and safety standards for most common machines and manufactured products, their producers also have to settle on industrial standards -- making sure that an Italian industrial robot actually will work when plugged into a Spanish auto assembly line or that a boiler inspected in Greece will be cleared for use in Denmark. 

John Farnell, who heads the EC's Standards and Certification Division, says producers have so far agreed on roughly 750 sets of such standards.
The EC hopes to have 2,000 to 3,000 of them in place by the end of 1992, but that's only a fraction of the total of machines and manufactures sold in Europe.
Mr. Farnell warns that covering the rest will take years more. 

All of them may not stay covered, either, if the jam case is any indication.
The jam negotiators, it seems, grew so fond of their talks that they persuaded the EC to let them go on setting ever more detailed standards for the stuff, even though technically that shouldn't be allowed anymore.
They say they feel better protected that way from low-grade Third World products.
Right now, they are putting the final touches on an agreement about what can go into low-calorie jam. 

Mr. Browning is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Paris bureau. 

