.START 

A 12-year-old boy with a 45-inch waist knows two things for sure.
He is seriously overweight.
And he has a terrible time finding clothes that fit. 

Clothes made for most kids don't begin to cover his frame.
On shopping trips, he has to go to the men's department to find trousers that fit at the waist.
But the legs of these adult pants are way too long and the crotch hangs to the knees.
It's a humiliating situation. 

It's also a marketing opportunity.
In an industrial loft in this Boston suburb, two women in their mid-30s with no previous business experience are designing and selling sympathetically styled clothes for seriously overweight boys and girls. 

Their success shows how a company can profit from choosing a product line that lends itself to small business.
The market is well suited to the personal service of a small mail-order company, but its volume is probably too small to interest major apparel makers. 

Sales of the four-year-old company, At Last Inc., are expected to hit $750,000 this fiscal year.
That's minuscule by garment-industry standards, but nearly a threefold jump over a year earlier.
The partners expect the company to show its first profit next year. 

Requests for the firm's modest 12-page catalog are running about 1,000 a day, and during the August back-to-school buying season, merchandise orders averaged about 65 a day. 

'We started in our living rooms at home," says Copie Lilien, At Last's president. "There were four of us here a year ago.
Now we have 10 employees.
It's exhilarating." 

Ms. Lilien and her partner, Kim Runyon, the company's vice president, think they've found a niche.
Heredity, junk food and a couch-potato environment have combined to produce a generation of overweight youth.
But At Last's partners think the numbers still aren't large enough to persuade traditional apparel firms to create a line of oversize clothes stocked in department stores and specialty outlets. 

At Last has shunned retailers, which can sap the resources of a small manufacturer.
A lone company-run outlet will be closed this fall.
For the moment, At Last is pushing its oversize clothes, aimed at ages four to 14, by catalog.
The founders are banking on customer loyalty that can flow to a mail-order firm that offers a personal touch. "We think this will set us apart when the inevitable competition arises," Ms. Lilien says. 

The catalog approach has special appeal for At Last's clientele.
It's a means of escaping the embarrassment of going to a special shop for the overweight or facing slimmer kids over the clothing racks at the local shopping mall. 

Ms. Lilien, who remembers the torture of shopping for clothes as a 195-pound teenager, says overweight youngsters want to dress like other kids, but love the option of picking out their clothes in private. "We have children who call us up in tears," she says. "We're not selling clothes.
We're really selling self-esteem." 

"Some of these kids have never worn a button-down shirt or a pair of blue jeans," adds Ms. Runyon.
Acid-washed jeans, with elastic waists and ribbed cuffs, are At Last's runaway best-selling item, accounting for about 40% of sales. 

There have been start-up problems.
The partners admit they overreached in their early catalogs.
The number of catalog items has been cut by about 20%. 

The Runyon family's living room was the company's first showroom. "Total strangers would appear in my driveway on Sundays.
I didn't like that at all," Ms. Runyon says.
The two partners didn't draw salaries for three years. 

The two women invested their first year in research.
Buoyed by a $16,000 investment from Ms. Runyon's husband, they measured dozens of overweight children, inquired about likes and dislikes, and produced their own sizing scheme, which ranges from 23-inch to 50-inch waists and weights from 55 pounds to 300 pounds. 

The entrepreneurs became convinced they were on the right track at an August 1986 display in a church basement: 70 parents of overweight children showed up to view At Last's line, which consisted of some fabric swatches stuck on a bulletin board and a handful of trouser samples. "They ordered and paid for clothes that hadn't been made yet.
That's how desperate they were," says Ms. Lilien. 

The company's low-key publicity campaign has continued to generate interest.
A one-paragraph item in the Aug. 15 issue of Woman's Day, a magazine sold at supermarket checkout stands, produced 15,000 responses to a toll-free telephone number.
Ms. Lilien expects to convert about 4% of these inquiries to orders. 

She says the boom in large-size women's fashions has paved the way for oversize children's apparel.
The incidence of childhood obesity is also on the rise, and At Last's founders say they remain the only commercial source for heavy kids' clothes. "We really are developing a market," she says. 

Some 70,000 households are on At Last's mailing list, and the total is expected to hit 95,000 by December.
These names could be an asset themselves in a direct-mail industry that parses names into every conceivable interest group. "We have the definitive list of overweight children in the country," Ms. Lilien boasts. 

At Last's average order is $113.
Roughly 25% of customers who bought from At Last in the past six months have bought again, an unusually high re-order rate by mail-order standards. 

Headquarters is a 4,500-square-foot loft in an aging building south of Boston's Route 128.
There the company cuts fabric to its own patterns and fills orders.
The clothes are stitched elsewhere. 

The two women would like to turn production over to someone else, leaving them free to concentrate on design and sales.
But Ms. Lilien says established children's apparel labels such as Esprit and Guess have been cool to offers to take over At Last's manufacturing. "We approached Bugle Boy and they laughed," she says. "We laughed and said 'Just wait. ' They don't know there's a market." 

Even success breeds its problems, however.
A manufacturer of women's sportswear is complaining that At Last's corporate name infringes on its trademark.
At Last's founders say they'll change their corporate name -- to Kids At Large. 

