.START 

The latest round of reserve-building for troubled loans to developing countries continued as J.P. Morgan & Co. upstaged its competitors with a $2 billion addition, the biggest increase yet. 

The huge addition will bring Morgan's reserve for loan losses to about $3 billion, which will represent about 100% of Morgan's estimated portfolio of $3 billion in medium and long-term lesser developed country debt.
As of Sept. 30, Morgan will have a total of $4 billion in lesser developed country debt exposure including trade finance loans.
About 70% of that would be covered by a portion of the higher loan-loss reserve, Morgan said. 

Morgan, the blue-chip parent of Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. of New York, will post a $1.8 billion loss for the quarter, as a result, and an unspecified loss for the year. 

For the first six months, Morgan had net income of $386 million, or $2.05 a share. 

The announcement came after the stock market had closed.
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Morgan closed at $39.75, up 12.5 cents. 

With Morgan's move, it is becoming increasingly apparent that the recently-announced accord to reduce Mexico's $54 billion in foreign bank debt is on the verge of failing.
By making the huge reserve additions, the banks are signaling their intent to sharply reduce future lending to developing countries.
Such loans are needed to allow those countries' economies to grow. 

Lewis T. Preston, Morgan chairman, said, "We are very concerned about debtor countries' rising expectations of the magnitude of debt reduction possible under {Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady's} initiative when sufficient resources to encourage sizable voluntary debt-reduction programs have not been provided by industrial countries.
Achieving satisfactory loan-restructuring agreements will also be more and more difficult because of increasingly divergent approaches to the debt problem among bank lenders and governments." 

For the pact to work, enough banks must agree to commit about $10 billion of new loans to Mexico over the next four years.
So far, Citicorp and Britain's Lloyds Bank PLC are the only ones who have signaled their intent to make new loans. 

Under the accord, banks can choose to make new loans and take no charge against reserves or to swap their loans for bonds that carry either a 35% discount in face value from the loan amount or a below-market 6.25% interest rate. 

If the Mexican accord breaks down, either the industrialized nations will have to contribute more money to make it work, or there will have to be a bigger discount on the bonds. 

Mr. Preston said, "We do intend to continue playing a constructive role in the developing countries." 

But Raphael Soifer, an analyst with Brown Brothers, Harriman & Co., said, "I don't think that Morgan is considering new loans as an option.
This could mean that we're going to have to go back to the drawing board on Mexico." 

Asked if he thought Morgan's reserve action was excessive, Mr. Soifer said, "It's a conservative move.
I consider it adequate coverage given their portfolio.
They have a disproportionate share of their loans in Argentina and a smaller than average amount in Mexico, so they probably need more." 

Morgan said that it has no plans to alter its dividend policy or to issue new common shares.
After the reserve action is taken Morgan will still have 5.8% in so-called tier one capital, well above the minimum that international banks must have by 1992. 

Morgan's actions follow a $950 million addition by Manufacturers Hanover Corp. and a $1.1 billion addition by Chase Manhattan Corp., bringing their reserves to 36% and 46% of lesser developed country exposure, respectively. 

In the past most banks' reserves have hovered near 30%. 

