.START 

The Uruguay round of negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, launched so bravely in 1986, sails on without a great deal of visible progress.
Lester Thurow, dean of the Sloan School of Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, last year proclaimed that "GATT is dead." While this was an overstatement, GATT's hold on life has become shaky. 

The General Agreement, after all, is a voluntary association of nations.
It thrived in the 1950s and 1960s, because all of the nations were headed in one direction.
GATT was part of the post-World War II plan to promote a more peaceful and prosperous world.
The nations that signed the agreement -- nearly all the Free World -- committed themselves to promote world trade by steadily removing tariffs and other restrictions.
The accomplishments in the first quarter century after the war were remarkable, in large part because the U.S. led the way. 

Free-trade sentiment had been growing in the U.S. through the 1930s, a trend exemplified by Secretary of State Cordell Hull's reciprocal trade agreements.
In 1945 and 1946 the U.S. officially proposed a permanent International Trade Organization, attached to the United Nations, so that continuing attention could be given to reducing trade barriers among nations. 

The atmosphere was euphoric.
Some scholars did object to the idea that tariff reductions should be made on a multilateral basis, but only because they thought the U.S. should retain the right to cut -- that's right, cut -- tariffs unilaterally. 

Everything seemed to be working out well.
Eager to get started, the Western nations were unwilling to await the formation of the ITO, which presumably would administer the agreement; in 1947, they signed GATT.
It seemed only a minor annoyance that Congress got disturbed by some of the far-reaching powers of the proposed ITO and refused to go along with it.
So GATT was born, a body without a head.
But what did it matter?
If everyone was for free trade, life would be easy. 

The U.S. commitment to free trade was in part philanthropic.
Foreign trade played a very small role in the U.S. economy.
Stories about U.S. exports in this newspaper would carry an apologetic line explaining that the subject really was worth discussing even though exports accounted for only about 4% of the gross national product. 

It was not, of course, that way elsewhere.
Other countries had seen their industrial plants devastated by the war, and they were slowly trying to work their way back into world markets.
The U.S. was more than willing to help. 

Up to a point, that is.
As Harvard economist John Kenneth Galbraith once wrote, "It has been sufficiently established that nothing in economics is forever." In the 1970s and 1980s, increasing competition from Japan, Taiwan, South Korea and even from Europe substantially weakened the U.S. commitment to free trade.
Once again American businessmen and farmers were calling for increased protection. 

There has always been some reason to suspect that some economists follow the crowd.
Only a few years before, the economic fraternity had been almost unanimous in its support for unfettered trade.
In the 1970s and 1980s, however, it has become respectable to talk of "industrial policy" and even of "managed trade." 

That's why it was so brave to launch the Uruguay Round in 1986, more or less throwing it into the teeth of the protectionist storm.
It was indeed vital to try to recover some GATT momentum.
But the chances of doing so were reduced by pushing the nations into areas previously left carefully untouched: services and agriculture.
If the negotiations had sought merely another round of modest tariff-cutting, the likelihood of ultimate success would have been quite a bit greater. 

The key problem is that member nations, particularly the U.S., don't trust GATT's administrative machinery.
When the ITO died aborning, a machinery was gradually built for GATT.
There was no great urgency about this construction project, since there was relatively little controversy.
Even the European Community, which some had feared would be protectionist, turned out to be fairly friendly. 

In the 1970s and 1980s, however, there have been a lot of disputes, not all begun by the U.S.
Under GATT procedures the controversies drag on and on.
When there are solutions, some participants don't recognize them as such.
GATT rules aren't always clear -- in part because, before the 1970s, they hadn't really been tested. 

Now a number of nations, especially the U.S., don't want to trust the rules.
Instead, there's a growing inclination for a do-it-yourself policy, a revival of unilateralism.
Of course, the current idea stands the unilateralism some economists favored four decades ago on its head -- increasing trade restrictions, not reducing them. 

The Reagan administration came into office in 1981 with a firm commitment to free trade, but Ronald Reagan, pushed by Congress and businessmen, soon became the most protectionist president in the past half century.
Hardly anyone even thought of submitting trade disputes to GATT; businessmen obviously figured they could do better by going to Washington. 

The approach was so crass that some unilateralists have sought to justify it.
A prime argument is that the U.S. is more open to trade than many of its partners, so it's OK to push the partners to make unilateral concessions.
The chief objection to the better-than-thou approach is that it isn't true.
A high U.S. trade official, once asked how the U.S. compared with its trading partners in terms of restraints, replied, in strictest confidence, "It's about 50-50." 

The GATT machinery has to be improved or replaced with something like the proposed International Trade Organization.
The question is how to create confidence in the new procedures.
Maybe oversight by the courts of the countries involved, at least for a time, would be helpful.
However it's done, countries have to learn to live together as buyers and sellers.
The punitive Smoot-Hawley Tariff in 1930, after all, showed us the reward of unilateralism: the Great Depression. 

