.START 

First Bank System Inc., ailing from a series of management missteps in recent years, said its board launched a search for a new chief executive officer and that current chief D.H. Ankeny Jr. stepped aside immediately. 

The Minneapolis-based banking concern in recent years has had a $500 million bond portfolio loss, big loan losses and high turnover among its executive ranks.
Those problems led to speculation in recent months that the board would replace the 56-year-old Mr. Ankeny. 

In a brief statement, Mr. Ankeny conceded he isn't the best person to turn First Bank around: "Given the challenges the organization faces, I've determined that it is in the best interest of shareholders and employees that I resign" as chairman, president and chief executive.
He didn't elaborate. 

The four-year tenure of the brewery-scion-turned-banker was marked by a willingness to take big risks -- ones he apparently didn't always fully understand.
By far the worst was holding onto an $8 billion government bond position through rising interest rates during 1987 in the hope that rates would decline; rates didn't and the value of the bonds fell more than $700 million in nine months.
First Bank has never fully recovered from the gamble, which led to a $506.3 million write-off last year. 

The bond debacle had been preceded by an ill-conceived lending binge -- much of it outside First Bank's native territory -- that led to hundreds of millions of dollars in losses. 

Darrell G. Knudson, 52, a First Bank vice chairman with senior experience mostly in running the company's smaller banks across the upper Midwest, was named acting chief executive officer while the board conducts its search. 

Willis A. Strauss, head of the board's personnel committee and a retired chairman of Enron Corp., Houston, couldn't be reached for comment at his office or home in Omaha.
Mr. Ankeny couldn't be reached.
Mr. Knudson wouldn't be interviewed yesterday, a spokeswoman said.
First Bank's stock rose 50 cents after the news yesterday to close at $20.625 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. 

"This is going to be positive for the company," said Ken Puglisi, a bank stock analyst at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods Inc. in New York.
He said the problems had sapped management's credibility. "Some fresh blood is just what the company needs right now." 

The search for a new chief executive, however, could be frustrating.
The banking industry is "very thin" on proven turnaround managers, asserted Windle B. Priem, an executive recruiter specializing in banks at Korn/Ferry International in New York.
Mr. Priem said he isn't involved in the First Bank search. 

What's more, First Bank has lost stature in recent years as more robust regional banking concerns around the country passed it by in size, profits and stock market value. 

Earlier this week, First Bank disclosed that it is considering lopping off big parts of its business in a restructuring that would idle as many as 2,000 of its more than 10,000 employees and reduce assets $2 billion, to about $20 billion.
The company wouldn't comment, but any such big restructuring probably would be put on hold until a new chief executive signs on. 

The company also disclosed fresh problems in its leveraged buy-out loan portfolio Monday. 

Mr. Puglisi now worries that a new chief executive will come in and discover yet more problem loans, as is often the case when banks change managements.
He and other analysts slashed profit estimates for First Bank. 

