.START 

A former employee of R.R. Donnelley & Sons Co. who traded on stocks mentioned in Business Week prior to the magazine's publication pleaded guilty to two counts of conspiracy and perjury. 

The former senior sales representative, Shayne A. Walters, admitted in federal court in New York that he conspired to commit mail and wire fraud and to trade on material non-public information from 1986 to 1988.
R.R. Donnelley & Sons prints Business Week for McGraw-Hill Inc., the magazine's publisher. 

Mr. Walters also admitted to committing perjury when he testified before the Securities and Exchange Commission in March.
The SEC's civil suit against Mr. Walters was settled when he agreed to pay $62,000 in restitution and civil penalties -- double his illegal profit. 

Mr. Walters, 32 years old, said he and his co-conspirators traded on securities mentioned in Business Week's "Inside Wall Street" column prior to the magazine's distribution to the general public.
He told U.S. District Judge John M. Walker Jr. that he woke up at 3:45 in the morning on Thursdays to make the 45-mile drive to Donnelley's Torrance, Calif., printing plant to pick up a copy of the magazine. 

He then gave the magazine to a stockbroker, who wasn't identified, who purchased the securities.
Two of the securities Mr. Walters purchased illegally were TriStar Pictures Inc. in October 1986 and Newmark & Lewis Inc. in July 1988. 

The government said Mr. Walters has been cooperating with the goverment in its continuing investigation of the trades.
Mr. Walters is scheduled to be sentenced April 24.
He faces a maximum sentence of five-years imprisonment and $250,000 fines on each of the two counts. 

A former Merrill Lynch & Co. broker, William Dillon, and a former broadcast editor at Business Week, S.G. Ruderman, previously pleaded guilty to charges involving trading on information gleened from unreleased copies of Business Week.
They were given six-month sentences. 

PANEL OF FEDERAL JUDGES urges limits on appeals by death-row inmates. 

But civil-liberties groups say the proposal by a five-judge panel appointed by Chief Justice of the U.S. William Rehnquist is unfair. 

The current death-penalty system in the states has led to "repetitious" appeals and "years of delay," according to a report by the panel. "The resulting lack of finality undermines public confidence in our criminal-justice system." 

Retired Supreme Court Justice Lewis Powell, who led the panel, said in a briefing: "It just isn't working." 

The judges recommended the system be streamlined to routinely allow death-row inmates only one trip through state and federal courts in "habeas corpus." Habeas corpus is a civil matter in which inmates, who were convicted and whose criminal appeals were denied, claim that their rights were violated during their arrest or prosecution.
Many death-row inmates currently go through state and federal courts several times before being executed. 

The panel said a major problem is that death-row inmates don't have good lawyers to handle their cases after conviction.
The judges suggested a trade-off: States that provide lawyers for death-row inmates would be able to take advantage of the proposed tough limits on the number and amount of time allowed for habeas-corpus appeals, while other states would continue to face multiple appeals. 

But civil-liberties groups said the proposal is aimed only at speeding up executions, and not at ensuring fairness for inmates.
Dick Burr of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund said the panel failed to propose any standards for the quality of lawyers to be provided by the states. "This provides a facade of legal counsel, a travesty that has existed for a long, long time," he said. 

An American Civil Liberties Union spokeswoman said the proposal means the federal courts would ignore "the extraordinary rate of error" in death-penalty cases, "misconduct of state prosecutors and police" and "attorney incompetence." The courts, she said, "will do everything possible to facilitate the rush to the gallows." 

The panel's report, in the form of proposed legislation for action by Congress, must first be considered next March by the Judicial Conference, the policy-making arm of the federal courts.
The 28-member conference deferred action yesterday so the judges may consult their district- and appeals-court colleagues. 

Even Justice Powell had mixed feelings. "My own very strong view is that if we can't make it work, we ought to abolish capital punishment," he said. 

DRUG PROSECUTIONS mushroom in the federal courts. 

Statistics for the caseloads of federal district courts show that drug prosecutions increased 15% for the year ended June 30, compared with the previous year.
The number of drug-law prosecutions increased to 11,855 from 10,291 the previous year.
The number of drug cases in the past decade has almost quadrupled. 

The statistics, released by the Administrative Office of the Federal Courts, illustrate how drug cases are consuming federal-court resources.
If drug cases are excluded from the total, the number of new criminal prosecutions by the federal government declined slightly last year for the second-consecutive year, to 33,036 from 33,212. 

The number of civil cases in district courts fell 2.6%, to 233,293 from 239,634, largely because of a drop in Social Security claims cases and in government suits to recover overpaid veterans' benefits. 

Another big jump for the federal courts was in the number of appeals in criminal cases, accounting for virtually the entire increase in the workload of the federal appeals courts.
The administrative office said much of the increase may be attributed to appeals of criminal sentences, authorized by the tough, new federal sentencing law that took effect in 1987, and was upheld by the Supreme Court in January. 

The total number of new appeals increased 5.9% to 39,734 from 37,524.
The number of criminal appeals included in those totals rose 33%, to 8,020 from 6,012. 

One bright spot: Bankruptcy-court filings by businesses declined 9%.
But the number of bankruptcy cases filed by individuals rose 10%. 

SUIT SEEKS equal insurance benefits for manic depression. 

The suit alleges that Guardian Life Insurance Co. of America and the Travelers Insurance Co. of Illinois unit of Travelers Corp. improperly reduced insurance benefits for victims of manic depression by defining it as a mental disorder.
The complaint says both companies are aware that medical experts consider manic depression to be a physical disorder of the brain. 

The class-action suit was filed this week by two anonymous plaintiffs and the National Depressive and Manic Depressive Association of Chicago in Cook County Circuit Court in Chicago.
It is believed to be the first class-action suit of its kind. 

Edward Kane, general counsel for Guardian, said his company has never before been sued under its mental-illness exclusion.
A Travelers spokesman said this was the first time his company was sued on this issue.
Both declined further comment because they hadn't seen the suit. 

In 1987, an appellate court in Arkansas ruled in favor of an individual who had been denied insurance payments for manic depression by a Blue Cross and Blue Shield office, said Robert Gettleman of D'Ancona & Pflaum, a lawyer for the plaintiff class. "Manic depression is a disease of the brain.
Companies shouldn't view it any differently than a disease of the heart or of the liver," Mr. Gettleman said. 

A LETTER SIGNED by 511 constitutional-law professors arrived in Sen. Joseph Biden's (D., Del.) office yesterday urging the Judiciary Committee he heads to oppose a constitutional amendment banning flag burning.
His panel sent such an amendment to the Senate floor with the recommendation that it not pass.
The panel also approved a statute, sponsored by Sen. Biden, that would outlaw flag desecration.
The professors' letter was silent on the statute, which has become something of a political hot potato among constitutional scholars.
They are divided into two camps: those who oppose both a constitutional amendment and a statute and those who oppose an amendment, but believe a statute would be held constitutional by the Supreme Court.
It is an interesting split, particularly at Harvard Law School, where Charles Fried, the Reagan administration solicitor general, is in the former group and Laurence Tribe, a liberal, is in the latter. 

MOTORISTS STOPPED in Texas on suspicion of drunk driving don't have a constitutional right to talk to a lawyer before taking a breathalyzer test, the state's highest criminal court ruled.
Under Texas law, drivers who refuse the test can lose their licenses for as long as 90 days.
Lawyers say that in recent years courts in other states have roughly split on the right-to-counsel issue, although historically most have denied the right.
Such cases often turn on whether the decision to submit to the blood-alcohol test can be considered a "critical" stage in the criminal process.
In its 7-2 decision, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals said the critical stage doesn't begin until formal charges are brought against a suspect. 

