.START 

House Republicans overwhelmingly approved a broad campaign-finance plan that Common Cause praised as an "important and serious" step toward enacting legislation this year. 

Among other things, the GOP plan calls for an 80% cut in gift limits for political action committees and elimination of "soft money" loopholes that allow parties to use undisclosed corporate and union money and huge gifts from wealthy individuals. 

Both those ideas are being resisted by House Democrats, but they drew commendations from Fred Wertheimer, president of Common Cause, a citizens' lobby that in the past has more often been allied with Democrats than with the GOP.
He said the plan doesn't go far enough but "represents an important and serious contribution to the debate" and "contains a number of important proposals." 

The 25-point plan appeared to be designed as a bargaining position for continuing negotiations with Democrats over the shape of a comprehensive campaign-finance bill.
It calls for restoration of tax credits for small political donations to candidates and parties, an idea embraced by many Democrats. 

It also omits some earlier GOP proposals, offensive to Democratic lawmakers and many GOP members as well, aimed at weakening incumbents in general.
Republicans dropped the idea of sharply cutting lawmakers' mass mailings and eliminated a plan to require incumbents to liquidate campaign war chests after each election. 

One leading Democratic critic of PACs, Rep. Mike Synar of Oklahoma, praised the package. "It's a big step," he said. "I think this proves that we're still on track to getting something done this year.
I don't agree with everything in it, but I want to commend my Republican colleagues." 

The GOP plan also includes a novel idea to require House candidates to raise most of their money from "local sources." Currently, the typical House incumbent raises most re-election money from a combination of PACs, Washington lobbyists and out-of-state business donors. 

While being careful not to close the door on any of the GOP proposals, Rep. Al Swift (D., Wash.), chairman of the House committee that handles campaign finance, yesterday disparaged the local-money idea as "radical" and untested. 

Even Republicans are divided about what they mean by "local." The main advocate of the concept, Rep. Bill Thomas (R., Calif.), wants most funds to come from individual residents of the candidate's congressional district, but other Republicans would take in neighboring cities and counties and allow money from "local" PACs. 

