.START 

Since the great man-made panic over Alar on apples swept through America's talk shows and some of its newspapers, bashing pesticides as a cancer threat has become all the rage.
Somehow left out of this latest controversy is the fact that cancer rates in the U.S. have dropped over the past 40 years.
Stomach cancer is down 75% since 1950.
Rectum cancer is down 65%. (Only lung cancer is on the increase, because of cigarettes.) 

But many environmentalists cling to their theology, which holds that as we move further from some ideal natural state, life becomes more threatened.
Given this almost religious belief in nature's goodness, we'd like to pose a philosophical question: How come nobody has explained why a natural carcinogen is morally superior to an artificial one?
Indeed, how is it that the urban press's eco-evangelists scarcely acknowledge the existence of natural carcinogens? 

These questions came to mind recently as we watched the latest anti-pesticide crusade begin its march through the pages of some newspapers.
An organization called the National Toxics Campaign is trying to get supermarkets to sign an "agreement" committing themselves to "actively encourage" the phasing out of all pesticides.
The NTC simply denies that plants may produce natural protective chemicals -- pesticides, in other words -- a noncontroversial notion among chemists and biologists. 

Even the regulators to some degree now force the toxics crusaders to measure up to what science actually knows about this subject, so they've begun to depend solely on the media.
They call this a "free market" approach because it circumvents the Environmental Protection Agency.
But whipping up public concern and boycotts with bad science isn't a freemarket solution; it's demagoguery. 

Five small supermarket chains are signing on to the NTC agreement, but most others are not, having had enough of Alar-style hysteria.
The truth is that the EPA is stringent to start with, and that farmers generally have opted for safer, less intrusive pesticides as they are developed. 

Also, Americans ingest many more of nature's own pesticides by weight than man-made pesticide residues.
In an article in a book titled "Important Advances in Oncology, 1989" Bruce Ames, the chairman of the Department of Biochemistry at Berkeley, compares Americans' intake of natural and man-made pesticides. 

Mr. Ames accepts the estimate of the Food and Drug Administration that the average American consumes about 45 micrograms of possibly carcinogenic man-made pesticide residues in a day.
He then points out that there are 500 micrograms of natural carcinogens in a cup of coffee (hydrogen peroxide and methylglyoxal).
There are 185 micrograms of natural carcinogenic formaldehyde in a slice of bread, 2,000 micrograms of nature's own formaldehyde in a cola, and 760 micrograms of carcinogenic estragole in a leaf of basil. 

Mr. Ames does not mean to make people hysterical about natural carcinogens -- the risks aren't that great -- he merely wants to set the dangers of man-made pesticides in proper perspective.
For that matter, much of the recent work on how the human immune system works suggests that the whole question of who gets cancer and why is much more complicated than much of the popular treatment of this subject suggests. 

Indeed, the assumption beneath the anti-pesticide crusade seems to be particularly crude and uncomplicated: nature good, man-made bad.
Nature's fine with us, but as believers in man-made progress, we doubt there is much truth in that dogma. 

