.START 

Ferranti International Signal PLC bought itself some extra time to resolve its financial difficulties, with a plan to raise about #100 million (US$158 million) by selling businesses. 

The sales plan, announced yesterday, helped pacify the company's bankers, who agreed to a short-term extension of the company's credit lines.
As a result of the bank agreement, Britain's third-largest defense-electronics concern said it "will continue to trade normally." 

The announcement, London analysts said, appears to give Ferranti extra time to arrange a merger, partnership, or other means of repairing its tattered balance sheet.
Serious accounting irregularities -- which Ferranti has said may be due to fraud -- were disclosed Sept. 11 in the books of a former Lancaster, Pa., company, International Signal & Control Group PLC, with which it merged last year. 

Ferranti has said the unit reported inflated asset and profit figures.
The expected correction in Ferranti's books may slash its net worth, or assets minus liabilities, as much as #200 million, or about half the #370.8 million net worth reported March 31. 

Disclosure of the problem rocked the company and unnerved its bankers and customers.
Eurofighter S.A, a European consortium collaborating on construction of a fighter-jet, recently warned its suppliers to exercise "caution" when subcontracting to Ferranti.
The company's bankers, meanwhile, were legally entitled to call in Ferranti loans, because of the drop in net worth, a Ferranti spokesman said. 

"The company was in breach of loan agreements" because of the accounting problem, he said.
Any significant reduction in Ferranti's credit lines could have panicked its customers and suppliers, worsening its problems. 

The banking agreement averts, at least temporarily, such a calamity.
To further reassure Ferranti clients and suppliers, the British defense ministry yesterday gave the company a public vote of confidence. "Despite its current financial difficulties," the ministry said, "Ferranti remains an important and valued supplier." It added: "We are continuing to discuss further (defense) requirements with them." 

Yesterday's developments represent "a good short-term measure" for Ferranti, said analyst Jane Stewart of London-based Kleinwort Benson Securities Ltd. Ferranti spokesmen declined to say how long the new banking agreement is for. 

One source involved in the banking talks called the pact "short-term." None of Ferranti's banks threatened to call in their loans, this source said -- it would have been against their own interests to have done so.
About 30 banks, led by Baring Bros. and National Westminster Bank PLC, were involved in the talks.
Ferranti spokesmen declined to say how much credit the banks agreed to extend, but repeated previous statements that Ferranti credit lines normally total about #300 million, of which about #200 million is normally being used at any one time. 

Ferranti's plan to raise cash with #100 million in asset sales wasn't a condition of the new bank agreement, but it helped appease the bankers.
The businesses being offered for sale, Ferranti said, are all "peripheral to the main electronics activities." A spokesman declined to identify the businesses, but London analysts speculated the sales list could include Ferranti's small civilian computer-making operation. 

Though Ferranti is already in contact with potential buyers, the Ferranti spokesman said, arranging the sales "isn't the sort of thing you can do in a couple of days." 

Arranging a merger or partnership will take even longer.
Though Ferranti said talks with "a number" of potential partners are under way, the company's negotiations probably will be delayed by close examination of Ferranti's books.
Moreover, at least two other British defense businesses, divisions of Thorn-EMI PLC and of Racal Electronics PLC, are also on the auction block for unrelated reasons.
Consequently, Ferranti has to compete for buyers' attention. 

The most likely partners, analysts say, include British Aerospace PLC and France's Thomson S.A.; spokesmen for those companies declined to comment. 

