.START 

He is a bureaucrat without a country.
For the past 30 years he has written rules that nobody had to follow.
He has pronounced upon matters nobody particularly wanted him to pronounce upon.
He has invented jargon -- monetary compensatory amounts, subsidiarity -- nobody understood.
He has been well paid, well fed, and universally mistrusted by the people who employed him. 

He was, and is, a Eurocrat.
And, after all those years of impotence, he is about to justify his existence at last.
Europe is driving toward economic unity by Dec. 31, 1992, and he is behind the wheel. 

Charles de Gaulle used to complain that it was impossible to govern a country that produced 385 different cheeses.
Imagine, then, what it might be like to govern the European Community.
Including France and its galaxy of cheeses, the Community embraces 320 million people in 12 countries speaking nine different languages, countries seemingly destined by perverse fate to have invented 12 cumbersome and mutually incompatible national bureaucracies, legal systems, customs and national quirks. 

What to do?
Compromising every step of the way, the postwar founders of the European Community invented three cumbersome and mutually incompatible bureaucracies, spread them inconveniently around three capital cities, and spent much of the communal budget translating and trucking around nearly one million pages a year of rules, regulations, suggestions and admonitions written in all those languages -- only to have each country's own bureaucrats ignore them. (The rest of the budget went to agriculture, including payments to farmers that the Eurocrats called "monetary compensatory amounts." That means "cash.") 

For a quarter-century or so, the 12 nations agreed on little else but this: The pseudo-government they had created and set up in Brussels should have no real power.
Fear changed their minds. 

Rebounding from the world recession of the early '80s, the U.S. was creating millions of jobs, Japan was booming, and both nations were greatly expanding their economic power around the world.
But Europe was stagnant, creating no jobs and limping along with 12% unemployment.
Alarmed, member nations of the EC finally decided that they really had to integrate economically if they were to have a chance against these giant competitors, and the only way to do that was to cede overall control of the process to their creature in Brussels. 

In 1985, the EC adopted a white paper produced by its Eurocrats outlining the directives needed to make economic integration a reality and setting Dec. 31, 1992, as the target date for implementation.
Since then, various barriers to the process have fallen one by one, and there is general belief that the move toward unity is now all but unstoppable. 

So Europe's government at last must govern.
The plan to free the movement of money, goods, people and services by the end of 1992 creates an urgent need for some sort of overarching authority to enforce antitrust rules, ensure health and safety for consumers and workers, decide on trade policy, make basic economic decisions, set general tax guidelines, and on and on. 

That would be work enough even if all the member nations were in absolute concord.
They are not; some axle-breaking political potholes still lie in the road to true unity. 

Northern countries, such as Britain, Germany and Holland, want a unified Europe giving maximum freedom to market forces; the southern countries, including Italy, Spain and Greece, favor more government aid to industry and more social and trade protection, while the northern nations fear jobs will flee to these subsidized, low-wage countries. 

Can the much-despised Eurocrat mold a United States of Europe out of this bunch?
Let's take a walk through the bureaucratic maze and watch him try. 

The Berlaymont building in Brussels is a sprawling, 13-story monster that looks from above like a giant black butterfly.
Its windows don't open, and its air conditioning doesn't work.
Its elevator system constantly finds new ways to baffle even frequent visitors.
This is the Eurocrats' sanctum sanctorum, their holy of holies, where roughly half of the 12,000 staff members of the Commission of the European Communities work.
The Commission is like the U.S. executive branch with less authority.
It studies problems and initiates measures that, if approved, it will later enforce.
But it doesn't decide anything. 

"Since the 1950s, there's been a massive change in what the Commission is being asked to do, especially with the 1992 program," says Hubert Onidi, who deals with general organizational matters from the 11th floor of the Berlaymont.
Once the producer of hairsplitting regulations cheerfully ignored by everyone, the Commission is now the designated initiator and implementer of the whole 1992 program. 

Its staff produced the White Paper that laid out the 279 kinds of regulations and directives that would be needed for unity, and set the target date for it.
Since the adoption of that plan, the denizens of the Berlaymont have been scribbling away and have produced 229 of them covering everything from banking rules to auto emissions standards.
So far, they've gotten high marks from everybody involved in the process. 

But tough battles remain, and their outcome will help determine the nature of tomorrow's Europe.
Most are fought out on the top floor of the Berlaymont, among the 17 Commissioners who direct the bureaucracy. 

Here, a free-market group, including the U.K.'s Leon Brittan, West Germany's Martin Bangemann, and Holland's Frans Andriessen, has managed to gain ground against Europe's protectionists.
This is good news for the U.S. and Japan, among others.
Earlier, it had been feared that the Commission might make Europe into a walled fortress by writing rules that would discourage outsiders from doing business here, but those fears have been allayed. 

Now, it seems likely that the Commission will resist pressure from even French and Italian car makers and give generous access to the post-1992 market to Japanese auto firms.
Also, a Commission amendment to an obscure document called the Second Banking Directive has satisfied most U.S. financial institutions that they'll get a fair shake, too. 

But the Commission works largely through tradeoffs, and in return for their gains on the open-access question the free-marketers will probably have to swallow more interventionist social legislation than they'd like.
Greece's Vasso Papandreou and Commission President Jacques Delors are pushing hard for a European Charter of Fundamental Social Rights that could set a minimum wage and rules on working hours, collective bargaining, the right to strike, and so on.
Mr. Delors says the struggles on the 13th floor have not slowed the 1992 program at all.
What they will do, he adds, is create a "pluralist Europe" that is neither wholly free-market nor wholly Socialist. 

Whatever kind of Europe emerges, the Commission will also have to enforce the rules that govern it -- and it's doubtful that the Commission can with the staff it has now.
Each of the 12 national governments thinks the Eurocracy is too big, while the Eurocrats themselves know it's too small.
As 1992 approaches, the EC has only 400 people in charge of competition policy, which includes mergers and antitrust, 800 in charge of its still-mammoth farm program, and 600 working on trade policy for a market of 320 million people. 

If, as envisioned, the EC really does open up bidding on all government procurement contracts offered by member nations, this alone could swamp much of the Eurocracy.
This business, which runs into several hundred billion dollars a year, is now dominated by suppliers in each country.
Opening the doors to myriad others could mean more than 100,000 publicly advertised bids a year, each of which would have to be translated into the tongues of Europe.
Among other things, this would bury the EC's translation service, which can't keep up with a much smaller volume of similar work now. 

Given member governments' continuing tight-fistedness, nobody here expects to get more staff.
But the canny Eurocrats have been able to ease the pinch a little by inventing the idea of subsidiarity.
Under this concept, the authority to enforce hygiene rules, say, would be left with the national governments; the people doing the work would be doing it for the EC but would stay on the payroll of those governments.
Brussels would act as a sort of appellate court if one country thought another wasn't doing a good job. 

All manner of things are proposed at the Berlaymont, but none are disposed of.
The crucial decision-making on Commission measures and practically everything else takes place across the street at the Charlemagne building, headquarters of the Council of Ministers.
This body resembles the U.S. Senate in that it represents each of the 12 member states, but it is much more powerful. 

The 2,000 bureaucrats in this building (half of them translators) coordinate meetings of the appropriate ministers from all 12 countries -- the ministers of agriculture, say, to decide about farm issues.
Three times a year, the heads of state and government meet to tie up loose ends and take major initiatives.
Depending on the issue, what these meetings decide becomes European law -- either at once or after each of the home governments has passed enabling legislation on the matter. 

The Council has so far approved 128 of the 229 directives sent from across the street, and is working on the rest.
It would probably still be mired in dispute over the first handful of proposals if it weren't for the Single European Act of 1986, which allowed voting by weighted majority (more populous countries got more votes than less populous ones) on many key issues. 

Previously, unanimous consent was required, and a single dissident could block anything (tiny Ireland, for example, routinely vetoed EC initiatives relating to milk production).
Now, the only issues that still require unanimity are taxation, workers' rights, and immigration.
Not coincidentally, these are the areas furthest behind the 1992 schedule. 

If by now the system of European government seems more than a little complicated, that's because it is.
And there's more. 

A few blocks from the Charlemagne building is a former eye hospital that is the temporary Brussels home of the European Parliament, a band of 518 lawmakers doomed to wander from city to city like Bedouins in pin stripes.
The Parliament is somewhat similar to how the U.S. House of Representatives would be if it were on wheels and if most of its decisions could be safely ignored. 

Dick Toornstra, its Brussels director, proudly calls it "the most complicated parliament in the world." Its staff of 3,400 is based in Luxembourg, its legislative chamber is in Strasbourg, France, and its committee meetings are held in Brussels.
For years its press officer lived in Luxembourg, even though all the press covering the Parliament lived in Brussels.
A couple of tons of paper -- carried in a convoy of huge trucks -- follow the nomadic legislators around each week. 

Those papers, scrupulously translated, rest largely unread.
Though its powers will gradually increase, the Parliament remains an advisory body whose opinions are often ignored by the Commission and the Council.
Twice, though, it has vetoed the Commission's proposed budget, over which it does have authority.
And last year its strong amendments on auto emission standards were adopted by both the other bodies, to the surprise of everybody, including the Parliament. 

Optimists believe that the Parliament, the Council and the Commission, long at war with one another but now driven by the need to get ready for 1992, are at last showing signs of melding into a harmonious and effective government.
If so, the next hurdle will be to get the member nations to accept them as one. 

Those countries have so long dismissed Brussels that the habit may be hard to break; Italy has ignored more than 100 different decisions of the European Court of Justice, and Greece has opposed nearly every EC joint political initiative, to cite just two examples. 

And an innate distrust of Eurocrats themselves persists -- especially in Britain, where Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher has made the figure of a Eurocrat designing a Socialist European Superstate one of her principal demons.
Perhaps because pay remains high (Mr.
Delors, president of the European Commission, makes more than George Bush and pays no taxes on that salary) and expense-account dining in Brussels so sumptuous, the 12 national governments still don't want to cede to their high-living minions any more power than they have to. 

When they want to make a big change, like moving the European Parliament to Brussels, Eurocrats must do it by stealth to avoid offending local politicians.
Members of Parliament have long wanted to end their traveling circus and settle near the Council and Commission.
Over objections from Strasbourg and especially Luxembourg (the EC presence represents 9% of the Grand Duchy's GNP), the Parliament got permission to build a new office building in Brussels. 

But it didn't get permission to build a chamber where it could meet.
Private developers, however, are building another office building close by that -- lo and behold] -- will just happen to have in its basement a chamber big enough to house 518 parliamentarians.
Though nobody will say so out loud, everybody expects the Parliament to move in as fast as it can. 

Mr. Revzin is chief of The Wall Street Journal's Paris bureau. 

1.
The EC Commission, which is the EC executive branch, makes a proposal. 

2.
The European Parliament reviews it in first reading. 

3.
The Commission revises the proposal according to Parliament's suggestions. 

4.
The Council, composed of elected ministers from the 12 national governments, examines the proposal in first reading.
It may amend it and adopt a "common position," that is, a decision in principle to accept the proposal. 

5.
The Parliament, within three months, examines the common-position text and can vote amendments. 

6.
The Commission can endorse or reject the Parliament's amendments. 

7.
The Council, within three months, must make a final decision.
If the Commission endorses the Parliament's amendments, the Council can adopt the measure by a weighted majority vote.
Any other changes in the legislation besides those agreed to by both the Parliament and the Commission must be adopted unanimously. 

Source: European Research Associates, Brussels 

