.START 

Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp., one of Alan Bond's biggest creditors, is believed to have reduced its exposure to the embattled Australian entrepreneur 20% to 25% this year and is expected to lower its exposure further. 

Neither Hongkong Bank nor Mr. Bond will say how much it has lent him.
Analysts estimate the current sum at between $750 million and $800 million, off from between $1 billion and $1.1 billion at the beginning of the year.
Despite the decline, they believe about 16% of the bank's published shareholder funds are committed to Mr. Bond. 

A drop in the bank's exposure to Mr. Bond was expected.
Last December, Paul Selway-Swift, the bank's general manager in Hong Kong, said the total would fall 25% by August.
Steven Thompson, an economist with County NatWest Securities Asia Ltd., the Hong Kong subsidiary of National Westminster Bank PLC, says he believes it will fall by that much "this year." 

Bankers said the reduction has been accomplished through a fixed-repayment schedule for much of Mr. Bond's short-term debt with the bank.
They said the recent sale of assets by Mr. Bond may have gone to pay off additional debt, though they saw no signs the bank was trying to distance itself from him. 

Hongkong Bank was one of the first financial institutions to back Mr. Bond as he was building his brewing, media, resources and property empire.
If his problems continue to worsen, Hongkong Bank's share price might be affected, analysts say.
For now, however, rumors the bank is considering moving its headquarters overseas before Hong Kong reverts to Chinese sovereignty in 1997 are helping to buoy the price. 

That speculation, which hasn't drawn a comment from the bank, has pushed up the price 8% in the past month and may continue to offset any bad news about Mr. Bond, the analysts said.
The bank's stock closed at HK$6.15 (79 U.S. cents) a share yesterday. 

The financial situation of Mr. Bond's 58%-controlled flagship, Bond Corp. Holdings Ltd., has deteriorated sharply in recent months as bankers have tightened credit lines and investors have dumped the stock, which has fallen 80% this year.
It closed yesterday at 36 Australian cents (29 U.S. cents) in Sydney. 

The turning point in Mr. Bond's corporate fortunes was his foray against the British conglomerate Lonrho PLC about a year ago.
He built a 20.4% stake in the company that appeared to presage a takeover offer, but Lonrho, which is controlled by R.W. "Tiny" Rowland, counterattacked with a campaign that centered on Bond Corp. 's debt.
The campaign was effective in making creditors uneasy. 

Although Bond Corp. won't disclose the size of the group's debt, analysts estimate the current total at six billion Australian dollars (US$4.65 billion).
Since April, signs have emerged that the group is facing a cash bind, and Mr. Bond said earlier this month Bond Corp. has "a number of problems we're dealing with." 

To raise cash, the company has been selling assets.
Last week, it announced it had sold its Lonrho stake at a loss of #50 million (US$79.1 million).
Earlier this week, the Perth-based concern announced a complex proposal aimed at selling half of its most valuable asset, its Australian brewing empire. 

Analysts applauded the planned sale as a way to help keep Bond Corp. afloat, but investors appear skeptical the transaction will be completed.
Shares of Bond Corp. have sagged on the news, as have those of Bell Resources Ltd., an associated company that would become 100%-owned by Bond Corp. as part of the proposed brewing-assets transaction. 

It was a very different story a few years ago, when Alan Bond was riding high as one of Australia's most successful and most well-known businessmen.
Hongkong Bank was eager to be a part of his success; it helped Mr. Bond get into the brewing business in 1982 by bankrolling the purchase of Perth-based Swan Brewery Co.
Since then, the bank has remained a big backer of Mr. Bond's ventures. 

S. Karene Witcher in Sydney, Australia contributed to this article. 

