.START 

Central Newspapers Inc., Vice President Dan Quayle's family's publishing business, joined a trend among newspaper chains by going public but keeping control in family hands. 

More than three million shares were snapped up yesterday, as the oversubscribed issue opened at $22.75, although it had been priced at $21.
The stock closed its first day of composite New York Stock Exchange trading at $23.50, up 75 cents, on volume of 1.6 million shares.
Based on the closing price, Central would have a market value of $607 million. 

The sale represented less than 16% of the company's Class A common shares, most of which will remain in family hands.
More important, nearly all of the Class B shares, which have 10 times the voting power of the Class A shares, still are held by the family. 

Other U.S. newspaper publishers with similar arrangements include New York Times Co., McClatchy Newspapers Inc. and Dow Jones & Co., publisher of this newspaper. 

Central decided to offer the public a minority stake to create liquidity in the stock, and to establish a market price.
For selling shareholders the result was a windfall. 

The biggest seller was tiny Franklin College, in Franklin, Ind., which disposed of 1.3 million of its 1.52 million shares -- more than doubling its endowment fund in the process.
Before the offering "we had valued all the shares that we owned at roughly $4 million," said Sid Downey, the school's vice president of finance.
The 885-student school is expected to receive about $27 million in proceeds. 

Other selling shareholders included DePauw University, the vice president's alma mater, which sold 181,818 of its 300,000 shares; and Liberty Fund Inc., a nonprofit foundation set up by a businessman who helped finance the newspapers. 

While the vice president wasn't among family members selling shares, two brothers and a sister were, as was their mother.
His office said that Mr. Quayle continues to hold 19,800 shares of Class A and 25,000 shares of Class B.
His wife, Marilyn, holds 8,000 Class A shares. 

Central has two daily newspaper monopolies, in Indianapolis, Ind. and Phoenix, Ariz., and also owns several smaller dailies in the Midwest.
Unlike many media companies, however, it has no non-newspaper holdings. 

Analysts said investors' initial enthusiasm for the stock may be based more on the company's potential than recent results. "Their profit margins are considerably below industry averages," said John Morton, an analyst with the Citicorp unit of Lynch, Jones & Ryan, in Washington.
He calculated that while the average operating margin for comparable companies is 16.5%, Central's for the last 12 months was 12.7% 

But "there are some obvious opportunities for them to improve that," Mr. Morton said.
He noted that both the Phoenix and Indianapolis papers publish morning and evening editions with separate editorial staffs. "Even without collapsing down to one newspaper a day they could save some money.
I'd expect they would follow the trend and go to once-a-day publication." 

Central's offering prospectus reported that earnings for the 26 weeks ended last June 25 were $19.8 million on revenue of $216.3 million.
That compares with net income of $15.4 million on revenue of $207.7 million a year earlier. 

But the document also discloses that fiscal 1988's earnings were slightly less than that for the previous year before a change in accounting.
During the latest year Central took a $7.6 million charge for workforce reductions at its Phoenix dailies, the Arizona Republic and Phoenix Gazette.
That reduction came as advertising linage declined, reflecting a slump in the housing market and the loss of some major retailers. 

The company was founded in 1934 by Eugene C. Pulliam, Mr. Quayle's grandfather.
The Vice President's father, James C. Quayle, is a director of the company. 

A majority of the Class B common stock is held by the Eugene C. Pulliam Trust, which is to terminate 21 years after the death of certain family descendants.
According to mortality tables, that would be in 2060, the prospectus says. 

As a final reminder that the company clearly remains in family hands, Central chose a fitting trading symbol for its stock: ECP -- in honor of its founder. 

