.START 

FEARS FADE on the economy, a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll shows. 

Of those polled, 85% expect their family's financial situation to either stay the same or get better over the next year.
Only 13% expect their finances to worsen.
That reinforces the latest view of most economists that a recession isn't likely in the next 12 months.
With the economy showing unexpected vigor, says economist Stephen Roach, "it seems likely the momentum could spill over into 1990." 

But a majority of people surveyed believe the budget deficit and federal taxes will go up.
And 43% say inflation will accelerate; only 8% think it will fall.
Budget and trade deficits as well as unemployment outrank interest rates as economic concerns. 

Analysts say many Eastern manufacturers fear a strong dollar will slow U.S. factory exports in the coming year. 

UNCERTAINTY REIGNS over East Europe among the public and Bush advisers. 

Views are evenly split on whether the U.S. should actively encourage Iron Curtain nations to loosen ties with the Soviet Union, the WSJ/NBC poll shows.
U.S. officials move cautiously.
Prodded by Democratic charges of inaction, Baker will tell the Soviets' Shevardnadze at their Wyoming meeting starting today that the U.S. plans modest help for Poland and Hungary. 

The administration will allow the two nations to increase steel shipments to the U.S.
It also urges Congress to approve a $100 million fund in Poland and $25 million in Hungary to foster private enterprise. "Czechoslovakia might be next in line" for reform, a senior U.S. official predicts. 

BUSH SOARS in approval ratings, but Democrats see underlying weaknesses. 

An impressive 67% in the new poll say they approve of the job the president is doing.
More than 60% approve of his handling the economy, and 58% applaud him on foreign affairs.
Most heartening to GOP partisans: Bush does best among young voters.
Bush's first blush of popularity seems to be lasting well beyond the honeymoon stage. 

But Democrats say the numbers are soft.
If Bush hits any big bumps, "he's going to be in trouble quickly because he's essentially a caretaker," contends Democratic National Committee spokesman Michael McCurry.
A White House official counters: "The poll numbers are a mile wide and a mile deep because George Bush has delivered on his campaign promises." 

Democrats concede that the party's new leadership has trouble devising a strategy for challenging the president. 

THE GIPPER LOSES ONE in the poll.
Asked whom they like better as president, 48% go with George Bush; only 22% choose Ronald Reagan.
Among blacks, Bush is preferred by an overwhelming 48% to 9%.
Bush, in general, has a 53% to 24% favorable rating among black voters. 

PRO-CHOICE CANDIDATES fare the best among voters.
Some 46% of those surveyed said they would definitely vote, or would be more likely to vote, for the candidate who favors a woman's right to an abortion.
Some 28% said they would back an anti-abortion candidate.
Young voters are pro-choice by a more lopsided 2 to 1. 

IRAs RULE over cutting the capital-gains tax; in the poll, 49% of voters say they prefer expansion of tax-deductible individual retirement accounts pushed by Sen. Bentsen and other Democrats, while 38% back capital-gains tax cuts advocated by Bush.
Among middle-income voters, the IRAs advantage widens to 53% to 35%. 

SOCIAL ISSUES dominate public opinion.
Drugs are by far the top worry in the poll.
The budget deficit is a distant second, but the next biggest concerns are the homeless, education and the environment.
War and peace, high taxes and trade are cited by only 1% each as the most important issue facing the country. 

ETHICS SCANDALS don't lower public opinion of Congress and Democrats. 

The new poll shows little impact from the furor over former House Speaker Wright, Massachusetts Rep. Frank and others.
A solid 74% of voters say ethics in Congress are about the same as in the past but are just getting more attention now.
And 70% believe Congress is doing about the same quality job as most recent Congresses.
Congress's Democratic majority isn't damaged by the flaps.
In the poll, slightly more voters, 32% to 29%, say they plan to vote for the Democratic candidate in the 1990 congressional election.
GOP Rep. Martin says voters' wide interests aren't reflected in what she calls the media's "bikini treatment: skimpy coverage that calls attention to the most sensational parts." 

Sentiment grows that Rep. Frank ultimately will leave for political and personal reasons. 

MINOR MEMOS: The Silver Fox jumps high above Nancy Reagan in the WSJ/NBC poll: voters like Barbara Bush better than her predecessor by 58% to 19%.
Among women, Mrs. Bush wins 66% to 15%. . . . Duke who?
Although Dukakis got 46% of the vote in losing last year's presidential election, only 33% of those polled say they voted for him. . . . The Pete Rose Memorial Question: Asked if they plan to bet on baseball playoff games or football over the next month, 20% of those polled say yes. 

