.START 

As a substitute for the Republican plan for a tax cut that would raise federal revenues, House Democrats are now officially offering a plan for a tax increase.
Revenues aside, they just prefer high taxes. 

Democrats of the now-dominant variety may have to agree that cutting the capital-gains tax to 19.6% would raise revenues in the initial year (in our view also over the long term).
Still, they complain, this is a tax cut that benefits only the "wealthy." And "the wealthy" should pay higher tax rates.
So the House Democratic leadership has proposed to stop the capital-gains tax cut and instead increase the top rate on the highest personal incomes from 28% to 33%.
Since this change would affect only the very top tier of income, it wouldn't raise much money, but this is not the object. 

Rather, House Democrats have been convinced that high taxes are good politics.
They take their instruction from Majority Leader Richard Gephardt, who believes that his own presidential-primary campaign proved this is the way politics works before being swept aside by the invincible Dukakis juggernaut.
So the pretty-much open object of the 33% rate is to punish success, and thereby garner the votes of the nonsuccessful.
Voters are presumed to be too dimwitted to recognize that the 33% proposal is the camel's nose under the tent, to be followed by higher taxes for the rich, the near-rich, the not-so-rich and everyone else. 

At long last, in short, the political choice that defined the past three presidential elections is now the central issue of congressional politics.
As it has developed over the past few months, the battle over a capital-gains cut has produced for the American electorate a rare opportunity to understand the two ideologies now competing for their assent.
Turning the 33% proposal into law would not only bust George Bush's promise not to raise taxes but also would displace the competing philosophy of government established by Ronald Reagan over the eight years of his presidency. 

The House Democrats have decided conclusively that the party's identity will sink or swim on the issue of taxes.
They want more.
The Democrats believe that the government is the most important institution in the nation's life, that the government exists to create programs and raise whatever taxes are necessary to fund those programs.
It is really the most remarkable thing to see one of this country's major political parties espousing such a vision in the late 20th century. 

By contrast, Ronald Reagan's support for tax cuts and his opposition to increased federal spending were based on his belief, stated at every opportunity, that the federal government and its great panoply of programs were smothering private initiative in the United States.
He sought to reverse the Democrats' idea that America's growth and greatness depend on government initiatives and that the government is entitled to the taxes necessary to sustain and expand its responsibilities.
It depends instead on letting all workers keep most of the country's newly produced wealth and on letting them decide, individually, how best to spend and invest the wealth their work has created.
Under this regime, the U.S. is now experiencing its seventh straight year of economic growth. 

Happily, not all Democrats have embraced the House leadership's vision.
The capital-gains cut now on the table was authored by a Georgia Democrat and supported by five Democratic colleagues on the Ways and Means Committee.
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Lloyd Bentsen said Wednesday that he opposes the 33% plan.
Connecticut's freshman Democratic Senator Joseph Lieberman recently wrote an eloquent plea to his party on this issue: 

"The argument of some Democrats against a cut in the capital gains tax -- that the rich will benefit more than the rest of us -- misses the point and is politically divisive.
Lower- and middle-income people won't realize most of the tax savings for the obvious reason that they have less capital, but they could get something better: a job, if they have none, or a better job, if they are underemployed.
After all, the whole idea of a capital gains tax cut is to induce people who have capital to move it into new investments that will make America more productive and competitive and benefit all of us with greater economic opportunity and security." 

Senator Lieberman and presumably some of his fellow Democrats recognize that the United States is not a land of seething, resentful workers bereft of opportunity.
The populism being peddled by Rep. Gephardt and the House Democrats reflects a complete misunderstanding of how America works and, not so incidentally, how America votes. 

