.START 

It took only a few months for Philip Tose's creation to catch up with him. 

In early 1988, Mr. Tose took time off from his job at Citicorp's Hong Kong brokerage firm to join a panel commissioned by the government to scrutinize Hong Kong's stock and futures exchanges.
The result was a 443-page report crowded with suggestions for reforming the colony's securities industry. 

Now chairman of the brokerage firm and merchant bank Peregrine International Holdings Ltd., Mr. Tose finds himself under the magnifying glass he helped create.
The most controversial outgrowth of the panel's report -- the Securities and Futures Commission -- says Peregrine may have breached Hong Kong's rules on corporate takeovers. 

"I recognized that I would be regulated more," Mr. Tose says. "The regulations have been tightened, but there's still the question of degree to be worked out." 

That question of degree has been a sensitive point from the time Hong Kong's financial community grudgingly agreed that laissez-faire would have to yield to stricter market regulation, and the issue continues to spark heated debate. 

The five-month-old commission's initial moves -- including the Peregrine case and another high-profile action involving locally listed Paladin Ltd. -- have furnished grist for both sides of the debate but haven't brought it any closer to a resolution. 

Hong Kong's ambition to be seen as an international financial center has been battered regularly in the past decade, first by corporate and banking scandals in the early 1980s, and then by the four-day closure of the colony's securities markets after the global equities crash in 1987.
The shutdown persuaded even reluctant participants that the markets needed tighter supervision. 

The Securities and Futures Commission Ordinance 1989 legislated a watchdog agency independent of the government.
Although the agency may recommend that legal action be taken, its own rulings lack the force of law and depend mainly on voluntary compliance.
At the same time, however, the ordinance also grants the agency unprecedented investigative powers. 

The spotlight is on Robert Owen, a former British banker who heads the commission.
During the negotiations leading to approval of the 1989 ordinance, Mr. Owen stressed that the resulting agency would have to have the muscle to carry out its mandate. 

In response to the current criticism, Mr. Owen insists that the commission's early investigations weren't just muscle-flexing. "We intervened because we had to," he says.
The commission's "principal objective is to cause the market here to develop in a long-term and consistent manner." 

But Mr. Owen thinks he may not have enough power to do the job.
The issue of compliance in a self-regulatory framework is one that clearly frustrates him: "It's not the rules but the means of ensuring that people comply with the rules." Indeed, the results of the initial inquiries may support his concern about the watchdog's limited powers. 

The Paladin case provides an example.
In August, the company proposed to buy New Zealand Equities Ltd., an investment concern.
Because New Zealand Equities and its associates held nearly 40% of Paladin's shares, the proposal drew fire from the commission, the Hong Kong Stock Exchange and Taiwan investors with a large stake in Paladin.
All three parties said that the New Zealand company shouldn't be able to vote on its own takeover. 

The commission threatened to punish Paladin if the New Zealand shareholders voted, but the saber-rattling had little effect.
The votes were cast, and the merger has gone ahead. 

The stock exchange's chief executive, Francis Yuen, concedes that the commission is virtually impotent in such situations because its main disciplinary tools are to delist an offender or to refuse to list new shares.
Paladin's shares also trade on New Zealand's stock exchange, so the impact of a trading suspension in Hong Kong would be lessened. 

"When there's someone who doesn't want to play by the rules, you have very little power over him," Mr. Yuen says.
Nevertheless, he also cautions against overarming the commission: "Because of these cases, which could be isolated, do you want to change the market to make it more costly to good companies?" 

In the case of an attempt by Li Kashing's Cheung Kong (Holdings) Ltd. to sell 30% of Kwong Sang Hong Ltd., a small property-investment company, to Peregrine, the commission is charging that the buyer and seller are acting in concert.
Peregrine executives deny the assertion. 

If the commission determines that the two concerns are in concert, Peregrine would have to offer to buy all of Kwong Sang Hong's shares outstanding for HK$860 each, the price Peregrine offered when it initiated the transaction.
Since then, however, the stock's price has risen to about HK$1,100, so Peregrine would be hard pressed to find takers. 

In the meantime, however, Peregrine's offer would require that prospectuses by prepared and mailed to every Kwong Sang Hong shareholder. 

Mr. Tose is optimistic that the commission will say Peregrine and Cheung Kong weren't acting in concert.
Whatever the finding, though, he believes that the episode bodes ill for the securities markets. 

"So far {the commission} has chosen the strict end of the interpretation spectrum when applying existing rules," says Mr. Tose. "If this becomes a pattern, then that's heading us toward over-regulation." 

