.START 

Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez may not have planned things this way, but a decision by his wife, Carmen Romero, to run for the Spanish Parliament in next month's elections has sparked a storm. 

As third on the Socialist Party's list of candidates in the province of Cadiz, Ms. Romero, a 42-year-old former teacher who -- like all married Spanish women -- retains her maiden name, is practically certain to be elected. 

But the prospect of what could turn out to be Spain's first husband-and-wife political team since Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile in the 15th century has met a mixed welcome. 

Mr. Gonzalez, charged the opposition newspaper ABC, drawing parallels between Ms. Romero's candidacy and the roles once played by Imelda Marcos in the Philippines and Isabel Martinez de Peron in Argentina, "governs Spain as if it were a banana republic." 

"The idea {of her candidacy} hasn't been presented well," commented sociologist Amando de Miguel.
Though it may win votes locally, he added, "it gives a rather Third World, paternalist view of Spain." 

Ms. Romero's candidacy, leaked to the media last week, hasn't yet been officially rubber-stamped by the Socialist Party. 

But officials said it is certain to get approval later this month, as part of a drive to ensure that at least 25% of Socialist candidates are women. 

Assuming Ms. Romero is approved, Spain's electoral system means she can hardly fail to get elected.
Seats in the 350-seat Parliament are allotted, on the basis of proportional representation, to closed lists of party candidates in 52 provinces; in the last poll in 1986 the first seven on the Socialist list won election in Cadiz. 

Despite her personal charm and credentials as a former union activist and Socialist Party member since 1968, the Socialist premier's wife may not have an easy time out on the stump. 

She has no direct connections with Cadiz, where she will be up against candidates such as the populist mayor of Jerez, Pedro Pacheco. 

"What seemed like a brilliant electoral trick . . . could turn out to be counterproductive," wrote columnist Abel Hernandez in the newspaper Diario 16. 

