.START 

An American visitor to Moscow asked recently to use a Xerox machine.
He was led, with Fort Knox-like ceremony, behind a locked door into a backroom, where a Soviet made the precious copies.
The question of the week is: What can the U.S. possibly do to help a nation that treats Xerox machines as a controlled substance? 

Back in Washington, copying is a different sort of problem; George Bush's critics are borrowing metaphors.
George Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, accused the administration this week of harboring "nostalgia for the Cold War," because it wasn't doing more to help Mikhail Gorbachev. 

A day later, foreign-policy Bigfoot Peter Tarnoff added a creative fillip by deploring a "bizarre nostalgia for the Cold War." The same people who think the U.S. doesn't do much of anything well in the Third World now insist that the U.S. somehow save the Second. 

The trigger for this scorn was a speech by Lawrence Eagleburger, the deputy Secretary of State.
The speech wasn't cleared in advance, a fact that irritated Secretary of State James Baker's political antennae on the eve of today's meeting with the Soviet foreign minister.
But its main sin seems to have been candor.
It "is not the task of American foreign policy," Mr. Eagleburger said, "to ensure the success of Gorbachev's reforms." 

The evidence for this simple proposition is illustrated by the poverty of the critics' own proposed agenda.
They express fine broad sentiments but few specifics.
Sen. Mitchell frets that the administration is "complacent about the arms control process," because it has placed a higher priority on conventional than on nuclear arms control.
But conventional arms is where the greatest ruble savings lie.
Tanks and infantry cost more than cookie-cutter missiles.
If Mr. Gorbachev needs "resources" to buy more butter, he can make fewer guns. 

Yet the Soviets are making as many new guns as ever.
A recent report from the Committee on the Present Danger says that while obsolete weapons are being demobilized, better ones are taking their place.
The Soviets still build military aircraft at twice the rate of the U.S.
In 1983, pre-"perestroika," they produced 810 nuclear artillery pieces and 400 short-range nuclear missiles.
Last year, with detente in full bloom, they made 850 and 450. 

It's also apparently impolite to mention details about what used to be known as "the Soviet empire." Charles Wolf, the astute Rand analyst, has pegged its cost to the Soviets at nearly $30 billion a year.
Fidel Castro's dole alone costs more than $4 billion.
A ceasefire is in effect in Nicaragua, but Soviet-bloc military aid to Managua amounted to $350 million in the first eight months of this year. "Resources" for "perestroika?" 

Sen. Mitchell wants to bring the Soviets into the web of "Western institutions" such as the GATT, IMF and World Bank.
But it stretches belief to think that entry in the IMF is going to do much for Soviet coal miners, whose main complaint while striking this summer was a shortage of soap. 

One ranking Soviet reformer, visiting a senior U.S. official, recently illustrated his economy's problems by relating that his neighbor had stockpiled seven years' supply of detergent.
Does the notion of a tariff-reduction mean anything in such an economy? 

The critics are going to get their Bush-Gorbachev summit but will more good international press satisfy the independent yearnings of Ukrainians or Balts? 

If U.S. restraint is "nostalgia," we may yet need more of it.
In his first meeting with the Soviet foreign minister, Mr. Baker stressed the importance of price reform, but was told how difficult it is.
Now, before this meeting, a stream of Soviets arrive preaching imminent danger and the need for Western help, but price and currency reform still go unaddressed. 

Supply-sider Jude Wanniski and Federal Reserve Governor Wayne Angell recently urged, in Moscow, that the ruble be made convertible to gold -- the ruble would suddenly have some measure of value.
Of course, this is another idea that only Moscow can implement, so it also probably won't pass Sen. Mitchell's test for assisting "perestroika." 

The same American who asked to use that Soviet Xerox machine, former defense official Philip Merrill, says that asking whether or not to help Mr. Gorbachev "succeed" is the wrong question.
The better question is, Can we help open up Soviet society?
Soviet citizens already know this.
At Moscow University, the first question students asked Mr. Merrill was: "How long would it be before they received direct satellite transmissions from the West?" Their second wistful question: "What did you do on your vacation?" 

The students understand, better than their Kremlin overseers, the liberating effects of modern technology.
Orwell was wrong.
Modern technology doesn't sustain the totalitarian state, but causes it to wither away as more knowledge (microchip power) is put in the hands of individuals.
Have TV or computer, the mind will travel. 

Mr. Merrill's idea for helping "perestroika" would be to bombard Soviet citizens with millions of old (16-byte) personal computers, printers, modems, cellular telephones, VCRs, fax and Xerox machines, as well as direct satellite TV. Imagine the subversive impact of CNN, much less MTV. (Just don't beam C-SPAN while Congress is in session.) 

The Bush administration has proposed Open Skies, and yesterday it offered Open Lands, but why not "Open Minds"?
Liberating the Xerox machine from its Gulag would do more for "perestroika" than all of the arms control ever dreamed of. 

