.START 

A Federal Trade Commission judge ruled that Owens-Illinois Inc. should be forced to sell its Brockway Inc. unit because their combined share reduces competition in the glass-container market. 

The decision prompted a brief but severe sell-off of high-yield bonds issued by Owens-Illinois, which was taken private in a $3.64 billion leveraged buy-out in 1987 by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., the largest U.S. leveraged buy-out firm. 

Some of the bonds fell three or four points before recovering most of those losses after KKR said it plans to appeal the ruling, and wouldn't have to sell Brockway until 1993 or 1994 even if it loses the case.
Some traders earlier had believed Brockway might have to be sold much sooner, possibly at a loss. 

The ruling by administrative law judge James Timony said Owens-Ilinois's 1987 acquisition of Brockway for $750 million gave the combined companies 38% of the U.S. glass-container market.
Owens contends the commission should instead consider its smaller share of the entire container market, including plastic and metal. 

Owens-Illinois, based in Toledo, Ohio, already has combined the two companies' operations, saving more than $50 million annually, according to a company spokesman. 

But the specter of a forced asset sale frightened some traders in the junk-bond market. "You've had a very jittery junk market and any kind of bad news sends people barreling off a cliff," said Maeda Klein, a high-yield bond analyst at Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. Owens-Illinois has about $3 billion of high-risk, high-yield bonds outstanding.
Ashok Vasvani, a bond analyst at Goldman, Sachs & Co., said the bonds regained all but one point of their losses by late in the afternoon. "My own feeling is this is no problem at all," he said. 

The company's bonds have underperformed the rest of the junk-bond market because container prices have fallen 8% during the past two years, Ms. Klein said.
For the first six months of 1989, the company reported revenue of $1.77 billion and earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation of $365 million.
Its net interest expenses were $238 million in the same period. 

