.START 

UP IN LINCOLN, Mont., elements of the American beef-jerky industry, such as it is, wait breathlessly for Japanese restrictions on imports of solid-muscle jerky to fall.
In Peoria, Ill,. the mayor is keeping his tonsils tuned in the event of another trip to Tokyo, where his renditions of Sinatra classics have been a smash.
And in other American small towns and cities, delegations are preparing to launch themselves across the Pacific in hopes of tapping the deep pockets of Japan. 

Corporate, big-city and state delegations have been crossing the Pacific for years to swap smiles and business cards.
Now, small-town America, much of it still suffering from an economic depression that has lasted for up to a decade, has joined in putting the big-time hustle on the Japanese. 

This can involve a lot of luggage.
Civic boosters from the U.S. have already hauled across the pond an incredible variety of local goods they hope to hawk to their bemused prospects -- American-made model trains, guitar strings, disposable diapers, and pictures of World War II aircraft for sale.
Another primary objective: getting the Japanese to invest in their towns, thus creating jobs. 

Results have been mixed, to put it charitably, and the many delegations returning empty-handed after blowing part of the town treasury sometimes have to suffer the mutterings of discontented taxpayers.
Detecting a whiff of boondoggle in the air, citizens are likely to wonder aloud whether the money wouldn't have been better spent filling up potholes than filling up chamber of commerce officials with sake and $20 breakfasts. 

Seeing this, boosters in many towns have decided to just stay home, thank you. "We've been watching other towns do this, and we're not impressed with their success rate," says a city official in Albany, Ore. "They had a fling, but they didn't bring home any business." That happens depressingly often.
There are, however, enough successes to keep rural and small-city delegations shuttling back and forth across the ocean, tantalized by the prospect of landing a lucrative agreement.
Japan's great wealth is a powerful, enduring attractant -- and some Americans whose local economies could use a transfusion think it only fair and historically fitting that the Japanese come up with the cash. 

"The two countries we whupped in World War II, we picked them up, put them on their feet, and industrialized 'em . . . . It's time to get a little return on our investment," declares Tom Sherrill, the city manager in Newcastle, Okla., population 8,000. 

Newcastle is getting that return, or a little of it, anyway.
A Japanese concern will soon begin producing foam rubber in a machine shop that's been empty since the oil boom went bust.
The venture may bring in 10 or 12 new jobs, and city officials dream of many more; first foam rubber, they figure, and then who knows?
Maybe mattresses, maybe pillows, and before you know it we'll be into the big money. 

As for trade, U.S. delegations have found it hard to predict what the Japanese will want.
To the satisfaction -- and sometimes the surprise -- of those producing the stuff, it turns out that they want, among other things, honey, goat cheese, tart cherries and maple syrup from Michigan; custom-tailored asparagus from Washington state, where farmers have adapted the husky local variety into a more "delicate, aesthetically pleasing" vegetable fit for Japanese palates; custom sleighs from Klamath Falls, Ore.; and log cabins from Rayle, Ga. 

Deep study of the ancient culture of Japan, and of the likes and dislikes of its inhabitants, pays off.
St. George, Utah, has successfully promoted itself as a tourist attraction, benefiting from goodwill generated by a local girls' group called the "Super Steppers" who have performed in Japan.
They are dressed in red, white and blue, and, according to Floyd Fox, executive vice president of the chamber of commerce, they have "very, very blond hair." They also dance. 

Effective entertainment, represented by the talented larynx of Mayor James Maloof, also has helped Peoria bag about $60 million in Japanese plant investment to date.
A former radio-show host turned real-estate agent, the mayor researched the ways of the mysterious East and found that the Frank Sinatra standard "My Way" is a favorite in Japan.
On a visit there he wowed a dinner audience of 250 Japanese businessmen by warbling the number. (The mayor says he also scored heavily in Korea with a tremolo rendition of "Danny Boy," but that's another story.) 

All this makes the process of tapping Japan's coffers seem easy, but anyone who has tried knows that it is not.
Jerome Kisscorni, city manager of Tecumseh, Mich., population 7,500, visited Japan a while back and found that the title on his business card was being loosely translated as the Japanese equivalent of dogcatcher, and that the town's claim to be the "refrigeration capital of the world" was taken to mean that the place was an arctic wasteland.
Told that they would need "banquet girls" for a dinner they were giving for their Japanese hosts, his delegation found itself in an ethical quandary. "We thought, 'Do we have to go out and hire call girls?
Is this proper? '" recalls Mr. Kisscorni.
As it turned out, they didn't have to hire call girls -- banquet girls are simply adornments, not hookers -- but they didn't get any new business, either. 

They can't complain.
Tecumseh had already landed a $100 million Japanese-financed stamping plant largely through efforts of the state, and the local delegation was only trying to build on that.
But other towns beyond number are still waiting, with varying degrees of pessimism or optimism, for anything at all from Japan. 

Les ("You get more with Les") Brooks, marketing director of Hi-Country Beef Jerky in Lincoln, Mont., is one of the optimists.
Hi-Country has already sold some "chopped and formed" beef jerky to Japan, custom-made to look like rough cut chewing tobacco.
It's only a matter of time, Mr. Brooks feels, before the Japanese finally concede that their domestic jerky is as inferior as he knows it is, discard arcane restrictions on imports of muscle-meat jerky, and throw open the door to the real, he-man article from the U.S. of A. 

The Japanese, he says, are wild about "cowboys and Indians and mountain men," so genuine U.S. jerky ought to be a hot seller. (He may be right.
One Japanese businessman ordered 500 cases of beer from Montana with the proviso that the usual label be replaced by one showing a grizzled pioneer toting a buffalo gun.) 

Gerald Bouchard, city manager of Port Huron, Mich., is one of the pessimists.
Scouting business prospects in Japan, he and a colleague spent $25,000 in little over a week, choked down raw fish, twiddled their thumbs waiting for appointments, and came home with zero. "I had the feeling that to be successful, you'd have to make a career out of it," he says. 

Sanger, Calif., a farm town of 16,000, has spent more than $50,000 trying to lure a Japanese steel-recycling mill and a waste-energy plant.
Mayor Mark Johnson has trudged dutifully through Japanese incineration plants by day.
By night, he has trudged dutifully through bars and nightclubs as a guest of the Japanese, though he is a teetotaler.
So far, he has nothing to show for it. 

"I'm sure some people think it's a waste of time and money," says Mr. Johnson -- but he remains convinced that Sanger will be able to snag significant Japanese investment if it keeps trying.
It may or may not, but nearly everyone who has tried a sales job on the Japanese agrees on this much: Patience is not just a virtue but a necessity. 

They know all about that in Battle Creek, Mich., where locals have spent a decade wooing Japanese investment. "The first thing that impressed me was the hopelessness of what we were trying to do," says James Hettinger, president of Battle Creek Unlimited Inc., the economic-development group doing the wooing.
Delegations from towns in the Southern U.S. had poisoned the ground, dropping hints that the North was covered with snow and union goons.
The Japanese were slow to make decisions, and there was grumbling among taxpayers back home. 

But persistence paid off.
Japanese have invested nearly $700 million in Battle Creek, manufacturing everything from auto parts to machine tools to chewing gum.
In January, 1988, a trio from Battle Creek returned from a five-day trip to Japan with a commitment for a $20 million investment. 

"We make a decision overnight, then spend five years implementing it," Mr. Hettinger says. "It takes the Japanese five years to make a decision, and they implement it overnight.
If you're looking for a quick fix, don't even consider it.
You can count on throwing your money away." 

Ms. Dolan is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau. 

