.START 

Joseph Davis, a retired small-business man, blames the three burglaries at his home on drugs.
Eileen Rande, a middle-school teacher and mother of three, is so worried about drug-related crimes that she got a German shepherd for protection.
Rosalyn McCleod, a recent high-school graduate working in a discount women's apparel store, says drug users and dealers are so common in her neighborhood she couldn't avoid them even if she tried. 

"This is like a war," says Winton Wright, an iron worker with three grown children. "You can't find somebody who doesn't know somebody or doesn't have somebody in their family that isn't affected." 

To these four residents of Detroit's suburbs, as well as to millions of other Americans, the fear of drugs and drug-related crime isn't abstract.
It is real and personal, something they see every day, at home, at work, in their neighborhoods and schools.
The remarks of these four, part of a focus group assembled for The Wall Street Journal here, reflect the pervasiveness of that fear at a time when President Bush is undertaking a new offensive against illegal drugs. 

According to a new, nationwide Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, three out of four Americans have been touched personally by drugs.
Half have personally used drugs or have a family member who has.
A remarkable 43% say that drugs are the nation's single most important issue; the next most frequently cited concern, the budget deficit, was named by only 6%. 

The telephone poll of 1,003 registered voters, taken last Saturday through Tuesday, found a nation willing to try even extreme measures to combat the drug problem.
Drugs are causing many Americans to change the way they live.
Today, they are more inclined to double-bolt doors, think twice about going out at night and consider whom they associate with more carefully. 

A surprisingly high 70% of the voters surveyed believe at least half of the crimes committed in their neighborhoods are drug related.
Also, 70% of those with children between the ages of 13 and 17 say that drugs are sold in their children's schools.
A third of workers say they know someone on the job who has used illicit drugs in the past year. 

The WSJ/NBC poll, conducted by pollsters Peter Hart, a Democrat, and Robert Teeter, a Republican, shows that 63% of Americans are willing to raise taxes to finance the drug battle, though when talk turns to what specific taxes, they are more circumspect: Only those on alcohol and tobacco should be increased, the respondents said.
The poll also showed that 68% of working Americans favor drug testing at their place of employment and that nearly half believe that colleagues testing positive for drug use or found to be using drugs should be fired immediately or after a second offense. 

"No single issue has so riveted the nation's attention since the 1982 recession," Messrs.
Hart and Teeter say in their analysis of the poll.
They add that respondents seem willing to try almost anything to solve the drug problem. 

The poll, in fact, shows a public willingness to experiment with a wide variety of anti-drug efforts.
By a 58%-34% margin, Americans believe the U.S. should send troops to help eliminate the production of illegal drugs in Colombia, if the government there requests them.
This is a rare reaction for the American public, which, since the Vietnam War, has repeatedly voiced caution about sending troops abroad. 

"We spend $300 billion a year for an Army and a Navy and an Air Force, and we never use the damn things," says Mr. Wright, one of 11 participants in the Journal focus group. "Why not?" 

From a political perspective, those who named drugs as the country's top problem believe, by a margin of 39% to 22%, that the Republicans will do a better job in the battle than the Democrats.
There is wide support for President Bush's drug program.
Nonetheless, those responding to the poll were deeply skeptical that the battle can be won: Only a third believe a federal program would do a "great deal" or "quite a bit" to correct the drug problem. 

Such skepticism was evident as well in the Journal focus group, which was conducted by Mary Lukens, an associate of Coldwater Corp., Mr. Teeter's firm.
The diverse, racially mixed group of six women and five men is too small to be a scientific sample, but the participants' attitudes help flesh out the findings of the WSJ/NBC poll. 

"Building more prisons is not going to solve it because all you're doing is educating folks to be criminals" during their incarceration, says Heyward Dortch, a gas-company administrator who does volunteer work in a Detroit inner-city public school. 

Cecilia Lande, a full-time homemaker with 13 grandchildren, adds: "No amount of money is going to stop it.
It has to be a change within the hearts and minds of people.
Young people have to think: 'I have just one body, and I'm going to need it all my life. '" 

Pam Le Hay, who teaches reading in a Detroit elementary school, says she sees the problems first-hand. "There are a lot of parents that are young, and they're doing drugs and they're having babies.
That's a big problem.
So don't tell me they can educate {their children} at home when they're high.
The TV's on all the time.
I see so much, and it's very sad, and it's not just in Detroit." 

While the focus group showed universal concern about drugs, it revealed wide differences in opinion about how best to fight the problem.
Robert McCaughan, an engineer at Ford Motor Co., argues that more drug-interdiction is needed. "I would cut off the supply," he says.
But Rodney Brown, a recent retiree, doesn't believe that would work. "Close off the Mexican border, and they'll come in from somewhere else," he says. "You'd wind up fighting every country that can grow it, and that's a lot of countries." 

Several members spoke of the need for harsh penalties for drug offenders.
Mrs. Lande suggests putting them on "an island right out in the Pacific." Mr. Brown suggests putting users "in concentration camps for a while." 

But Margaret Perna, a mother of three boys between the ages of eight and 14, advocates counseling programs that "involve both parents and kids that are using drugs" and argues that federal money should be used to make treatment cheaper. 

These divisions were reflected in the nationwide WSJ/NBC poll, which showed that 39% of the public believes tougher law enforcement and sentencing would be the most effective weapon, while 25% choose education and 22% select more U.S. efforts to get other countries to clamp down on drug production within their borders.
When asked how they personally would allocate additional funds to combat drugs, nearly half of those surveyed would split the money equally between law enforcement and preventive measures. 

These other findings emerge from the poll: 

-- Two out of 5 voters favor arresting and jailing anyone who uses drugs, a proportion that increases among the elderly.
Another 2 in 5 favor jailing all dealers and repeat offenders, but only fining first offenders. 

-- The strong generational pattern of drug use is evident.
More than 4 in 10 of those aged 18 to 34, and 1 in 3 of those 35 to 49, say they have tried drugs.
But fewer than 1 in 10 of those aged 50 to 64, and 1 in 20 of those 65 and older, say they have tried drugs. 

-- A third of workers are aware of someone at their workplace who has used drugs within the past year; this awareness is highest among those with blue-collar jobs.
Less than half the workers say their employers offer counseling and treatment programs. 

-- While voters support the idea of raising alcohol and tobacco taxes to support the fight against drugs, majorities oppose increasing income or gasoline taxes, or instituting a national sales tax.
By a 56%-40% margin, voters would be willing to cut defense spending to underwrite the drive against drugs -- but they are unwilling to see spending cut on Social Security, environmental protection, education or even roads and highways. 

The poll found that blacks feel the effects of drugs in their neighborhoods more than whites do.
Many more blacks say they have changed the way they live as a consequence of the threat of drugs or problems caused by drug sellers or users.
Seven out of 10 black voters approve of President Bush's drug program, the same proportion as whites. 

All told, two-thirds of voters believe that the portrayal of drugs in movies, television and music has stimulated people to try drugs.
That view is shared by those in the Southfield focus group, who fear the damage done by well-known performers who flaunt their drug use.
Members of the group yearn for new and better role models. 

"It works when you have folks go in the room and talk to some of those kids" who might be considering taking drugs, says Mr. Dortch, the gas-company administrator and inner-city volunteer. 

