.START 

You may know that "there's a sunny little, funny little melody started by a native down in Waikiki." In case you didn't know, David Garland wants to make sure you do. 

For three hours this weekend, the disk jockey is going to spin almost 100 versions of "The Hawaiian War Chant," a dance ditty written in the 1930s by Johnny Noble, Ralph Freed and Leleiohaku.
Last spring, he played 50 versions of the song in a two-hour program. 

"I enjoy Hawaiian music," Mr. Garland says.
He admits he specializes in things that don't get heard, things like "Ta-Hu-Wa-Hu-Wai," things you wouldn't expect to hear on WNYC-FM, a classical music station that broadcasts his "Spinning on Air" program. 

After hearing about Mr. Garland's show in March, a collector who runs the Aloha International Steel Guitar Club, based in Minneapolis, mailed off a tape of more than 100 additional versions, prompting this weekend's show. (The collector told Mr. Garland he alphabetized his 60,000 records and found 800 Chant versions by the time he got through the letter C.) 

There is a bit of a dispute over when "The Hawaiian War Chant" was written.
EMI Music Publishing owns rights to the song and says it was introduced by Tommy Dorsey and His Orchestra in 1936, yet Mr. Garland has a version he claims was recorded in 1934. 

A Spike Jones & His City Slickers variation, featuring the vocals of the Wacky Waikikians, took the song to No. 8 on U.S. pop charts in 1946, according to EMI, which isn't sure how many times the song has been recorded.
Some others who put out versions include Ray Charles, Buddy Rich, Henry Mancini, Ella Fitzgerald and Bette Midler. 

Alas, the war chant isn't a true Hawaiian chant, says Jimmy Kaina, a native Hawaiian and the eastern regional director of the Hawaii Visitors Bureau here. "The 'War Chant' is good fun, but in the old days the music was strictly serious," says Mr. Kaina, who also holds a master's degree from the Manhattan School of Music. 

That hasn't fazed Mr. Garland, who's known for his musical schizophrenia.
Last week, the 34-year-old jock did three hours of kiddie songs, and for "people who couldn't get away" over Labor Day, he spun tunes mentioning faraway places. 

