.START 

Over the next six months, Argentina will engage in the most extraordinary of the many privatization projects adopted by Western nations in recent decades.
In all other instances, privatization has improved both the nation's economy and its wealth.
But there is a serious chance that the privatization policy chosen by the current Argentine government headed by Carlos Saul Menem will drain, rather than enrich, the country. 

The plan of the Menem government, recently enacted by the National Congress, provides that, within the next 180 days, the various ministries are to engage in negotiations looking to sell roughly 25 state enterprises to private companies, including the railroads, telephone service, coal mines, mail service, harbors, even the federal mint. 

The motive for the plan is to balance the budget to try to stall raging hyperinflation.
Currently, virtually all of these enterprises are losing money, due to the strength of powerful political constituencies: suppliers that obtain inflated payments for inputs; unions that obtain greater than competitive wages; and consumers who pay subsidized prices for products and services.
The idea is that privatization will balance the budget by eliminating these losses while retaining the current tax level and supplementing it with the sudden addition of revenues from the various privatization sales. 

This approach misunderstands a vital part of how privatization can benefit an economy.
Privatization increases a country's wealth when it subjects state enterprises to the competitive forces of the market.
Privatization substitutes market for political decision making to defeat political interests that cripple an economy through the capture of special benefits.
Under market competition, suppliers receive no more than competitive input prices; workers receive no more than competitive wages; and consumers are forced to pay full competitive prices for products and services.
Eliminating special benefits to political interests by enhancing competition maximizes a country's wealth. 

There is, however, serious conflict between policies that would balance the budget and policies that would improve the welfare of the country.
Almost all of the enterprises set for privatization have been operating for decades as state monopolies.
The government will reap the highest short-term gain if it sells these enterprises with a legal guarantee of monopoly attached.
A private firm or consortium will pay a much higher price if it has been promised monopoly earnings far into the future. 

The preservation of monopoly, though, will impair the long-term strength of the Argentine economy.
Monopoly systematically bankrupts a country.
Monopoly forces some consumers to pay more of their resources for the same product and, at the same time, forces other consumers to purchase inferior products or to find less effective means of satisfying their demands. 

Of course, the more the government structures the sales to eliminate monopoly and encourage competition, the lower the price the state entity will attract.
But ideally the sale price will be no greater than the salvage value of the assets of the enterprise, because the private manager can expect no more than a competitive return on the investment.
This is what happened in England when the Thatcher government sold off National Freight for a net of $10.5 million, barely more than one year's preprivatization profits. 

An economy, in fact, may be worse off under a privatization plan that simply substitutes private monopoly for state monopoly.
Because of the political power of consumers, a state monopoly never charges the full monopoly price for products or services.
As a consequence, deleterious price effects of monopoly on output and consumer welfare are more likely to be muted under state than under private ownership (though they may be somewhat offset by superior, private-management efficiency).
Freed from political restraints, however, the private manager is able to raise prices and fully reap the return from the monopoly. 

Since July 3, the government has increased drastically prices of many products and services about to be privatized; electricity, gasoline, water and natural-gas prices were each raised more than 700%.
These price increases were justified as emergency measures to raise government revenues in the face of hyperinflation.
But they also serve to signal entrepreneurs bidding for the state monopolies what the prospective profits of those enterprises might be. 

For privatization to benefit Argentina, rather than the pockets of a few private investors, competitive conditions must be established for as many state enterprises as possible.
Because of decades of state monopoly, there is no existing base for domestic competition.
The government may need to enact special incentives to lure foreign competition or to provide interim regulation until competitive entry appears. 

For those state enterprises that must inescapably operate as monopolies -- the natural monopoly industries: utilities and subways, for example -- price and service regulation must be established.
There is great danger here, however, that Argentina will establish a complex regulatory structure that will only re-create more awkwardly the system of special benefits that generated the economic problems from the start.
Argentina will not benefit by substituting a new regulatory morass in place of an inefficient system of state management.
Regulation is necessary only where competition is shown to be truly impossible. 

There is some hope that the Argentines are now addressing the danger of substituting government monopolies for private ones.
Maria Julia Alsagoray is a free-market advocate who has been put in charge of privatizing ENTEL, the national telephone company.
She insisted that the privatization decree specifically ensure competition with the new owners.
Article 11 says that after a five-year period of exclusivity, competition for services will be open without conditions.
However, Ms. Alsagoray had to fight for this provision, and there remains that initial five-year period of exclusivity to which she apparently was opposed. 

The danger signs are clear.
The shift of state monopolies from government to private management may succeed in reducing the budget deficit.
But only if the protections accorded state monopolies are removed will overall investor confidence return.
Except for those foreign companies scrambling to acquire a monopoly, the foreign-investment community recognizes that private monopolies are just as likely to harm an economy as public monopolies -- and perhaps more so.
If the government fails to adopt policies introducing competition and regulating monopoly exploitation, privatization will not only fail, it will substantially harm the already damaged Argentine economy. 

Mr. Priest is the John M. Olin professor of law and economics at Yale Law School and recently lectured in Argentina on privatization. 

