.START 

Two groups of shareholders filed lawsuits against Avon Products Inc., claiming the company inflated its earnings figures this year after fending off a potential suitor. 

The suits, filed in federal court in Manhattan yesterday, come in the wake of the company's announcement Tuesday that 1989 per-share earnings would be $1.95 to $2.15, down from earlier predictions of $2.30 to $2.40. 

Avon shares dropped 50 cents yesterday to close at $32.125 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. 

The shareholders filed class-action suits seeking to represent all those who purchased Avon common stock between May 19 and Sept. 19, when the lower earnings estimate was announced.
A spokesman for Avon declined to comment on the suits. 

Avon, a cosmetics and gift-products concern, said this week that its new gift and jewelry products aren't selling well, and sales weren't expected to improve into the important Christmas season.
Non-cosmetic products account for about half of Avon's fourth-quarter sales. 

According to the suits, Avon officers inflated the company's earnings figures in order to buoy the stock price following the withdrawal of a merger offer from Amway Corp.
In May, Amway offered to purchase Avon's shares outstanding for $39 each, or a total of $2.1 billion. 

On May 19, a few days after Amway withdrew its offer, Avon chairman and chief executive officer James E. Preston sent a letter to shareholders explaining why the company had rejected it. 

In the letter, Mr. Preston said it remained in the company's long-term interest to remain independent.
He projected a 20% annual growth in earnings for the next several years.
Avon shares jumped $4 in the days following Mr. Preston's letter, the shareholders said in the suits. 

Also, following an Avon announcment in July confirming the earlier earnings projections, the stock again went up four points over the next 10 trading days, according to the complaints. 

"Avon knew at the time they made these projections that it was highly unlikely they could meet them," said Stephen Oestreich, a lawyer for one shareholder group. 

John Halebian, a lawyer for the other shareholder group, said the group's complaint had cited an article in The Wall Street Journal in which an analyst said the earnings figures may have been prepared in light of the Amway offer. 

