.START 

IT'S A HUCKSTER'S dream: Some 320 million European consumers, the world's biggest and richest market, united in a free-trade zone, glued to Euro-TV, dying to rush out and buy lots of Euro-products from big Euro-factories. 

The key word, however, is dream.
Companies looking for homogenized shoppers when the European Community tears down trade barriers won't find them in 3 1/2 years.
In fact, they probably never will. 

It's not for lack of trying.
Long before the EC launched its 1992 program, ad executives were chattering about global villages and cross-border tastes.
The 1992 hoopla, envisioning Europe as a single business entity, has turned that chatter into a frenzy.
Ad spending is soaring, with more than $1 billion in pan-European business awarded to ad agencies since early 1988, according to the magazine Advertising Age. 

But when it comes to marketing, the pan-European vision evaporates.
A single market, for instance, doesn't mean a single mind-set.
Language differences make some product names inappropriate -- or just plain comical.
Some companies sell products in five different countries under five different names; how do you advertise that to Europe at large?
And government regulators seem enamored of their own nitpicking rules that make a single ad campaign impossible. 

"Everyone is struggling with how to do it," says Judith Lannon, J. Walter Thompson's European development director -- "how to make sure an ad retains the essence of a good European idea but is still sympathetic to local tastes." 

The task isn't entirely hopeless.
American icons such as Coke and Levi's have long treated Europe as a single market, with upbeat music and smiling faces as their lingua franca.
The gurus of globalism also like to talk about the factors pushing some Europeans together.
Trendy teenagers everywhere crave the latest in bright Benetton sweaters; fashionable grown-ups covet Rolex and Dior. "The name of the game in Europe is building powerful European brands," Ms. Lannon says. 

Easier said than done.
For starters, the "citizen of Europe" touted by ad agencies is a myth; even Brussels bureaucrats can't homogenize national cultures and tastes.
With their nine different languages and distinctive national customs, Europeans will always be far more diverse than Americans -- maybe more so after 1992. 

"As the political and economic boundaries fall, a lot of the social and cultural ones will get reinforced," says Joseph De Deo, president of Young & Rubicam Europe. "Just the way Americans tend to remember their ancestry because they're afraid of becoming too homogenized, there might be a nostalgic strengthening" of national ties. 

For companies trying to sell in Europe, that means threading through a maze of quirky national tastes.
It will be a long time, for instance, before the French stoop to drinking the instant coffee Britons adore.
Or consider washing machines.
It doesn't matter how they clean; British homemakers want front-loaders while the French insist on top-loaders.
Germans like lots of different settings and high spin speeds; Italians favor a slower speed. 

Even the soap poured into the machines gets gummed up by national stereotypes.
When Procter & Gamble Co. wanted to pitch its Ariel laundry detergent across Europe, it ended up with five TV commercials for five markets. 

Each shows a housewife in her laundry room telling her teen-age son that Ariel removes stubborn dirt even at low temperatures.
But each housewife is subtly different.
The blond Italian looks positively glamorous next to her washer; the perky Frenchwoman has curly hair and a turned-up collar.
The English mum is a cross between Mary Poppins and June Cleaver, complete with pearls, pretty dress and soothing voice. 

"You couldn't have that kind of interplay with a Euro-housewife and a Euro-son," says Derek Bowden, media director for Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising International, which made the ads. "If we were selling Vuitton luggage, then an Italian would be just as good as a German or a Brit as long as she was glamorous and obviously rich.
But if you've got products targeted to the housewife market, then you have to accept that they are creatures of their own culture.
They're not European as such." 

Neither are many product names, and for pan-European campaigns that's the most basic stumbling block of all.
Unilever Group, for example, sells a liquid cleanser that in Germany is called Viss, in Switzerland Vif, Jif in Britain and Holland, and Cif in France and Spain.
Back in the 1970s, when the cleanser was introduced, a single European name didn't seem necessary, so Unilever used whatever sounded good in various languages.
Changing names now would confuse shoppers "even if you explained it with good European reasons," says a Unilever official. 

Mars Inc. 's Pedigree pet foods unit had a similar problem with its Mr. Dog canned dog food.
The product, which originated in Britain, was named Cesar elsewhere in Europe because "Mr.
Dog does not translate into Monsieur le Chien or Herr Hund or whatever it would be in Italy," says a Pedigree official.
But earlier this year, Pedigree-contemplating a pan-European campaign-decided it needed a single name.
That, in turn, meant running special ads in Britain saying Mr. Dog is now called Cesar. 

Even new products can bump against the language barrier.
Last year, Craton Lodge & Knight, a London-based product-development firm working for Bacardi Corp., concocted a fruity bitters with a made-up name -- "Pavane" -- suggestive of French chic.
Bacardi wanted to sell the drink in Germany.
Trouble is, "pavane" is perilously close to "pavian." And in German that means "baboon." CLK quickly switched to "Pericle," which doesn't mean anything, it hopes. 

Regulatory barriers aren't so easy to sidestep.
Although the EC has made some efforts to harmonize general standards, it appears willing to let member countries keep their specific rules.
There are a plethora of them, covering broadcast and print ads.
Saatchi prints a 52-page book listing the basics; the alcohol section alone runs to seven pages of dense statistics.
Ireland, for example, forbids TV ads for spirits but allows beer and wine commercials -- as long as they don't run before 7 p.m. Spain allows commercials only for drinks with less than 23% alcohol content, and only after 9:30 p.m. 

Candy isn't any safer.
In Holland, ads for sweets have to show a toothbrush in the corner of the TV screen. (Rule No. 17 of the Dutch broadcast code says the toothbrush must be at least one-tenth the height of the film, rising to at least one-eighth in the final three seconds.
And by the way, the ad can't run before 7:55 p.m.) Austria doesn't let children endorse products.
Toy commercials in Spain have to show the product's true size if it costs more than 5,000 pesetas (about $42 at current exchange rates). 

So what can companies do in their search for Euro-products?
A frequent tactic is exporting a strong national brand to countries where it has never been sold.
Determining which products can cross borders successfully is the 1992 game's neatest trick. 

"Rational" products -- ones with logical benefits instead of purely emotional appeal -- are a good bet, says Mr. De Deo, the Y&R executive. "One plus one equals two in every country.
The more you focus on the product benefits, the more you're avoiding local life-style differences." 

In general, a "natural" image appeals to Europe's growing band of environmentally concerned consumers, especially if the message is simple and visual.
Jacobs Suchard AG, the Swiss coffee and chocolate giant, is pitching its Milka milk-chocolate candy bars across Europe with TV commercials showing a cow -- painted purple like Milka's wrapper -- mooing in a mountain meadow.
No language barrier, just an image of Alpine freshness. "This is very well appreciated Europe-wide," says Gerhard Zinser, Suchard's marketing manager. 

In fact, food -- a literal measure of what Europeans will swallow -- is the focus of marketers' hottest debates.
On one side, there is evidence of broadening palates.
Who would have thought a decade ago that pasta would be the stuff of power lunches across Europe?
Even more surprising is Mexican food's takeoff in Europe.
IC Industries Inc. 's Old El Paso unit, the Mexican food leader in the U.S., began selling under its familiar red and yellow label in Europe in 1984.
By 1990, Old El Paso estimates the total Mexican food market will be worth 16 million in Britain, though the biggest per-capita consumption is in Norway, of all places. 

"If it is a new food like Mexican, one can go at the whole of Europe with one voice," says John Mayfield, sales and marketing director for the IC unit that sells Old El Paso in Europe. "We start with virgin territory." 

But in many areas, taste remains chauvinistic.
Junk food, for example, isn't universally craved.
In a recent McCann-Erickson study of European youth, only 17% of French respondents said they "really like" junk food, well below the survey average of 49%. (Europe's snack champs are the Greeks; 61% of youths there adore the stuff.) 

Convenience food is popular in northern Europe, much less so in the south.
Confirming their reputation for not caring what's on their dinner plates, Britons have fallen in love with frozen food's best friend, the microwave oven.
A recent survey by Mintel Ltd., U.K. market researchers, found that 43% of British respondents own a microwave, compared with just 3% of Italians. 

As for Euro-consumers, ad agencies claim to see two nascent groups: businessmen and teen-agers.
For years, advertisers have thought that businessmen from Frankfurt have more in common with businessmen from Paris than with fellow Germans. 

But Saatchi's Mr. Bowden figures that only 5% of European businessmen have joined the business jet set. "It's too easy to think of the European business community as one massively homogeneous market," he says. "It's clearly not." 

Among young people, the McCann-Erickson survey found some striking similarities.
European youths tend to yearn for personal success and worry about being short of money; many define themselves in terms of gadgets they buy. 

Some ad executives argue that the growing similarities among teen-agers foreshadow the movement toward a Euroconsumer. "The next generation will be a major catalyst for Europeanization," Mr. Bowden says, "because they'll feel more European and maybe slightly less Swiss or Swedish." 

Europe's media magnates are doing their best to help.
By 2000, satellite and cable television will reach 64.7% of European households, according to a Saatchi report.
It predicts that cable and satellite ad spending will hit $198 million this year, quadruple by 1992 and soar to $4.5 billion by the end of the century. 

Perhaps, but there are plenty of skeptics.
Teen-agers may share a few crazes, they say, but tradition dies hard. 

"Twenty-five years ago, when TV was introduced, you had some bright spark saying it would create the global consumer," says Greg Harris, a lecturer in marketing at the London Business School. "Five years ago when satellite was introduced, you had the same thing.
Basically, nobody's ever found this global consumer." 

Ms. Toman is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's London bureau. 

