.START 

The Japanese, those economic animals.
Who can stop them? 

Leave it to the Indians to give it a try.
In 1985, four Japanese companies signed a $163 million contract to help build a second port in busy Bombay, the largest construction job the Japanese have won in India.
A squabble with Indian customs delayed construction 12 months.
Customs won, charging the Japanese $17 million in unexpected duties on equipment imports. 

In the meantime, the yen had appreciated, wiping out some profit.
When the job was complete, the government penalized the consortium $3 million for the delay.
Then came the topper: The Japanese received a $4.5 million bill for dirt they dug from local hills and the sand they dredged from the Arabian Sea. 

A Japanese diplomat calls the companies' losses "learning charges." What did they learn? 

"They learned how difficult it is to work in India," he says. 

For potential foreign investors, the old saw about India's being a land of contrasts is all too true.
It has hundreds of millions of hungry consumers -- and a government that zealously guards them from such foreign baubles as pizza and razor blades.
It has one of the largest pools of educated white-collar workers -- who commute on some of the world's worst roads, talk on the worst phone lines and endure one of the roughest climates.
It's a land that is changing rapidly, particularly since Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi started liberalizing the Indian economy, but at the same time a country that seems stuck in some very ancient mud. 

More than ever, foreign companies are being attracted by India's promise of great sales and cheap labor.
But for many, the road to investing is just too hot, too dusty and much too long.
This is especially true for small and medium-sized companies.
Multinational executives say the long haul is worth it -- it's worse in Africa, relates one -- but only if, after three years of loose bowels and boring bureaucrats, they are finally allowed to set up shop.
Which is not always the case. 

Yet the specific obstacles to investing in India, such as red tape and a foreign-equity limit of 40%, are mere manifestations of an essential problem: India needs foreign investment, but it still isn't quite sure it wants it. 

"The basic thing is that most of our people, in all political parties, have no concept of how the world is moving," says Viren J. Shah, president of the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India. "My politician friends think it's the 17th century and that every investment, like the East India Co., is going to come into India and take over." Various East India companies, from Britain, France and Portugal, helped spearhead early European commercial and political exploitation of India. 

Indian officials are touting a recent boom in foreign investment, the result of Mr. Gandhi's ambitious, but only half-implemented, economic liberalizations.
Last year India approved $146 million in foreign investment, a 123% jump from 1987.
Approvals for the first quarter of 1989 were a hefty $84 million.
U.S. investments last year reached $65 million, after languishing in previous years around $25 million. 

But for a country the size of India, the boom is a bit tinny, especially when compared with investments flowing into other developing countries. 

"Investment in India is minute compared to that in ASEAN," says Jeffery James, commercial and economic counselor for the British High Commission (ASEAN, or the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, includes that region's major trading countries).
Agrees Mr. Shah of the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry: "It's very small compared to what they get in Thailand, China, Turkey.
We should get 10 times as much investment." 

World Bank figures show how far India lags.
In 1987, India's net direct private investment from abroad was $253 million, compared with $1.7 billion in China, $425 million in Indonesia and $3.3 billion in Mexico. 

The West Germans, the biggest recent investors in India, note that the technical collaborations approved in 1988 totaled a mere $16 million -- "peanuts," says HansGeorg Hansmann of the Indo-German Investment Promotion Service.
The Japanese Embassy says only 600 Japanese expatriates live in New Delhi, India's capital, compared with more than 10,000 in Thailand, a true magnet for foreign investors. 

India's ambivalence toward foreign investment is deep-rooted and bound in a skein of cultural and political threads.
Indians are by nature wary of the outside world and terrorized by the type of rapid change endured by such countries as Japan.
Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister, made a creed out of the concept of economic self-reliance that had been popularized during India's struggle for independence from Britain. 

In the mid-1970s, his daughter, Indira Gandhi, began the process that finally pushed Coca-Cola Co. and International Business Machines Corp. out of India -- events that still give foreign companies pause about the depth of their welcome in India.
Today's bureaucracy, under Rajiv Gandhi, has a new set of instructions.
But bureaucrats and their attitudes don't change as quickly as their rule books. 

"Everything is prescribed and protected by the government here," says Miguel Pardo De Zela, commercial attache at the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi. "It's very different from an investment, say, in Hong Kong." 

The two main disincentives to investing in India, which investors find more repelling than the weather or poor hygiene, relate to this unrelenting government control.
The government favors some kinds of investments and disdains others.
Its approval process can take years.
Secondly, it regulates the strength of foreign investments in India by restricting foreign ownership of Indian equity to 40%. 

India wants high-technology investments, modern industrial projects and investments that can be parked in its remote poor areas.
It doesn't want ventures that require too many imported materials or machinery.
The government looks askance at proposals to simply sell goods to Indians; local law actually forbids the use of foreign brand names. (The law is frequently flouted.) 

The government proudly states that India won't accept certain investments popular in other, sillier countries: for example, fast-food restaurants.
In all of India, there is but one outlet of a Western fast-food chain, New Delhi's Wimpys, which is jammed with backpack tourists and young urban Indians. 

An exception to these rules, deemed by history, is in soft drinks.
When the Indian government ejected Coca-Cola in 1977, after demanding it reduce its local equity to 40% and surrender its secret formula, investors abroad turned their backs on India.
It took more than 10 years for that shock to subside.
PepsiCo Inc. asked in 1985 to set up a Pepsi-Cola concentrate factory in India, and the bureaucracy recognized the move's special symbolism among potential investors abroad.
It agonized for three years and then bounced the decision up to Mr. Gandhi's cabinet, which approved Pepsi's proposal in 1988. 

But the government forced Pepsi through a few special hoops.
Pepsi committed itself to a grab bag of unrelated industrial projects, which made its application more politically salable.
Today, the company is constructing an agricultural-research center and a fruit-concentrate plant in Punjab state and has promised to export a lot of produce.
In Pepsi's wake, Coca-Cola has applied for a return to India and is taking an aggressive, contrary route.
It asserts it isn't interested in politics or fruit concentrate and merely wants to sell soft drinks.
Sources say Coke's application is going nowhere. 

The experience of Gillette Co. in India highlights both the pitfalls and the promise of investing here. 

The Indian market, in piece terms, is the world's largest for razor blades: 2.2 billion blades sold a year.
Until the 1980s, an Indian company enjoyed a near monopoly. 

When Gillette applied to enter India in 1976, "we were the first company to come into a purely consumer-goods market," says Brandy Gill, managing director of Indian Shaving Products Ltd., the Gillette joint venture. "We offered no high tech, nothing that the Indian consumer desperately needed." (Either Mr. Gill is being modest or he has never shaved with an Indian razor blade.) 

The government finally recognized the virtue of allowing a multinational to break up a monopoly.
But then the application ran into "political difficulties," an Indian code word meaning that the monopoly manufacturer was worried and used political pull. 

"The government and big business work very close together," says Mr. Gill. "Our application took seven or eight years and two changes of governments because our competition had good connections and managed to block the application at every turn.
To block things is easy in India.
To approve them is much more difficult." 

When the government finally approved, it attached stiff conditions, even by Indian standards.
Gillette was allowed only 24% equity in the local company, it couldn't use its international brand names, and it had to export 25% of its production.
The equity limit was the most troublesome, as it is to most foreign investors in India. "You've got to find the right partner and you've got to convince him to give you complete management control," says Mr. Gill. 

The U.S. government says India's limit of 40% foreign equity blocks investment, and as a result it placed India on the list of unfair trading partners under the "Super 301" provision of the 1988 trade law. "Businessmen are used to being boss in their own companies and find it difficult to take orders from Indian partners," says Mr. Hansmann of the Indo-German Investment Promotion Service. "They prefer to do things at their own pace, which is fast." 

Once allowed into India, investors say, the biggest hassle is over.
But some problems persist: Certain products aren't suitable to local conditions (those conditions include weather; Rank Xerox, which makes copiers in a joint venture, says several of its models don't work in the Indian heat and dust).
There are also labor problems, export commitments and periodic rematches with the Indian bureaucracy. 

But India being India, market competition is still tame and the profits relatively easy. "Not a single American company has left because of the problems they faced in India," says Mr. Shah of the Associated Chambers of Commerce. "Not one]" 

India also offers one of the most diverse and affordable labor pools in the world.
For labor-intensive businesses like garments, factory labor is cheap.
White-collar middle managers abound at low salaries, and most speak English. 

"We have M.B.A.s coming out of our ears," says Gillette's Mr. Gill. "We are exporting Indians to other Gillette companies around the world.
In China, we haven't been able to develop anything.
In Africa, we've been in Kenya 10 or 12 years and we still don't have a single manager who's Kenyan." 

Inexpensive technical labor has attracted Texas Instruments Inc. and Hewlett-Packard Co.
Both are doing in-house software development from installations in the southern Indian city of Bangalore.
Communications are a hassle.
Hewlett-Packard is battling several government agencies just to get a dedicated phone line to Texas Instruments' earth station a quarter-mile away. 

But programmers are readily available, which isn't the case in the Silicon Valley, and they come cheap.
A low-level programmer earns $3,700 a year, compared with $30,000 a year in the U.S. Research-and-development managers ask for $16,000 yearly, compared with the $100,000 to $120,000 earned by their American counterparts. 

Even when you factor in productivity, communication problems and travel between India and the U.S., says Radha Basu, Hewlett-Packard's country-development manager, costs are one-third or one-quarter of those in the U.S. 

For all the tos and fros, the diarrhea and the dickering, investors will probably continue to bang on India's door, in increasing numbers, as long as the government doesn't do a U-turn -- a possibility if Rajiv Gandhi and his Congress (I) Party lose general elections due before January -- and as long as a chance lingers to get at 800 million consumers and workers. 

"One compares India's investment climate with ASEAN countries, like Singapore and Indonesia, where things are better and more encouraging.
India seems less attractive," says Mr. Pardo De Zela. "But India is a special case and has to be looked at on its own." Adds his counterpart at the British High Commission: "New investors shouldn't look at just the short term.
A long-term view is a must.
Whatever India's problems, internal poverty, etc., 20 years hence India will be an economic giant where every company ought to be." 

The lesson was learned by those Japanese who took a bath in Bombay.
They lost money building the port and paid millions of dollars for sand from the sea.
Will the loss push them away from the subcontinent? 

Hardly. 

"We lost so much money," laments an executive from one of the construction companies. "My boss tells me I have to stay here until I earn it back." 

Mr. Spaeth, based in New Delhi, is a staff reporter for The Asian Wall Street Journal. 

