.START 

Hotel Queen's Behavior 

May Be Rather Common 

MANY PEOPLE gleefully watched the recent tax fraud trial of Leona Helmsley.
But for workers with dictatorial bosses, management experts say, her conviction proved especially gratifying. 

"Sure people love to see the rich go down," says Bea Harris, of Harris Rothenberg Associates, a Wall Street psychological consulting firm. "But this has to do with another kind of powerlessness people feel -- people who feel victimized {by bosses} and helpless to do anything about it." 

Many witnesses testifying against Mrs. Helmsley, the self-proclaimed hotel queen, were former employees describing her cold and abusive behavior as a boss.
While Mrs. Helmsley's case may look extreme, some consultants say it isn't. "There are many employers who act just like that," says Ms. Harris. 

What is rare is that Mrs. Helmsley's excesses were exposed.
In most cases of such bosses, says Jim Oher, a New York consultant, employees don't call them on it, fearing they'll be "fired . . . or humiliated." 

Fear below ranks is matched by tolerance and denial above. "If someone's really running operations well, meeting {the} bottom line, who's going to hold that person accountable?" says Ms. Harris.
She's called in for advice on such cases, she says, only if the boss's behavior causes valued subordinates to defect. 

Some companies are starting to tackle the problem of difficult bosses.
John Reed, Citicorp's chairman, recently circulated a videotape telling managers the company won't tolerate those who treat people badly. 

If This Card Turns Black, 

Take a Deep Breath 

IT MAY BE a given that corporate life is stressful.
But some companies are spending money to make sure their employees don't forget it.
The tool of choice: the Stress Control Biofeedback Card. 

At $1 a shot, the card is the invention of Los Angeles psychologist Alfred Barrios, who worried that "the world of biofeedback wasn't reaching the masses." Based on the principle that the extremities go cold under stress, the card takes the temperature of one's thumb and registers four shades from black (stressed) to blue (relaxed). 

Just seen a sales report you think may be causing you stress?
Pull out the card and press.
Then do the 10-second relaxation exercise described on the back.
Stressed people don't have time for more, says Mr. Barrios.
They "demand immediate results." 

The card is popular at Ford Motor, where operations manager Joe Masters likens it to dashboard stickers reminding people to wear seat belts. "The signal," he says, "is, 'hey, watch yourself. '" 

"It's a nice little toy for employees to play with," says Alan Bisiewicz, wellness coordinator at Massachusetts Mutual Life, who hands out about 500 a year. "The insidious thing about stress is how it creeps up on people." 

But he says the card is only a "small part" of the company's stress programs.
Mr. Bisiewicz's rating of the card: "a step or two up from a mood ring." 

Labor Force Change 

Is Greatly Exaggerated 

YOU MAY have heard the forecast about the workforce in the year 2000 -- how it'll be 15% white males, 85% other. 

Well, you've heard wrong.
One of the most popular statistics in management is also one of the most misunderstood. 

The figure from the Hudson Institute's Workforce 2000 report has played a major role in arguments for making corporate cultures more receptive to women and minorities. 

Yet many people have the mistaken impression that of those looking for work in 2000, only 15% will be white males, or that only 15% of the total work force will be white males. 

In fact, the report says that, of the growth in the labor force -- people entering the work force minus people leaving it -- only 15% will be white men.
And that's partly due to the big number of white men retiring.
The 15% figure -- now being revised even lower -- compares with about 45% for the period from 1945 to 1985. 

"I've been skeptical" of the 15%, says Lawrence Baytos, senior vice president for human resources at Quaker Oats, echoing other executives. "But I haven't really tried to tear it apart.
Since it reinforces a sense of urgency {on management policies}, we're only too willing to use it." 

Arnold Packer, an author of the report, admits that, although the report does say "net new entrants, we didn't explain the word net." He gets phone calls from corporations asking, "Is it right that. . . ? I say, 'No, no. '" 

While not as dramatic as some people first thought, the Hudson Institute's report still contains striking projections.
For instance, the total work force in 2000 will be about 39% white men, down from about 45% in 1986. 

"I've heard some white males {looking anew at the figures} say, 'Oh well, then it's not very serious, '" says Lewis Griggs, a producer of films on work force diversity.
They're "looking for any reason to stick {their} heads in the sand." 

Odds and Ends 

MERGER PHOBIA is "rampant," says Robert Half International, a recruiting firm.
Some 54% of executives surveyed fear losing their jobs in a takeover more than being fired for other reasons, losing a promotion or experiencing some other career mishap. . . . Organizational charts showing the power structure at companies are now "key forms of competitive intelligence," says the Conference Board, which sells such charts, often urgently.
The curious these days even send couriers. 

