.START 

As the relentlessly optimistic decade of Ronald Reagan and Donald Trump comes to a close, it's appropriate that Thomas McGuane has written another novel. 

For much of the past 20 years, this iconoclastic macho man has holed up in the hills of Montana and built a loyal following for his complex books on human despair, antimaterialism and the meaninglessness of modern life, anchoring his tales of woe with razor-sharp descriptions and biting humor.
He also has scared off a good many readers with his unconventional plots and the often impenetrable monologues delivered by self-absorbed, usually boozed-out protagonists. 

Consider this rambling aside from the scrambled mind of would-be Key West fishing guide Thomas Skelton, in Mr. McGuane's most acclaimed novel, "Ninety-Two in the Shade": "The king's ransom, the dog in the manger, the cat that swallowed the cream . . . A potato-like president, limp with murder, turns to his piquant attorney general and says, 'I'd give America for a thirteen-year-old nympho. ' But the attorney general always replies, 'No soap. ' Always." 

McGuane loyalists will read his new offering anyway, so the most immediate question surrounding "Keep The Change" (Houghton Mifflin, 230 pages, $18.95) is should the rest of us give this book a chance?
The answer, with unMcGuanean clarity, is yes. 

The years seem to have mellowed Mr. McGuane some, and this book is surprisingly reader-friendly.
The main character, Joe Starling, is neither an alky, a ne'er do well nor a sociopath.
He went to Yale and became a commercially successful artist before he lost it. 

The book, particularly early on, is full of wry wit and graceful depictions of family relations, first love and the stark beauty of the Montana prairie. 

Joe's father, a rancher by birth, became a grimly suburban banker and moved the family from Montana to Minneapolis -- where he willed himself onto the golf course every weekend despite his obvious unsuitability for the sport.
At times, he took young Joe to visit the ranch he had held onto in Montana.
After military school, Joe returned to work for a summer on the ranch, where he lost his virginity, brooded over his love of the land and over his father's inability to love him.
Dad, suffering from alcoholism and -- how appropriate -- diverticulitis, went bankrupt and was forced to turn the Montana ranch over to his spinster sister Lureen.
Then he died. 

When his painting career falls apart, Joe heads to Florida, where he takes up with a Cuban spitfire, improbably named Astrid, whom he met while she was sitting atop a vintage Rolls-Royce wearing nothing but gold spray paint en route to a costume party as a hood ornament.
Joe earns a meager living illustrating manuals that tell people how to use such gadgets as an electric cat feeder and an abortive "portable secretary," that was supposed to do everything for "her" boss except you-know. 

In the throes of passion with Astrid one afternoon, Joe improbably reaches out for the mail and discovers his American Express card is about to be canceled.
He then does what any of us would do in a similar situation, right?
He steals Astrid's car and heads off for Montana. 

The absurd lengths to which Mr. McGuane goes to make his characters unpredictable can be, at times, annoying.
When Joe meets his friend the gadget entrepreneur at the Yale Club in New York, he runs into a beautiful woman, spends much of the night hitting on her, and when she finally invites him to have a drink with her, Joe says, "I'm sorry, but I'm afraid I don't know you." 

Back in Montana, Joe gets a letter from Astrid saying she hates him for stealing her car.
Joe writes back, "God made women because sheep can't cook," and next thing we know, Astrid shows up in Montana with all her belongings. 

It is back in Montana where Mr. McGuane develops his richest characters and turns Joe into a likable, although pathetic character.
Joe is seeking something of substance in his life and the romantic innocence he recalls from that pre-college summer, so he agrees to run a herd of cattle on the ranch for Aunt Lureen. 

But Joe's quest runs up against a pair of beguiling characters whose surface simplicity belies their powerful determination to achieve their thoroughly selfish ends.
At least, Mr. McGuane seems to be saying, they know what they want. 

There is Joe's first love, Ellen Overstreet, a fresh-faced schoolteacher who is unhappily married to Joe's boyhood enemy Billy, and who seems to be reaching out to touch someone, and not long distance either.
Then there's Lureen's brother and housemate, Uncle Smitty, damaged goods since World War II, seemingly lost in a sea of alcohol and calls to arms, padding around their old house in his smoking jacket, howling at the moon, fearing phantom air raids, railing against President Truman. 

Mr. McGuane's ending is crafty, but it leaves Joe as ever, another chapter in his life complete, without a clue as to the next page.
The ambiguity is maddening, but in Mr. McGuane's view of things, that's life. 

Mr. Swartz is a page-one editor for the Journal in New York. 

