.START 

A hundred weary professionals, mateless and evidently desperate, have come to a shabby conference room of the Hotel Roosevelt for a lesson in snaring a spouse.
The go-between is 39-year-old Helena Amram. "Love must grow slowly," she tells the crowd, "but marriage should come quickly." 

She's talking three months. 

By her account, repeatedly proclaimed, Helena may be the "most successful" matchmaker since Broadway's Dolly Levi.
Her lovelier-than-life face in ads above the caption "Beautiful women do not go to singles bars]" has made her well known in New York, a media celebrity. 

Successful she may be.
She's definitely expensive.
A match made by one of Helena's underling cupids costs each client $5,500, whether or not it leads to matrimony, let alone wedded bliss.
But if they tie the knot, the cupid gets a $500 bonus.
And when Helena gets involved personally in a major way, it is said to cost the client $20,000. 

Her prices, Helena stresses, cover the expense of having candidates checked out by her private investigator, by her psychologist, by her handwriting analyst.
Clients themselves have to come up with the doctor's letter testifying they aren't diseased.
Helena's "very scientific" system is supposed to ensure that her list of marriageables is studded with eligible bachelors and lovely ladies who wouldn't dream of cruising the bars.
Helena's Personal Qualities Inc. is after all a marriage brokerage business, not a dating service (though she has one of those, too). 

Her clip file contains more than 200 articles that mention her name.
She has counted.
She boasts of 8,000 marriages (most of them in Israel), 15 branch offices (including outposts in London, Washington and a new one in Beverly Hills) with annual revenue of $16 million.
And she has plans to franchise.
She claims a 60% success rate -- by which she means that six out of 10 clients make it to the altar.
She knows of no ensuing divorces, though it isn't clear how diligent Helena is in statistical follow-up. 

The queen of the lonely-hearts, herself happily married and living in Fair Lawn, N.J., wants more, more, more. "I'm going to be the most famous rich lady you ever saw," says Helena.
Like one famous former rich lady, Tammy Bakker, Helena's own beauty relies rather heavily on thick pancake makeup, which a rival matchmaker snidely calls "Aunt Jemima." 

Helena has truly Hellenic ambitions. "First there was Helen of Troy," she says. "Then there was Helena Rubinstein.
Now it's my turn." 

She isn't joking. 

For some time she has been talking about the as yet largely unrealized plans she has for aggrandizing the Helena empire.
It is soon supposedly to include a private-detective agency, Helena Investigation International, "the best idea I ever had in my life," she says.
Singles who aren't availing themselves of Helena's full-service matchmaking would still be able to use Helena's private eye to determine whether their dates are "gold diggers, druggers, rapers or criminals." Helena beams at the possibilities. 

Then there is the Helena Travel Club.
And a promised Manhattan nightclub that she says will be "better than Regine's." And, in the offing, she swears, a Helena Marriage Line offering recorded advice and live counseling over the phone and a forthcoming, preordained "best-seller" called "Have I Got a Match for You," to be published next Valentine's Day by a division of Random House.
And as if all that weren't too much, Helena has been shedding weight -- 37 pounds -- to get in shape for a daily television show her William Morris agent is trying to arrange. (Even matchmakers need arrangers.) 

Her dreams of omnipresence delight the Israeli-born matchmaker, whose story brings elements of "Fiddler on the Roof" into the 1980s.
She began her career by finding husbands for widowed friends after the Six Day War and soon thereafter opened offices throughout Israel, becoming the nation's No. 1 marriage broker.
She decamped to New York, however, in 1979, after a client had claimed on TV that Helena had fixed her up with three guys she didn't hit it off with -- an Arab, a criminal and a married man.
Helena sued the TV station for damaging her reputation, and won. 

Helena herself gets sued now and then in the U.S. by dissatisfied clients, but she feels that that is only to be expected.
In her line of work, she insists, it would take God to satisfy everybody. 

Nevertheless, she is always optimistic about the possibilities and can work her charm on the disenchanted.
A 28-year-old car salesman bashful about having his name in The Wall Street Journal recently presented himself at Helena's Madison Avenue offices in Manhattan.
He seeks a young woman with "a fresh attitude toward life." But five months into his quest, he feels that Helena's people are matching him with a succession of "burnouts," jaded women who have been around. 

Barely has his gripe begun when Helena shoves an eligible woman's photograph in his face and explains the situation: "He needs someone down to earth, with a touch of sophistication, who won't try to change, overpower, or fix him. . . . She has to be sexy, warm, feminine.
He needs someone not too intelligent -- not too out there -- who will make him feel like a man." The young man leaves, without a whimper. 

Helena's fans, mostly people she has married off, are unstinting in their praise, but not everyone warms to the experience.
Recently, an executive recruiter and prospective client says Helena dangled before her the names of Mortimer Zuckerman, the real estate developer who owns U.S. News and The Atlantic Monthly, and Leonard Stern, the chairman of Hartz Mountain and owner of the Village Voice.
But Mr. Stern is married, as the would-be client pointed out to Helena.
And Mr. Zuckerman has never heard of Helena.
Helena denies this version of the story.
The lady didn't sign up. 

Ungrateful for her efforts are some of her clients who are single still, particularly some people in New Jersey, where eight lawsuits are pending against her matchmaking service. (The litigants aren't happy with the number and quality of the introductions.) Her lawyer, Harlan Schlossberg, says that since February, Helena has settled five other suits and two letters of complaint, and that refunds in those cases amounted to about $15,000 all told.
The New York state attorney general's office says it has received eight letters of complaint about Helena's operation from consumers this year. 

When Ellen Blumenkrantz, 35, joined the ranks of Helena's hopefuls a year ago, one of Helena's operatives in Fort Lee, N.J., told the direct-mail broker that she would be introduced to a man a month and that wedding bells would be pealing.
So says Ms. Blumenkrantz. 

Her first date, as it happened, was with a Con Edison employee, who, she says, she had been assured had an MBA.
He hadn't gone to college at all.
The subsequent "fire inspector" was a fireman.
And the "gorgeous hunk," Ms. Blumenkrantz says, turned out to be a guy in "a mink jacket, a heavy gold chain, with his hair flipped over a bald spot." 

After a grand total of four dates -- only one of which came close to meeting her specifications -- she is thinking of telling her story in court.
She contends, "I don't think they would turn down anyone -- unless he had a criminal record." 

Helena dismisses the complaint.
Ms. Blumenkrantz is carping "about his fur coat and his chain . . . because she can't deal with rejection." Helena adds: "The only happy clients are married clients.
I'm stuck with 40% of my clients.
They are eating my heart out everyday." 

As a consequence, Helena resorts to extreme measures.
She holds "rejection parties": little affairs for singles who have, foolishly, previously rejected one another because of a photograph or telephone call.
And because of a demographic problem -- a shortage of men over 40 -- she goes off on manhunts.
Her favorite safaris are to the Yale Club, but she goes to other watering holes as well. 

Thus, on the evening after her singles seminar, Helena shows up at a restaurant and bar called Canastels.
She has with her a stack of brochures -- and her own husband, who is associated with her in the business. ("Otherwise people will think I'm a bad woman.") Within moments, she spots something promising.
She moves right in on a table where two men are seated. "Hi, I'm Helena.
Are you married?" she demands. (Men recruited in this fashion usually get "scholarships." The $5,500 fee is waived.) 

Alas, however, the man Helena really craves is sporting a wedding band.
But his divorced brother, Howard Schlossberg, is thrilled to meet Helena, and it just so happens he feels the immediate need of her services.
Instantly, Helena leaves and returns with a blonde named Pamela he had been eyeing.
Mr. Schlossberg, who is chief executive of Gloria Vanderbilt Suits (and no kin to Helena's lawyer) gives one business card to Pamela and another to Helena. "Helena appeared like a genie," he later enthuses. "Her approach is, like, amazing." 

By the following Monday, however, the honeymoon is over.
Pamela hasn't called.
And Helena has turned down his invitation to dinner.
She wants him to come to her office for the standard routine.
Mr. Schlossberg thought dinner would be a better way to "really communicate with her so she would take a special interest in me." 

But Helena does have something in mind for Mr. Schlossberg.
He says, "When I called up, she kicked in with this high-pitched sales thing about how they have the most 'bee-yoo-tee-fool' women in the world.
I wanted to talk thoughts.
She wanted to throw bodies at me." 

