.START 

The Chicago Mercantile Exchange plans to become the first futures exchange to allow members to match large buy and sell orders for contracts outside the exchange's trading pits. 

The Merc proposal applies initially to its stock-index futures contract, and similar plans are expected for the Merc's foreign exchange futures by year end.
The proposal is an admission that the more than century-old practice of shouting orders in a trading pit can't serve all the needs of multibillion-dollar financial markets dominated by institutional players, Merc officials said. 

Allowing large futures trades to be matched off the exchange floor may swell the amount of program trading between the stock-index futures market here and the New York Stock Exchange.
But it won't necessarily make the markets more volatile.
Making large institutional trades, 300 contracts or more under the stock-index futures plan, outside the pit may actually lessen the price-jolting impact large program orders often have on both markets, futures traders say. 

"This rule will help minimize the impact of institutional trading on the marketplace," said John Geldermann, Merc chairman. 

Matching large orders outside a trading pit, and then reporting the price of the trade to the market, is expected to have less of an impact on prices, in most cases, than randomly shouting out large buy or sell orders, when other members often aren't immediately willing to take the other side of the order. 

The proposal has been under consideration by the Merc for nearly two years, and still requires regulatory approval.
It is similar to the off-exchange matching of big stock orders by brokerage firm trading desks that has accounted for much of the activity on the Big Board for more than 20 years. 

Under the Merc proposal, an exchange member with an order for 300 or more S&P 500 futures contracts to buy or sell could find another member outside the pit to execute the trade at a predetermined price.
The member with the order would first notify the exchange, and then announce to the members in the trading pit the size of his buy or sell order, but not the agreed-to price. 

The pit traders would then have the opportunity to bid on the order at whatever price they chose.
The member with the order would trade all or part of the order with pit members offering a better price, or complete the trade as planned with the member outside the pit. 

Leo Melamed, chairman of the Merc's executive committee, said the proposal was a pilot plan, and details such as the 300-contract minimum could be modified to meet customer demand.
Three hundred S&P 500 contracts have a value of about $52 million at current levels. 

Merc floor traders contacted said they favored the block trading plan.
Some asserted that members at times illicitly arrange trades outside the pit to facilitate trading. "The good news is they want to legalize prearranged trading.
The bad news is you have to trade 300 or more," said one trader. 

Many of the 45 futures traders and one clerk indicted on fraud charges last month at the Merc and the Chicago Board of Trade were charged with various forms of prearranged trading, or not offering their orders to all traders in the pit. 

The Merc plan also is aimed at capturing part of the estimated 10% to 15% of all program trades in U.S. securities that are executed overnight in London.
These trades, known as exchanges for physicals, or EFPs, at times involve 500 to 1,000 S&P 500 futures contracts and a corresponding dollar value in stocks.
They are made offshore partly to ensure they can be executed at predetermined prices to fit a particular institution's trading strategy. 

If the orders were brought to the U.S. stock and stock-index futures markets during trading hours, they might have to be broken up to be executed, depending on market volatility, and portions of the order would be executed at different prices.
Merc members said that allowing members to match S&P 500 futures orders outside the trading pit could attract part of this business back to Chicago. 

Providing for block trading of stock-index futures also improves the Merc's competitive standing in relation to the Big Board.
The stock exchange is expected within the next few months to gain regulatory approval for a stock "basket" product that may fulfull many of the hedging and arbitrage functions currently provided by stock-index futures. 

