.START 

Investors are constantly being bombarded by "proof" from brokers and mutual fund marketers that stocks are the place to be. 

A newsletter sent to investors recently by T. Rowe Price, for instance, points to a study by the firm showing that investors who bought stocks through thick and thin would have about quadrupled their money in the past 20 years -- even if they had bought only at the top of the market each year. 

"Is now a good time to invest in the stock market?" the mutual fund company asked. "In the past," it said, "long-term investors have been able to earn attractive returns on stocks even if they were unlucky enough to invest only at market highs." 

Citing another study, by Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., the article goes on to say, "The risk of trying to time the market . . . is not being in the market at critical moments when it counts the most." 

But while such arguments are true, so far as they go, they fail to address a crucial consideration for individual investors: the risks of being in the market at moments when it hurts the most.
By blending returns from stocks bought in good years, as well as bad years, such studies gloss over the real damage suffered by investors who put a lump sum in the stock market just before prices plunge. 

"Most people think of bear markets in terms of the short-term consequences, believing that there's no problem to recover and average a healthy return in the long run," said James B. Stack, president of InvesTech Research. "They don't realize that one bear market can rob them of more than two-thirds of their potential return over a six to 10-year period." 

Moreover, said Mr. Stack, investors have historically had only a relatively short amount of time to recover from one bear market before being hit by another. "Since the turn of the century, the stock market has suffered through 16 bear markets, or about one every six years," he said. 

With the stock market up some 28% over the past year, understanding the downside risk is important.
That's particularly true for investors who hold some of the $150 billion of certificates of deposit coming due next month who may be kicking themselves for being too cautious last year. 

Mr. Stack estimated that, excluding the effect of the Great Crash of 1929-32 when stock prices plunged 89%, the "average" bear-market loss is about 36% from peak to trough.
What would the "average" bear market cost investors long term? 

Assuming that stocks generate total returns of 17% in good years (their compound yearly average for the past decade), a hypothetical investor who put $10,000 into stocks at a market peak would end up with a total return of only $4,032 after six years, Mr. Stack said.
That's less than a third of the $13,678 that would be earned by investors who stayed in 8% money market funds for the initial bad year, then shifted to stocks for the five subsequent good years. 

"Many investors don't realize how the 'magic of compounding' turns against them in a bear market," said Mr. Stack. 

Another way to gauge the cost of a bear market is to measure the amount of time it would take for investors to recoup their losses and begin showing real returns.
Measured in terms of total return, including monthly reinvestment of dividends, it took 21 months before people who invested in the stock market at its August 1987 peak recovered from the crash that October, according to Laurence Siegel, managing director of Ibbotson Associates Inc., a Chicago investment research firm. 

The wait was even longer for investors who bought stock at the end of 1972, ahead of the 1973-74 bear market, when prices plummeted some 45%.
It took them a minimum of 3 1/2 years before they made a penny in stocks, even with dividends taken into account, the Ibbotson study showed.
They had to wait about 12 1/2 years before their stock market returns matched what they would have earned by investing in risk-free Treasury bills. 

Dividends and the compounding effect of dividend reinvestment are important mitigating factors to the ravages of down markets, a point noted by T. Rowe Price in discussing the effects of buying at the market's high each year over the 1969-88 period. 

The restorative effect of dividend compounding is particularly noticeable over long periods.
In fact, "of the 9.4% average annual return earned in the stock market from 1901 to 1988, a greater proportion derived from yield than from capital appreciation," said David Salem, a managing director of Cambridge Associates Inc., an investment consulting firm. 

Not counting dividends, for instance, would have increased by about 2 1/2 times the time it took for investors to become whole again after the 1973-74 bear market to more than nine years, according to InvesTech's Mr. Stack. 

Steve Norwitz, the T. Rowe Price vice president responsible for the newsletter report, said he's "not necessarily encouraging people to move into stocks." The report is only meant to "indicate that if they do {buy stocks now}, based on historical results, we'd expect you'd earn a pretty good return." 

That assumes, however, that investors "take a disciplined approach to deciding how much of their assets they want to expose {to the stock market's risks}, implement {that approach} consistently over time, and keep a long-term horizon of nothing less than five years," Mr. Norwitz stressed. 

The newsletter noted, he pointed out, that "by the end of the first decade, you had not made any money, really," by following the strategy outlined in the article. "It was really the discipline to stick it out and reinvesting dividends, plus the great 1980s market that made it work," he said. 

Further, he said, "just because it worked in this period doesn't mean it's going to work in every 20-year period." 

And some analysts think there is rough sledding ahead.
For instance, Gary Brinson, head of First Chicago Investment Advisors, said "the risk of buying in at the top is abnormally high right now." His work, which evaluates the stock market in the light of both fundamental value and macroeconomic variables, shows stocks to be more vulnerable now than in 1972.
In fact, he said, "the only time period in recent history when {the risk} has been higher was the summer of 1987." 

That doesn't mean that a crash is imminent, just that investors who are thinking of making a big bet in stocks today should proceed very cautiously, he said. "There haven't been too many times in history when you'd want to stand up and scream, 'Don't do what's normal because something abnormal is going on, '" he said. "This just happens to be one of them." 

How are investors reacting?
On the whole, "the people who are coming into the market now are first or second-time investors," said Michael Hines, vice president, marketing, at Fidelity Investments, the big Boston-based mutual fund company. "The well-experienced ones are those that are leaving." 

How long it took investors who bought stocks at the highs that preceded major market downturns to: (a) earn back their original investment, (b) match the return they would have gotten by investing in Treasury bills instead of stocks and (c) catch up with inflation* Standard & Poor's 500-stock index; all dates are month-end Chicago 

