.START 

E&J Gallo Winery will try to end its lucrative business with skid-row alcoholics, but the effort will probably produce more favorable publicity for Gallo than any real results. 

Gallo makes millions of dollars from the trade in cheap wines in skid-row districts, through its Thunderbird and Night Train brands.
But Gallo has also reaped much criticism from community and church groups for the social consequences of profiting from winos. 

Under mounting pressure from community groups, Gallo said yesterday it would pull the potent wines from the shelves of grocery stores, bars and other outlets in skid rows across the U.S. 

The announcement by the country's largest volume-wine producer follows a sort of reverse market test in San Francisco's Tenderloin district, where three months ago Gallo stopped selling Thunderbird and Night Train.
The test wasn't very successful, but since then other cities, including Los Angeles, Seattle and Portland, Ore., have petitioned Gallo and other vintners to pull the highly alcoholic wines out of their skid rows. 

Community groups were heartened by the Modesto, Calif., wine maker's decision, but they expressed doubts about the plan's workability.
For starters, Gallo's ban can't really bite into consumption without cooperation from its competitors in the skid-row trade.
At least one competitor, Canandaigua Wine Co., yesterday signaled its willingness to stop sales of its Wild Irish Rose in certain skid rows. 

But even if all cheap-wine purveyors boycott skid rows, the result might just be a mini-Prohibition Era, with thriving bootleg enterprises peddling the stuff.
That's what has happened in San Francisco, and it's why the trial ban in San Francisco didn't succeed. 

Some San Francisco skid-row retailers continued selling Thunderbird and Night Train even after Gallo stopped shipments; the retailers purchased the wines on the black market or from retailers outside the city's skid-row district.
Skid rows also typically rely heavily on a network of entrepreneurial bootleggers who sell cheap wines to winos at higher-than-retail prices when liquor stores are closed -- late at night and on Sundays, for instance. 

A Gallo spokesman said the company and its distributors are currently discussing what skid rows will be targeted, but the spokesman said the ban on cheap-wine sales will probably affect every major metropolitan area. 

The company said it wasn't pressured into its action, but earlier this month the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors became the first governmental agency to address the issue by launching a campaign to reduce the availability of the wines in that city's skid-row district. 

Yesterday, Marvin Sands, Canandaigua's chairman, said the company has stopped selling Wild Irish Rose in San Francisco's Tenderloin, and it's planning to talk with Los Angeles officials about a program to stop sales in that city's skid row.
He said "only a fraction of one percent" of his customers are skid-row alcoholics. 

"Nevertheless, this has been coming to the forefront in the media," Mr. Sands said. "We recognize there's a problem in skid row." Gallo's skid-row sales were the subject of a front-page Wall Street Journal article last year. 

The fuss over the wines has burgeoned as skid-row populations have swollen as a result of homelessness.
While alcohol consumption nationally has declined, skid-row consumption of the cheap wines has increased.
And at 18% to 21% alcohol content, the cheap wines have about twice the kick of ordinary table wine, without any of the pretensions. 

But Gallo and other vintners repeatedly have denied that the wines are the source of the trouble.
They maintain that the problem partly stems from law-enforcement agencies that don't enforce existing laws that ban sales to habitual alcoholics and obviously drunk patrons. 

Even Gallo doesn't think its program will significantly dent alcoholism on skid row. "History shows that if alcoholics are deprived of one source of alcohol, they will simply find another, regardless of difficulty or cost," the Gallo spokesman said. 

"I don't think it's going to help," said the manager of J&J Wine & Spirits in San Francisco, a business that is near the Tenderloin but doesn't sell the cheap wines. "Any liquor store can get the wine from another place.
There are so many legal ways to get it.
If someone wants to drink, they'll go an extra three to four blocks to get their drink." 

"It's a step in the right direction," said Phillip Faight, chairman of Safe and Sober, a San Francisco community group, but he added: "Just taking fortified wines out of peoples' hands isn't going to solve the problem." 

Alix M. Freedman and Sharon Massey contributed to this article. 

