.START 

President Bush and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev have agreed in principle to meet for their first summit, and a time should be set in the next few days. 

The wheels were set in motion yesterday when Mr. Bush met Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze at the White House.
Mr. Shevardnadze said afterward, "We have concluded that a summit is necessary, there is no doubt about that." And Secretary of State James Baker said that he and Mr. Shevardnadze plan to set a "general time framework" for a meeting when he holds a series of lengthy discussions with the Soviet foreign minister in Wyoming this weekend. 

In his hour-and-a-half of discussions at the White House, Mr. Shevardnadze also told the president that the Soviet Union isn't seeking direct American economic assistance to help it work out its enormous economic problems.
Rather, Mr. Baker said afterward, the Soviet foreign minister said his government would like the U.S. to provide "technical advice" on how to reform its economic system. 

State Department officials already had been planning a series of talks with their Soviet counterparts this weekend in Wyoming on how to overhaul and revitalize the Soviet economy.
In addition, President Bush said this week that Mr. Baker and Mr. Shevardnadze will discuss Soviet progress on human-rights issues such as emigration that might lead to a liberalization of U.S.-Soviet trade restrictions. 

The White House meeting came at a time when Mr. Bush and his administration are being chided by political opponents who charge that they have been too slow and timid in responding to changes in the Soviet bloc.
In addition, the meeting comes at a time when, in the Soviet Union, Mr. Gorbachev is facing unprecedented economic problems and unrest in outlying Soviet republics. 

Thus, both sides can benefit from setting a summit date now.
For Mr. Bush, such a step would buttress his claim that he is making steady but orderly progress in Soviet relations.
For Mr. Gorbachev, it will help show critics at home that his policies of reform and openness are winning some international rewards. 

Mr. Gorbachev, who sent Mr. Shevardnadze to the U.S. with a long letter on arms control, also won a new statement of American support as a result of yesterday's White House meetings.
Mr. Baker said, as the Bush administration has in the past, that the U.S. wants Mr. Gorbachev's program of perestroika, or internal reform, to succeed.
But he also went beyond that to say that the U.S. wants Mr. Gorbachev personally to survive as general secretary of the Communist party to continue overseeing the reforms. 

"It is the position of the president, the position of the administration, that we want perestroika to succeed, and we'd like to see the general secretary to succeed as well," Mr. Baker said after the meeting. "Because we think, frankly, that his success is very important in whether or not perestroika succeeds." 

Administration officials sometimes have attempted to distinguish between supporting reforms and counting on Mr. Gorbachev to remain in charge.
Mr. Baker's comment represented a more pointed, public personal endorsement than the administration has generally expressed. 

In his comments to reporters, Mr. Baker seemed to imply that the Bush-Gorbachev summit is likely to take place early next year, though he insisted that such a time frame hasn't been set. 

"I think it's important that the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States get together periodically," Mr. Baker said. "It will have been some time, if we're looking at something into next year -- and I'm not saying that that's the time frame we're going to give you in Wyoming." 

But Mr. Baker also stressed that the White House meeting failed to produce much progress in resolving one particularly nagging sticking point between the U.S. and Mr. Gorbachev.
The U.S. reiterated its complaints that Soviet arms continue to flow to Nicaragua at high levels. 

Mr. Baker implied that Soviet officials repeated past claims that they have stopped shipping arms directly to Nicaragua.
But U.S. officials complain that, while direct Soviet arms shipments may have been stopped, record amounts of Soviet-made weaponry continue to flow to Nicaragua through Cuba. 

Asked how the Soviets respond to that American complaint, Mr. Baker replied: "They demur a bit on that, and they take the position that they can't totally control what happens with respect to Cuba. . . . We have some difficulty with that." 

