.START 

Investors muddled through another day, still unable to discern any clear trends in the economy or financial markets. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average slipped 3.61 points to 2680.28 in light trading.
The average was in positive territory through much of the day until late-afternoon program selling pushed prices lower.
Long-term bond prices slipped while the dollar posted modest gains despite Federal Reserve intervention. 

The only piece of new economic news -- a revision of second-quarter gross national product to 2.5% from 2.7% -- didn't provide any clues about the state of the economy.
Analysts debate whether the economy is poised to resume vigorous growth or is about to tumble into a recession.
The question isn't likely to be resolved soon, and certainly not before the release in early October of September employment data. 

Meantime, money managers are going to have to start positioning their portfolios to put the best possible face on their performance in the third quarter, which ends next week.
Some analysts are predicting that managers won't want to be holding too much cash at the end of a relatively strong quarter and thus will be buyers of stocks during the next several days. 

Bond investors, who are more dependent on economic information to plot their strategies than are stock investors, remain puzzled at the conflicting economic data of recent weeks.
Traders said retail interest in bonds has dried up and price moves are driven mostly by technical factors. 

Currency traders remained edgy as they prepared for a meeting of finance ministers and central bankers this weekend.
Although there isn't any evidence that the meeting will produce new agreements on trying to control the dollar, traders said rumors are that industrialized nations may try to devise a "secret plan" this weekend to cap the dollar's recent strength. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices fell modestly in light trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 146.9 million shares.
Declining issues on the Big Board were ahead of gainers 750 to 677. 

Bond prices eased.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond fell about a quarter point, or about $2.50 for each $1,000 of face amount.
The yield on the issue rose to 8.18%. 

The dollar rose.
In late afternoon New York trading the U.S. currency was at 1.9435 marks and 145.63 yen compared with 1.9395 marks and 145.13 yen Wednesday. 

