.START 

Despite what you may think, Japanese tariffs are among the lowest in the world, many trade barriers have been lowered here, and quotas remain on only a few agricultural products. 

So why is it that a simple product like the U.S. roach killer Combat had to do battle before it could reach Japanese retail shelves? 

For certain types of products such as telecommunications equipment, trade barriers clearly impede foreign access.
But for numerous one-of-a-kind products, the problems are often less a matter of protectionism than of regulations that discriminate against any newcomer. 

Take the chlorofluorocarbon gas collector made by Murray Corp. of Maryland.
For several years it has been making equipment to recover Freon gases from auto air-conditioning systems.
Last year, it decided it was time to introduce the equipment here. 

The company redesigned the device to meet local requirements, then sought a waiver for the elements that couldn't be changed.
A year later, it is still filling out forms. 

"You don't really need to know who dug out the copper that went to the mill that made the rod that made the fitting that went into your equipment," but some of the requirements seem as far-fetched as that, says Murray's president, Thorne Gould. 

The Japanese defend such rules as being necessary to ensure product safety.
But some bureaucrats concede that such concerns may sometimes be taken to extremes. 

Sometimes a manufacturer gets a product into Japan but then finds that consumers are discouraged from buying it.
About three years ago, Anaheim Marketing International of California received government approval for its version of a garbage-disposal unit.
Despite such approval, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government considers the product a threat to the city's water. 

When consumers call the city these days for advice about the product, they are told: "Although there's no law restricting use of the disposal, we ask people not to use them." 

On other occasions, the problem is the time it takes to follow the process through. 

Consider the case of Combat, the roach killer developed by American Cyanamid Co. Retail shops here had to order the product by January if it was to be on their shelves by cockroach season.
In the U.S., the product won a special award for child safety.
But that wasn't enough for the Ministry of Health and Welfare, which required new tests especially for the Japanese market. 

Cyanamid lost a year of sales before it got to market in 1989. "Japan is unquestionably an attractive consumer market," says Ira Caplan, managing director of Cyanamid (Japan) Ltd. "However, the time and cost in penetrating it successfully, plus the pain and suffering, is inordinately high relative to the return." 

Things work best when a company gets to the right department in a ministry that is relatively internationalized. 

That's what happened with the Clapper, an electronic gadget that plugs into a wall socket and enables the user to turn on lights by clapping his hands.
Joseph Pedott, president of the manufacturer, Joseph Enterprises Inc. of San Francisco, says 1.3 million units have been sold world-wide.
But in Japan, he encountered an electronics law barring units that don't turn on with a switch.
Ultimately, Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry changed its interpretation of the law to accommodate the product.
If it didn't do so with a clap of the hand, it did make the change in only a year. 

Ms. Rubinfien is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Tokyo bureau. 

