.START 

After two weeks of tough internal bargaining, members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization have introduced a far-reaching package of proposals designed to monitor and implement major reductions of conventional weapons and troops in Europe. 

The proposals handed to representatives of the Warsaw Pact yesterday in Vienna spell out, for the first time, limits on military exercises and stored military equipment as well as a system of military inspections that would allow each side to inspect the other's forces at any time, anywhere from the Atlantic Ocean to the Urals. 

The proposals call for each side to disclose the exact location of its military units and the quantity and types of its heavy weapons, and they require a 42-day advance warning for call-ups of large reserve forces. 

A spokesman for Eduard Shevardnadze, the Soviet foreign minister who is visiting here today, said the Soviets have already agreed to one element in the proposal: President Bush's so-called open-skies plan that would allow inspections from aircraft by either side of the other's territory.
The details of the plan are still being worked out by NATO. 

Another NATO proposal would ban most military exercises involving more than 40,000 troops or 800 tanks. 

NATO would also permit the U.S. to store some $6 billion of tanks, artillery and armored personnel carriers in Central Europe by lowering overall totals of weapons for active units and allowing both sides to store the additional equipment or to give them to units that are not operational.
The U.S. considers the storage sites vital to its commitment to reinforce Europe with 10 Army divisions within 10 days of a crisis. 

The proposals also include, for the first time, a limit of 700 portable assault bridges, considered crucial for any invasion of northern Europe.
The Soviet Union currently has a large number of these bridges positioned along Warsaw Pact borders. 

The new package also provides an escape hatch, or so-called non-circumvention provision, for a nation that fears a military buildup on the borders of Europe, such as Soviet forces behind the Ural Mountains.
Any nation that believes "extraordinary events" endanger its "supreme interests" may withdraw from the proposed conventional arms-control treaty after giving three months' notice. 

The escape hatch, according to NATO officials, was the subject of considerable wrangling at alliance headquarters in Brussels, where some nations wanted to extend controls beyond Europe's borders in certain circumstances.
The U.S. balked, arguing that this would tempt the Soviets to demand limits on the U.S. Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean. 

Another controversial proposal, a U.S. move to allow inspectors to visit arms-production facilities in Europe, has been shelved for further study after Britain, France and Italy objected that it would violate the secrecy and proprietary nature of their arms industries. 

To carry out the verification regime agreed to by NATO, a small army of inspectors would be given the right to visit military units on the other side "at short notice, with no right of refusal." 

Yesterday's proposals are a supplement to an earlier set introduced by President Bush in May at a NATO summit in Brussels.
The proposals established overall ceilings on five major weapons: 20,000 tanks, 16,500 artillery pieces, 28,000 armored troop carriers, 5,700 land-based aircraft and 1,900 helicopters. 

The spokesman for Mr. Shevardnadze said that a letter from Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev contains further initiatives in other arms-control areas, including proposals for controlling weapons in space; a new, but undisclosed scheme to control sea-launched cruise missiles; and a more elaborate Soviet proposal to curb the production of fissionable nuclear weapons material, such as plutonium. 

He said that President Bush's hopes to complete a conventional weapons-control agreement within six to 12 months would be a "very difficult task," but added that the Soviets will try hard. "The time is ripe for an agreement." 

