.START 

I am really glad I bought my house here in the country far away from Manhattan.
But did all those little animals have to come with it?
All of them? 

Thomp, thomp.
Middle of the night.
In New York, I'd be reaching for a butcher knife and the phone.
Thomp, thomp.
Scratch, scratch.
Another rip in the screen door.
I stumble to the kitchen, turn on the light, step over the cats, and reach for the spatula, the loaf of Wonder Bread and the peanut butter.
In a few minutes, Bobo, Mrs. Bobo and the three Bobettes are munching on sandwiches they surely don't need, judging from the size of them.
Stitched together, the Bobo family would make someone a very stylish coat. 

But they were here before me and I like to think there's space for all of us in this woodsy mountain hideaway, even two outsized racoons and their chubby children.
Birds eat at my feeders along with Louella, the squirrel.
And I never panic when Bambi arrives at dusk with a few bushy-tailed friends and a million pain-bringing Lyme ticks, though I've adjusted my gardening outfit.
Now when I go forth in the morning, I look a lot like Woody Allen in "Sleeper" in my hermetically sealed, white pants and sweater set with the zipper up the front.
Inflate me and I would float over flower beds where hardy impatiens clumps are fighting for their lives as the choicest tidbits in a smorgasbord for snails and slugs. 

So many slugs] If only I were a little closer to Guerneville, Calif., site of the annual slugfest with its great food fair.
I'd be happy as a clam broiling slug-kebab and winning ribbons with my strawberry almond slug shortcake. 

Thus when I first saw the small black smudge on the kitchen floor, my inclination was to scoop it up with a scrap of paper and bring it back outside so it could finish off the begonia plant.
Oh my heavens.
YEEEEEECH] What's this?
Since when do slugs wiggle? 

Dear God.
I've never had a pet snake before.
Do I have to have one now? 

And such a pathetic little snake, too.
A mere six inches, I'd say.
We New Yorkers are used to eight-foot Burmese pythons who ply the sewers along with engorged alligators, surfacing regularly in Manhattan bathrooms and the pages of New York tabloids.
Not so long ago, I read about a woman who woke up her mate screaming at the top of her lungs.
She was just about to sit down, when the seat moved.
So he looked and of course the snake had disappeared, and he sneered at her before turning the light out.
In the morning, he found it coiled around the shower head and fainted.
I guess she won that argument. 

My little Peter was just a cute country snake, chicly black with a beige underbelly and an orange ring around his collar.
He was the sort of snake who, if I'd kissed him and magically changed him into a man, would have subscribed to Ultra.
But I thought my life was already full and I asked my mother to take him to the neighbor down the lane, a man who keeps five ugly cars, including a 30-year-old ambulance in full view of my deck.
My mother had an active day, wielding Bobo's spatula and a cookie tin.
Before she went home, she had found eight more snakes outside underneath some geranium pots and dropped them off near the rotting Saab. 

Why did she go so soon?
Hardly was she out of sight when another black serpent wiggled into view right next to my desk.
Then another one and yet a third, over there by the fireplace.
My senses left me.
I went berserk and took a hammer and smashed their little heads into the floor. 

Then I called the local Department of Environmental Conservation and asked for help.
Was I not part of the environment and in need of conservation? 

Not to Mr. Oafid, of the snake section.
He was concerned about my snakes. "Peaceful, nice animals looking for a spot to hibernate.
You couldn't ask for a nicer snake than a ring snake," he said. "They never bite and people like to handle them. . . ." I drifted out of contact with his herpetological ode, as I stared, slackjawed I suspect, at the unusual extension to my phone line.
I felt my eyes leaving my head.
Where was my hammer? 

". . . reach a maximum size of eight inches, eat bugs and have about a dozen offspring," he was continuing when I regained consciousness.
A dozen] 

My next call was to my exterminator, who came over only to tell me he couldn't do anything about snakes.
Killing snakes was illegal for a pest control company, though he'd heard about some people who said pouring gasoline around their house was a deterrent.
It certainly sounded dramatic, but my house already reeked from the mothballs someone else had suggested, and I wasn't ready to give up smoking. 

I also had guests coming: two music managers who between them handle most of the opera singers I have at one time or another punished in these pages.
I wanted to make a good impression -- a kinder, gentler impression -- showing them the country life and cooking perfect pasta. 

Dinner passed uneventfully.
I did see something crawling on Susan's sleeve, but I don't know her well and couldn't hear myself whispering: "Um, is that an earworm or a snake on your sweater?" 

Night turned into day without any screams or sounds of people packing prematurely.
I got a grip on myself and puttered around making lunch. 

"Hey, everybody, come on in and try this salmon pasta." 

"YEEECH] YEEECH]" My guests stood frozen on the veranda. 

"Say, could you turn around for a minute?" I asked, reaching for my hammer. 

That was two weeks ago.
I am still living in sci-fi hell.
The other day, I looked up my fieldstone chimney and discovered a skin fluttering in the breeze.
Those little snakes] No longer feeling safe on my floor, they were climbing the walls.
Word creeps out in the animal kingdom. 

I called a friend who lives part-time in the country and had been married to a human snake for 16 years. "Have you tried vacuuming them?" he asked. "You could suck them up and clean your house at the same time." 

Come to think of it, I hadn't. "So, OK, I vacuum.
But then what do I do with the bag?" 

"You drown it in the tub," he said. (And if one escapes down the drain, I can always catch it many years and nutritious meals later, grown into python proportions, in my New York bathroom.) 

That night I turned on the TV, surrounded by my useless cats, one orphaned (I hope) ring snake I no longer had the heart to smash which had tucked itself into a corner, with the Bobettes chattering on the porch.
The movie was called "The People Across the Lake." It was about an urban couple and their children who move to the country where they open a shop and find dead bodies in the yard.
Things could be worse, I guess. 

