.START 

The first international closed-end fund for the Philippine stock market is being launched by Hong Kong-based Indosuez Asia Investment Services Ltd., a unit of Banque Indosuez of France. 

Closed-end funds, which issue a fixed number of shares that are then traded on major stock markets, have become a popular way for investors to play the world's emerging equity markets.
More than 40 single-country funds are listed in New York or London.
At least half a dozen more, investing in countries such as Portugal, Peru, Austria, India and Chile, are in various stages of planning. 

The $50 million Manila Fund is expected to begin trading soon on London's stock exchange, according to Indosuez executives.
The fund's launch gives Indosuez a lead over several other groups that are preparing closed-end funds for the Philippines.
Tokyo-based Nomura Securities International currently has its Philippine Fund Inc. in registration with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
The fund is expected to begin trading on an American exchange late this year or in early 1990. 

Two small open-end funds, which issue new shares directly to investors on demand, already exist for the Philippine market.
Jardine Fleming Philippine Fund and Thornton Philippine Redevelopment Fund, both based in Hong Kong, manage less than $30 million combined.
The two have been stellar performers since the fall of the Marcos government in 1986; through August, they had risen an average 97% this year, according to figures from the Hong Kong Unit Trust Association. 

Ray Jovanovich, investment manager for Indosuez Asia in Hong Kong, said in an interview that enough Philippine shares have been acquired to invest about 40% of the Manila Fund immediately. "We've been picking up shares over the past four months as part of the portfolio," he said. "Over a 12-month period, we'd like to be substantially invested." 

Indosuez Asia has developed a track record of creating single-country funds that are able to invest relatively quickly in small, thinly traded markets.
It acquired big blocks of Thai shares for its Siam Fund before it was listed in early 1988, and of Indonesian stock for its Malacca Fund, which began trading in January and was the first of a string of recently created Indonesia funds.
Both are listed in London. 

The Manila Fund is underwritten by Banque Indosuez and the International Finance Corp., the investment arm of the World Bank.
Mr. Jovanovich said an IFC executive would sit on the fund's board. 

The issue price for the fund's shares is $10 each, but Mr. Jovanovich said he expects them to begin trading above that price. "Initial indications are that the fund is heavily oversubscribed," he said. 

Typically, new single-country funds begin trading at a premium to the value of their underlying portfolios.
Some, particularly those investing in closed markets such as Taiwan and South Korea, have continued to trade at premiums after six months or so.
Funds that invest in more-open markets, such as Malaysia, have at times traded at discounts. 

Foreigners currently can purchase numerous Philippine shares, mainly as American depositary receipts.
ADRs, which are traded on American exchanges and are issued by banks, allow investors to own foreign shares indirectly. 

