.START 

ITT Consumer Financial Corp. settled extensive fraud charges made by the California Attorney General's Office, agreeing to pay restitution, fines and other penalties that may eventually total $100 million. 

The settlement is one of the biggest ever in a consumer fraud case. 

ITT Consumer is a unit of New York-based ITT Corp., a multinational giant with interests including communications, information and financial services, manufacturing and hotels. 

The California Attorney General's Office filed a lawsuit alleging that ITT defrauded thousands of California consumers by mailing them letters and certificates promising pre-approved credit, inducing them to take out loans that sometimes carried rates as high as 35% and then illegally charging them for insurance, club memberships and other services that the customers didn't request and frequently had no idea they were receiving. 

Though the loans were small -- usually between $500 and $2,000 -- California Attorney General John Van de Kamp said at least 100,000 people were affected. 

"They blanket the state with these direct-mail promises of easy money," he said. "I get them all the time.
I got one just the other day." He said most of the victims of the alleged scam were poor people who were easy prey. "These are people who are often desperate," he said. "They're borrowing money for food for their children." 

The settlement, worked out over the past eight months, was filed yesterday at the same time as the suit.
In it, ITT Consumer acknowledged no guilt.
Milton W. Schober, an attorney for the unit, said it isn't denying the charges, either.
He asserted that the company didn't suspect anything was amiss at its California operations and didn't know about the attorney general's investigation until January. 

Thomas E. Wilshire, ITT Consumer's president, said in a written statement that the alleged violations "without doubt, were contraventions to our procedures and not a pattern of behavior condoned by the company." 

However, ITT Consumer has a history of similar practices and alleged wrongdoing.
Since 1984, six states have filed enforcement actions or lawsuits charging fraud.
At least two class-action suits have been brought against the company on behalf of consumers.
ITT Consumer has entered consent decrees or been the subject of cease-and-desist orders in all six of the states.
It has paid more than $2.7 million as a result of the cases. 

ITT Consumer, one of the largest consumer finance companies in the U.S., had $4.8 billion of loans outstanding as of Dec. 31. 

Mr. Van de Kamp scoffed at the statement that the company had no reason to suspect anything might be wrong at its California operations until January.
He said that state investigators had swarmed over ITT Consumer's offices in June 1987, photocopying loan documents. "I think that was a pretty good hint," Mr. Van de Kamp said. 

Mr. Van de Kamp and several other investigators suggested that the California settlement could trigger a flood of investigations and lawsuits by other states.
ITT Consumer operates in 34 states. "The attorneys general around the country have been made aware of some of these practices and will note this settlement with interest," Mr. Van de Kamp said. 

The settlement covers allegedly fraudulent transactions dating to January 1985.
It calls for ITT Consumer to pay a civil penalty of $8,670,000.
The ITT unit also agreed to provide $10.5 million that will be used to bolster California's consumer-protection efforts and beef up fraud detection. 

