.START 

About a year ago, one of Britain's hottest new television companies, TVS Entertainment PLC, tried to become a hit in the U.S. by buying a hot U.S. production company, MTM Entertainment Inc. Yesterday, TVS admitted its U.S. debut flopped. 

TVS stunned industry analysts here by announcing it expects MTM to post an operating loss this year.
It said it is considering job cuts at MTM, is trimming MTM's production finance, and is hiring a new U.S. sales manager.
It blamed the problems at MTM -- famous for such past hits as the "Mary Tyler Moore Show," "Hill Street Blues" and "St.
Elsewhere" -- on difficulties in peddling reruns of old MTM shows to U.S. broadcasters. 

The news caused TVS's stock price to tumble 26.4%, or by 69 pence ($1.09) a share, to 192 pence apiece.
Recent reports of mounting problems at MTM had provided some warning, but London financial analysts said the announcement was worse than they had expected.
Some speculated that TVS's U.S. problem might make it vulnerable to a takeover next year, when British restrictions on ownership of broadcast companies are expected to ease. 

The expected loss at MTM is an ignominious development for what was once one of the U.S. TV industry's most-admired producers.
Named after a co-founder, actress Mary Tyler Moore, MTM won industry awards and investors' praise for a string of hits in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
But since 1982, when its popular "Newhart", "Remington Steele," and "St.
Elsewhere" shows began airing, it hasn't had a new network hit.
Worse, TVS said yesterday, a "weakness" in the U.S. market for syndicating reruns is hurting what would otherwise be its cash cow: getting extra cash by peddling its old hits. 

Times are, indeed, tough in the U.S. for many reruns.
The market for "off-network syndication" -- industry jargon for reruns sold to local U.S. broadcasters -- has been "weak for the last three or four seasons," said Mitchell Praver, vice president and director of programming at New York-based consulting firm Katz Continental Television.
The allure of many reruns, especially of hour-long shows, has recently diminished for broadcasters struggling to hook increasingly jaded viewers.
Hot new talk-format shows such as the "Oprah Winfrey Show" are also crowding out time slots previously reserved for reruns. 

"Our problem is a weak market," a TVS spokesman said. "It isn't a company problem." 

But MTM also is unfortunate enough to be selling some of the wrong kinds of reruns.
One MTM specialty, hour-long drama shows such as "Hill Street Blues" and "St.
Elsewhere," is death for rerun ratings.
Preferred afternoon viewing is light, half-hour comedies and game-shows, analysts say.
The hour shows haven't as much "long-term value" when trying to syndicate them. 

TVS officials, expressing confidence they can turn MTM around, say they plan to ride out the market weakness and redouble their sales efforts.
It said MTM has 13 new TV shows in the works, at least some of which it is counting on for a hit.
It said it is "confident" its cost-cutting measures at MTM "should in due course eliminate the effect of these losses on the (TVS) group." 

A TVS spokesman declined to quantify the expected MTM loss, but London analysts speculated it would total at least #10 million.
That amount is enough to wipe out TVS's expected pretax profit from ordinary activities in the 1989 second-half from its prosperous British operations.
The TVS spokesman declined to comment, but a TVS statement yesterday said that because of MTM's problems, TVS's total 1989 pretax profit from ordinary activities won't exceed last year's #26.1 million. 

TVS's $320 million purchase of MTM last year was the boldest expansion move so far attempted by Britain's once-stodgy television industry. 

Of Britain's 15 privately owned television broadcasters -- the so-called independent stations that compete with the British Broadcasting Corp. -- TVS was among the fastest-growing because it broadcasts to one of England's wealthiest regions, the countryside south of London.
Its net advertising revenue in Britain rose 16% in 1988 to #166.3 million, and its program sales to other broadcasters boosted total revenue to #223.6 million. 

