.START 

FROM NEW YORK to Nagoya, corporate leaders are entranced by the prospect of running a global business.
They think it's crucial to success -- both their own and that of their businesses. 

There are, however, a couple of hitches to this global vision: Executives aren't quite sure how to go about it, and there's some disagreement over what the precise benefits will be. 

Those are some of the findings that emerge from an extensive new survey of 433 chief executive officers in the U.S., Europe, Japan and Pacific Rim nations.
The poll was conducted jointly by The Wall Street Journal, the management consulting firm of Booz-Allen & Hamilton Inc., and Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's leading business newspaper. 

Nearly 50% of CEOs say that expanding abroad is a very important part of their plan to increase revenue and profit in the next five years.
Some 30% say that globalization will be a vital means of lowering their costs or upgrading their technology.
And many CEOs figure more foreign exposure will make them smarter, even if they aren't quite sure how. "Globalization means different things to different industries," observes Seth Masters, a senior associate at Booz-Allen. "Everyone sees it as a winning proposition." 

But plenty of pitfalls lie ahead in the race toward globalization.
While CEOs are eager to expand abroad, they acknowledge that foreign competitors will keep making inroads in their home markets.
Protectionist trade barriers are a worry, especially in Europe.
And as much as companies love to talk about becoming global, most of them aren't there yet.
They remain largely local in practice. 

On the surface, there's virtual unanimity about the merits of running a business globally. "I find it essential to know what's happening around the world, just to keep abreast of the opportunities," says Lester A. Hudson Jr., president and CEO of Dan River Corp., a textile concern.
In the past 12 months, Mr. Hudson has traveled both to Europe and to Australia on business.
That's pretty typical; 68% of the CEOs surveyed say they travel overseas on business at least twice a year. 

But experts differ on just what it takes to be a proper global business.
Does it require a minimum percentage of sales overseas, such as 25%?
Or does it involve a top management team with experience from a variety of different countries?
Or is it more a state of mind, where CEOs scan the whole world before making production, sales or finance decisions? "There isn't one driving force," asserts John Creedon, president and CEO of Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. 

Judging by sales alone, many businesses are more talk than action; they currently get only a modest percentage of their revenue from abroad.
That's especially true of U.S. companies, with their big domestic markets; they reported that only 13% of 1988 revenue came from outside North America.
By contrast, 33% of European companies' revenue originated from outside Europe.
And 18% of Japanese companies' revenue was from non-Japanese sources. 

Growth into overseas markets will be brisk but not overwhelming, if CEOs' crystal balls are functioning properly.
Five years from now, CEOs on the average expect 26% of their revenue to come from outside their home region, compared with a shade less than 20% today. 

The survey also found that industries with heavy research or capital-spending budgets are much more global already than the average business.
For example, companies involved in aerospace or telecommunications typically derive more than 25% of their revenue abroad, perhaps because of a desire to spread their big costs over a wider selling area.
In any event, it puts them well ahead of other businesses such as financial services in the drive to be truly global. 

Even the most globally oriented companies aren't sitting still. "We have 35% to 40% of sales overseas, but it should be more," says Richard Wood, chairman of Eli Lilly & Co.
Several years ago the pharmaceutical company reorganized each of its activities on a world-wide basis, trying to make sure it approached each business problem globally.
For example, Mr. Wood says: "Thirty years ago our research people thought only in terms of {getting regulatory approvals from} the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
The rest of the world was an afterthought.
Today they think of world-wide testing from the beginning." 

In industries that historically have chosen a local focus, globalization also is winning support. "The world is getting to be a smaller place," says Metropolitan Life's Mr. Creedon.
His company recently has opened offices in Taiwan and Spain, and has begun a joint venture in South Korea. "We have our toes in the water," Mr. Creedon says. "It's premature to tell whether this will be significant 10 years from now." 

To make a splash globally, CEOs from all nations seem willing to spend however many dollars, marks, yen and drachma it takes.
American, European and Japanese executives all plan to direct more of their investments outside their home region in the next five years.
The trend is especially pronounced for U.S. and Canadian executives.
From 1983 to 1988, only 9% of their investments were made outside North America.
During the next five years, they say, that figure will rise to 16%. 

As for profitability, most U.S. executives think they can achieve average or better returns just about everywhere in the world except the Soviet bloc or China.
European executives aren't quite so optimistic, and nearly 60% of Japanese CEOs think they will encounter below-average or negative returns in the U.S. and Western Europe.
But if history is any guide, the Americans are too cocky and the Japanese will do better than they think. 

In other survey findings, many executives are optimistic about plans to reduce trade barriers within the European Community by 1992.
More than 80% of CEOs expect freer movement of labor within Europe and easier cross-border transit. 

But non-European executives fear that the whole 1992 movement may be a stalking horse for European protectionist desires. 

"We're concerned about some indications that Europeans would like this to be a reason to build a wall around Europe," says William Johnson, CEO of Scientific-Atlanta Inc.
His company, which makes satellite and cable-television equipment, has pushed up overseas sales rapidly, to 20% of total sales in the past year from 14% the year before.
Mr. Johnson complains, however, that some European nations force his company to "redesign products to specious standards." That puts foreign companies like his at a disadvantage to local competition. 

Within Europe, executives have a new favorite country: Spain.
Some 64% of CEOs whose companies do business in Spain said they plan to increase their activity there, vs. less than 1% that plan to cut back.
That was the best showing of any European nation.
The charm of Spain, it appears, has to do with the country's strong economic gains, relatively low wages, and recent entry into the European Community. 

The local competition there "isn't as strong as, say, Tokyo," says Metropolitan Life's Mr. Creedon. "Spain is growing very rapidly.
Per-capita insurance and pensions are relatively small.
It looks like an undeveloped market where we can make a contribution." 

Mr. Andes is a senior special writer based in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.
He also served as contributing editor of this Wall Street Journal report. 

