.START 

A power struggle with political overtones has broken out for control of one of France's private television stations, La Cinq. 

Currently before French courts, the struggle involves a fight between right-wing press baron Robert Hersant and pro-Socialist businessman Jerome Seydoux for control of La Cinq's board.
Both are shareholders, and Mr. Hersant is chairman. 

Founded in late 1985 as part of France's deregulation of the broadcast industry, the station originally was controlled by two investors chosen by the then-Socialist government, Italian media baron Silvio Berlusconi and Mr. Seydoux. 

A conservative government took power in 1986 and renounced that arrangement, calling it a privately arranged, uncompetitive deal.
It held a competition and awarded control to a group led by Mr. Hersant, which also happened to include Mr. Seydoux and Mr. Berlusconi. 

Now that the Socialists are back in power, Messrs.
Seydoux and Berlusconi have mounted a palace coup, aimed at replacing Mr. Hersant with a yet-unnamed person of their choosing.
To no one's surprise, government communications authorities have authorized the switch. 

But Mr. Hersant has taken the matter to court, arguing that a proposed purchase of shares by Mr. Seydoux from another investor violates rights of first refusal held by all shareholders.
The investor in question, an agricultural cooperative, denies that it has sold the shares or violated the agreement. 

A spokeswoman for Mr. Seydoux denies that the fight is political.
She says Messrs.
Seydoux and Berlusconi have criticized the channel for losing hundreds of millions of francs.
The French government also has penalized it for failing to observe government regulations requiring that a high percentage of programs be made locally. 

La Cinq won't disclose its losses, which it says it regards as an investment.
And a spokeswoman said La Cinq expects the losses to end by mid-1990, which it considers normal for such a new station.
She said La Cinq is France's third-largest station, with a 15% audience share. 

