.START 

Appeal of Globalization 

Globaliztion appeals to some industries a lot more than to others.
The most global businesses, such as aerospace and consumer electronics, are driven abroad by big R&D budgets, strong consumer brands or heavy capital spending.
At the other extreme, utilities and financial services would rather stay home, as shown in this table of industries' revenues from outside their home market. 

Why Go Global? 

Chief executive officers around the world want to expand their businesses globally.
But the U.S. executives seem least clear about the strategic benefits, as shown by the percentage of CEOs who cite each reason for globalizing as very important. 

Pacific 

Where the Action Is 

Many CEOs plan specific actions in the next 12 months to increase their companies' global scope. 

Pacific 

Technological Leaders 

Jingoism isn't dead.
American CEOs say the U.S. has the leading technology in their industries. "Aber nein," the Europeans reply; it's in Europe.
Japanese executives vote for Japan; only the Pacific Rim CEOs graciously favor the U.S. 

Toughest Competition 

Foreign competition hasn't obliterated U.S. industry yet.
When North American CEOs were asked to identify the home country of their toughest competitor, they generally answered the U.S. and Canada.
But the Japanese are gaining. 

Site of Future Sales 

Overseas markets beckon brightly for U.S. CEOs.
They expect foreign sales to be a bigger part of their business mix in five years, particularly in Europe.
But they aren't optimistic about the Soviet bloc or China, and North America will remain dominant. 

Foreign chief executives are just as eager to expand their U.S. operations.
If anything, European and Pacific Rim executives are a little more aggressive than the Japanese. 

Waiting for a Payback 

If there's one vital fact to know about Japanese industry, here it is.
When it comes to building factories or making other capital investments abroad, Japanese managers are more patient than any other group. 

Average payback period (in years): 

Willingness to have longer payback: 

Worldly Experience 

Today's CEOs aren't quite cosmopolitans, but they know a bit about the world.
European and Pacific Rim executives are the most worldly. 

Pacific 

Opportunities From 1992 

CEOs world-wide are upbeat about business opportunities in Europe as the European Community moves to a unified marketin 1992.
Percent who may change is likely or somewhat likely: 

There's a lively debate whether a protectionist "FortressEurope" attitude will emerge in 1992. 

CEOs from around the world are concentrating their European expansion plans on a few countries -- with Spain scoring surprisingly high.
Percent who plan to increase theircompany's presence in country: 

*Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan 

(See related story: "Going Global: Vision vs.
Reality -- CEOs Think Expanding Abroad Is Important, but Many Aren't Sure How to Do It" -- WSJ Sept. 22, 1989) 

