.START 

RJR Nabisco Inc., disclosing worse problems at its tobacco unit than many analysts expected, said it is sharply cutting cigarette shipments this year to curb excess inventories. 

The bold move by the New York food and tobacco giant is meant to kick the company of the industry practice called "trade loading" -- the periodic sale of massive quantities of discounted cigarettes to wholesalers.
For the past five years, loading has been practiced heavily at RJR, as an incentive device for dealers to boost sales and as a way of papering over the company's steadily declining market share. 

The company has said for several months that it has been trying to curb the loading habit, which causes excess inventories of billions of cigarettes to turn stale on dealers' shelves.
Many of the older cigarettes are returned to the company by vendors for a full refund.
What's worse, says one top RJR adviser, many reach store shelves and turn customers off with a harsh smoke. 

Analysts said it is clear from the announcement that RJR's strategy of gradually ending loading hasn't worked, probably because vendors resisted an inventory draw-down because they make more money on loading discounts.
Much of RJR's loading occurred just before its semiannual price increases, when it would allow distributors to stock up on products under the lower prices and reap extra profits from the mark-ups. 

"If RJR didn't try to end it in one fell swoop, they might not have been able to do it at all," said Emmanuel Goldman, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc. 

Specifically, RJR said it was cutting cigarette shipments 29% in the third quarter and 17% in the fourth quarter, compared with year-earlier levels.
Had RJR continued loading as usual, it could have expected to record about $170 million more operating profit in both the third and fourth quarters, the company said.
However, because of extended-payment terms that usually go with loaded sales in order to facilitate large acquisitions by distributors, the sales wouldn't have brought in much cash in the quarters, so the company's cash flow shouldn't be hurt by the shipment drops, RJR said. 

In fact, Kurt von der Heyden, RJR's executive vice president and chief financial officer, said the shipment cuts may even have a "moderately positive" effect on cash flow.
That's because the company won't have to pay excise taxes on a lot of shipped cigarettes for which it wouldn't get paid itself for several months.
RJR is owned by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., which bought the company in a $25 billion leveraged buy-out earlier this year. 

"This is a very positive development for the company as far as cash flow is concerned," said Mr. von der Heyden. "I view it as a very positive contribution to our debt service." 

But some industry analysts said RJR's huge inventory adjustment shows the tobacco unit is in worse shape than previously thought.
James W. Johnston, chairman and chief executive officer of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., said that on Jan. 1, RJR had a staggering 18 billion excess cigarettes on distributors' shelves.
Although that number has been worked down to a surplus of one billion to two billion, the magnitude of the problem stunned analysts. 

"In reality, for several years now, their shipment growth has been overstated" because of loading, said Mr. Goldman. "Everyone knew Philip Morris {Cos.} was growing faster than RJR.
But now we know they've been growing faster than faster.
RJR has been blowing smoke in our faces." 

Mr. Johnston said the effort to end loading "is a milestone decision that eliminates a longstanding problem for our company in a short time." He said the move should reduce stale-cigarette returns to the company by 50%.
RJR will announce a new incentive program for distributors in December to replace loading, he said. 

Mr. Goldman estimated the level of RJR's production cuts indicates its share of the U.S. cigarette market is about 3% less than previously thought, or about 28% instead of 31%.
Market-leader Philip Morris's share is about 40%. 

A former senior RJR official said the company's former management didn't realize loading was such a problem until last year.
He said former management also tried to phase out the practice, but couldn't take the radical step announced yesterday because the impact on earnings would have outraged Wall Street. 

Added Mr. Johnston: "Here is probably the clearest, most positive statement of what we can accomplish by being a private company for a while." 

