.START 

Secretary of Transportation Samuel Skinner is planning to issue a national transportation policy next spring.
No one knows what the secretary intends to propose, but the signs are ominous.
The last time the government came up with a plan for a major industry, the country got an industrial policy for energy that resulted in fraud, foul-ups, and fuel lines. 

If a transportation plan focused on those decisions by government that could produce a more flexible and cheaper transportation system, such as deregulation of surface freight transportation, it could be useful.
Unfortunately, given the tenor of the preliminary material on the plan issued by the Department of Transportation, the federal government is likely to become more heavily involved in transportation issues, perhaps usurping some of the authority and activities of local officials. 

Even more disturbing was Tuesday's speech by Secretary Skinner to the International Aviation Club.
In this talk, he expressed his intention of restraining foreign investment in U.S. airlines and ensuring that any acquisitions of U.S. airlines not lead to "excessive debt" that might jeopardize passenger safety. 

Mr. Skinner's concern with foreign ownership, already restricted by law to 25% of any airline, is puzzling.
If 20% of the stockholders of an airline reside in London, England, rather than London, Ohio, Londontowne, Md., or Londonderry, N.H., that cannot make any economic, national security or safety difference. 

Does the secretary believe that foreign owners, if they could exercise control, would withdraw service on profitable routes?
Or that domestic shareholders would favor operating an unprofitable service?
Perhaps Mr. Skinner is concerned that a foreign airline might use its leverage to attract transit passengers to foreign destinations from its partially owned U.S. affiliate.
If there were any harm in this arrangement (many U.S. airlines have similar links to partially or wholly owned local carriers), it would be an antitrust matter, better left to the expertise of the Justice Department.
Mr. Skinner's concern about "excessive debt" also seems misplaced.
The Transportation Department's own studies have shown that safety and financial health are unrelated.
Does the secretary lack confidence in the Federal Aviation Authority's ability to monitor safety and maintenance?
Or does he disbelieve his own department's evidence? 

The appropriate debt/equity ratio for an airline is best left to the market.
If an air carrier takes on excessive debt, that will be reflected in the value of its stock.
The safety of passengers, unlike the safety of shareholders, will remain unaffected. 

Mr. Skinner's speech and the material issued by the department on the proposed national policy imply that the Transportation Department intends to take a more active role.
But judging from the record, whenever the federal government becomes deeply involved in transportation, such as by regulating a mode, or by providing the infrastructure, the system suffers. 

One of the major problems facing the transportation sectors involves congestion at busy airports, which is at least partly due to the air traffic control system.
Another impediment to low-cost transportation is the remaining requirements for truckers to file rates, which sometimes are suspended or denied, coupled with the continued precondition that new carriers apply for and secure certificates of public convenience and necessity before they can operate.
At a minimum this increases paperwork, legal fees, and costs; it can also result in higher tariffs than carriers and shippers want. 

Rail carriers remain constrained in their freedom to abandon unprofitable lines or to price freely in certain markets.
Not only does this restrain railroads in their ability to compete but it raises their costs.
And when the federal government dredges harbors and rivers, builds locks or constructs highways, it subsidizes rail's competitors. 

It is noteworthy that only incidentally has the secretary or the department raised the issues of regulation and deregulation.
Unfortunately, federal regulation can and still does in the case of surface freight transportation have a major impact on the industry and the cost of moving goods.
Any federal policy guidelines for transportation must consider regulation/deregulation.
The department's publications are now actually claiming that rates and entry conditions of freight carriers have been deregulated, when the truth is that regulation has been reduced but certainly not abandoned.
And nowhere is there any hint that further deregulation is intended. 

Another glaring omission is the absence of any reference to the role of the FAA, the possibility of privatization of some aspects of air traffic control, or the use of landing fees to reduce congestion.
Studies have indicated that a private sector air traffic system would be more flexible and produce fewer delays and reduced congestion.
And while setting landing fees should be the responsibility of the local airport authority, the department ruled last winter that peak load prices set by Boston's Logan Airport to reduce crowding in a market-oriented way were discriminatory.
Many of the topics that the department intends to address with its new national policy, such as urban transportation congestion, are primarily state and local issues.
While funding of local transportation systems has often relied in part on federal taxpayers' dollars, the planning and actual development of regional strategies traditionally have been a local responsibility.
We are left to wonder whether this will continue to be true. 

Do we need a national plan?
The U.S. has one of the best transportation systems in the world.
The private sector's responses to shippers and travelers have created an incredibly efficient and low cost network.
There are bottlenecks and inefficiencies but these result typically from inadequate governmentally provided infrastructure or from the remaining regulation.
In many communities, anti-growth sentiment coupled with antipathy to automobiles has discouraged the construction of new or expanded highways.
The result has been increased congestion and delays.
But this is a local challenge, not a national one. 

The federal government should not attempt to allocate traffic between modes or to "promote diversions of commodity movements to underused facilities . . . ." The market is the only proper judge of the appropriate mode of transport. 

If Mr. Skinner focuses on diminishing the federal government's activities, especially the regulation of surface freight and air traffic control, the new plan could indeed be a useful document.
But few bureaucracies recommend reduced roles for themselves. 

More likely the department will attempt to usurp the power and authority of knowledgeable local officials and require states and communities to develop plans in conformity with federal policy.
In that case, the best that can be hoped for is that this study-plan, like so many others, winds up on the shelf of some bureaucrat gathering well-deserved dust, having cost the taxpayer only a few million.
If implemented, it could cost the taxpayer and the economy billions. 

Mr. Moore, a member of President Reagan's Council of Economic Advisers, is a fellow at the Hoover Institution. 

