.START 

Maybe after this week's incredible round in federal court, more people may decide that Jeremy Rifkin isn't such a playful "gadfly" after all.
Joined by such like-minded "gadflies" as the Christic Institute and the Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, Mr. Rifkin sued to block this week's launching of the space shuttle and the wondrous Galileo probe of the planet Jupiter.
Judge Oliver Gasch spent two hours hearing their fantastic fears of plutonium-powered generators before he sided with NASA.
How did these three get into court in the first place to try to block a $1.5 billion launch? 

In a sensible legal system, such a typically Rifkinesque lawsuit would fail any lawyer's laugh test.
But less than sensible judges rewrote the rules of "standing," which had limited plaintiffs to people with a direct injury, thus ensuring that courts didn't usurp the policy functions of the other branches of government.
Now, plaintiffs with nothing other than politics on their minds are routinely waved into court.
Some federal judges in Washington are having second thoughts.
Judge Laurence Silberman's recent criticism of Public Citizen is the latest example.
Last year, Mr. Rifkin had a case challenging a genetically altered vaccine dismissed by Judge Thomas Hogan on standing grounds -- he had only some "generalized grievance." Another Rifkin case against proposed government biotech rules was dismissed by Judge Gerhard Gesell for failing to "present a justiciable case or controversy." 

There is a way to keep plaintiffs from twisting the legal system for political ends: Assess fines against politico-plaintiffs and their lawyers.
The Christic Institute is already under court order to pay $1 million to CIA agents and Contra leaders for a frivolous RICO case it brought against them.
As a similar deterrent, NASA's lawyers should seek reimbursements for taxpayers from the anti-Galileo litigants.
Cases with merit deserve their day in court.
But society's progress toward the frontiers of space, medicine and research will continue to be at risk until groups such as these are laughed off the courtroom steps. 

