.START 

Ford Motor Co. has quietly formed a new holding company for some of its major financial units and is selling privately a 25% stake in it for $800 million to institutional investors in a move that should garner it major tax savings. 

While Ford officials won't discuss the tax savings from the transaction, tax experts say the auto giant should save many millions of dollars. "`We never talk about our tax returns," says George V. Brown III, executive director of strategic planning for the company's Ford Financial Services operation. 

The new holding company, Ford Holdings Inc., includes Associates Corp., a consumer and commercial finance company that is Ford's most recent and largest acquisition, as well as Ford's insurance and leasing subsidiaries. 

The transaction will allow Ford to preserve major tax benefits and avoid an increase in taxes resulting from its $3.35 billion acquisition of Associates from Paramount Communications Inc., a purchase that is scheduled to be completed at the end of this month. 

Since 1986, when Congress passed landmark legislation overhauling the U.S. tax code, U.S. multinationals have been required to allocate interest expenses on a consolidated basis.
The effect for many companies has been to increase the effective cost of debt financing, because interest expenses allocated against foreign income "crowd out" tax credits that otherwise might be available. 

Thus, interest expenses in the U.S. must now be allocated prorata to foreign-based assets.
This reduces the calculation of foreign tax credits used in the U.S., effectively increasing U.S. tax payments by decreasing foreign tax credits, tax lawyers say. 

Ford, which makes and sells cars overseas, typically has large foreign tax credits each year.
However, by setting up Ford Holdings, and selling the 25% stake making it a stand-alone unit under the tax law, Ford isn't required to consolidate these interest expenses and can preserve its foreign tax credits. 

Ford's push to trim its tax bill follows three straight years of record earnings, which have made it one of the nation's most profitable corporations.
In 1988, the No. 2 auto maker earned $5.3 billion, the highest net income ever achieved by an auto maker world-wide.
Earnings, however, are expected to decline this year because of slower U.S. car sales, higher incentive costs and temporary plant shutdowns. 

At the same time, Ford executives have said they expect financial services to take an increasing role in the company's profit, eventually constituting one-third of earnings, according to Ford Vice Chairman Harold A. Poling. 

The Ford Motor Credit subsidiary, which was incorporated in Delaware in 1959, received a special exemption under the 1986 tax act.
The 1986 law generally lowered tax rates while closing many loopholes.
But the more recent planned acquisition of Associates, a huge, highly leveraged company, would have eaten up much of Ford's foreign tax credits if it wasn't established through a separate company. 

In an interview, Ford's Mr. Brown said the auto company is in the midst of selling $800 million of voting preferred stock to institutions in the so-called private placement market.
This nearly $200-billion market is made up of insurance companies, pension funds and other big investors; individual investors can't buy securities issued there. 

Mr. Brown confirms that the creation of Ford Holdings as a separate entity preserves tax benefits Ford currently receives because Ford will own less than 80% of the concern. 

However, Mr. Brown says Ford formed the new holding unit primarily to help finance Ford's acquisition of Associates and to begin selling preferred stock, "a market Ford hasn't accessed." As for avoiding potential taxes, he only says, "There may be some tax benefits and there may be some tax detriments." 

The innovative Ford transaction could be imitated by other multinational corporations, investment bankers and tax lawyers say. 

"This is one of the strategies that many U.S. multinationals have explored to alleviate the adverse consequences of the 1986 tax act," says James A. Duncan, a partner at the New York law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen & Hamilton. "Many U.S. multinationals have explored variations on this strategy.
But its costs and benefits depend very much on complex considerations specific to each company," he added. 

Unlike common stock, whose price fluctuates with the perceived value of a company, its assets and earnings, preferred stock has a fixed, stated value that doesn't move with the actual value of the company.
Preferred stock normally pays dividends to holders comparable to interest rates on some money-market investments. 

Ford Holdings' offering of preferred, which is being arranged by Goldman, Sachs & Co. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., is unusual because it is one of the rare instances when so-called money market preferred has been sold with voting rights, which are required to achieve beneficial tax treatment in this case. 

