.START 

Jane Pauley, who celebrated her 13th anniversary yesterday as co-anchor of NBC News' "Today," will most likely leave the two-hour morning broadcast at year end. 

Reached at home, Ms. Pauley said, "I really can't say anything about the situation." But in an interview with the Washington Post, Ms. Pauley said she would remain with the National Broadcasting Co., a unit of General Electric Co., although she declined to be specific on what her duties would be. 

Sources within the network said it was possible that Ms. Pauley will join a prime-time program to be produced by NBC News, possibly to be co-anchored by "Nightly News" anchor Tom Brokaw.
Ms. Pauley will be succeeded by Deborah Norville, who is the news reader on "Today." 

Separately, two people close to the situation said John Palmer, who was displaced by Ms. Norville in August after seven years on "Today," is entertaining offers to anchor news shows for at least two NBC-owned stations, WRC in Washington and WTVJ in Miami.
Sources said NBC News president Michael G. Gartner has extended Mr. Palmer's contract six months and has allowed him to "explore his options." Mr. Palmer, who now anchors NBC's "Sunrise," spent part of last week at WTVJ's offices. 

According to people close to the situation, Mr. Gartner has given Mr. Palmer the option to remain with NBC and "choose his next assignment, within reason." 

In a telephone interview from his home, Mr. Palmer said, "I haven't turned anything down yet.
There are a number of things under consideration, including options at the network and at local stations.
I am not in negotiations with anyone yet." Mr. Palmer's contract expired in late September. "There is nothing magical in that six-month extension," he said. "It could go on longer." He declined comment on Ms. Pauley's departure. 

One person said Mr. Palmer was offered a role on "Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow," NBC News' prime-time magazine that has had three airings and is scheduled to have three more. 

NBC News released a statement about Ms. Pauley that said, "Conversations about the specifics are concluding now and we expect to announce our mutual plans shortly." 

Ms. Pauley submitted her resignation on or about Sept. 7, stemming from her frustration over the direction of "Today," which is the top-rated morning program.
NBC executives did not accept her resignation.
Ms. Pauley, a popular fixture on morning television, has about two years remaining on her contract. 

