.START 

Northern Telecom Ltd. is expected to unveil today a new family of fiber-optic switching and transmission products that clear the way for telephone companies to put picture phones in every home and bring studio-quality video to businesses. 

The new products, called the FiberWorld family, will significantly improve the speed and quality of voice and data transmissions, as well as quadrupling the capacity of a single fiber-optic strand, according to Northern Telecom. 

The new devices, coupled with high-resolution monitors, would provide a cost-effective way to deliver high-speed data, voice, image and video transmissions over a fiber-optic telephone network.
For example, a doctor would be able to transmit an X-ray to a patient miles away and discuss a prognosis.
Travelers could use their phones to call up studio-quality video shots of possible vacation spots and check out the quality of hotel accommodations. 

"These services haven't taken off because the Õtelephoneå network couldn't deliver them," said John C.W. Taylor, Northern Telecom Inc. 's group vice president. 

The FiberWorld products are based on a new set of international standards for fiber-optic telecommunications equipment put in place last year.
Northern Telecom is the first company to launch a complete line of switching and transmission products based on the new standards, known as synchronous optical networking, or Sonet. 

Telephone companies hope products based on the new standards will resolve inefficiencies caused by the proliferation of incompatible equipment. 

Installing Sonet-compatible products can also cut telephone companies' capital costs by as much as a third, as it eliminates the need for several so-called multiplexers to compress, code and decode voice and data transmissions at both ends, and allows for greater use of a single fiberoptic strand, said John Roth, executive vice president of Northern Telecom. 

The system's software also allows voice and data traffic to be rerouted if a fiber line is broken or damaged, almost eliminating interruptions in services. 

First out of the starting gate with its Sonet-based products, Northern Telecom hopes to grab the lion's share of a market it estimates will reach $5 billion as more telephone companies move to install fiberoptic networks. "A 50% market share is achievable," contends Mr. Roth. 

Analysts say Northern Telecom may be less than six months ahead of the competition.
Northern Telecom says its products will roll out over 18 months beginning early next year and will begin contributing to revenue and earnings by early 1991.
Burt Wolder, a spokesman for American Telephone & Telegraph Co., said his company is "developing a full line of Sonet products and expects to announce them very, very soon." 

