.START 

Senate Republican leaders said they probably wouldn't have sufficient votes to attach a capital-gains tax cut to a $14.1 billion deficit-reduction bill for fiscal 

But even if the GOP fails to surmount a Democratic procedural roadblock on that bill, which the Senate is to begin considering today, other opportunities to realize President Bush's campaign pledge for a capital-gains cut would quickly follow. 

A fifth day of talks, meanwhile, failed to produce an agreement to exclude a capital-gains provision from the measure and to guarantee a separate, speedy vote on the question.
Senate leaders are to meet again today, although Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell of Maine said: "It will be very difficult to reach agreement." 

The discussions have centered on capital gains and deficit-reduction, but they have had just as much to do with assessing political blame for the automatic, across-the-board spending cuts that are expected to take effect Monday as mandated by the Gramm-Rudman budget law. 

When senators take up the deficit-cutting bill, Republicans are likely to offer an amendment cutting the rate at which both individuals' and corporations' capital gains are taxed.
For procedural reasons, such an amendment would likely need 60 votes to be approved, an obstacle Senate GOP Leader Robert Dole of Kansas said probably couldn't be cleared.
Senate Republicans have been trying to devise a procedure that would require only a simple majority of senators to adopt the tax cut.
But Democrats insist that capital gains not get special treatment. "This is a question of fairness under the rules of the Senate," said Sen. Mitchell. 

Oregon Sen. Bob Packwood, the ranking GOP member of the tax-writing Senate Finance Committee, and Treasury officials continued working on the leading Republican capital-gains proposal.
While Sen. Dole said GOP lawmakers would probably press the issue at any opportunity, Mr. Packwood said he hadn't yet decided whether to offer his amendment to the deficit-reduction measure. 

In comments last night to the American Council for Capital Formation, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady said the Bush administration was encouraging the Senate to adopt a capital-gains tax that "reduces the rate according to the length of the holding period." 

An aide to Sen. David Boren, leader of a group of Senate Democrats who favor a cut in the capital-gains tax rate, said it wasn't certain whether the Oklahoman would offer a Democratic proposal to the bill. 

If a capital-gains reduction isn't offered to the deficit-reduction measure, the next most likely opportunity would come later this month when Congress must raise the federal government's debt limit. 

The House's $10.9 billion deficit-reduction measure, approved last week, includes a provision that would cut the capital-gains tax for individuals to 19.6% from as high as 33% through Dec. 31, 1991.
After that date, the measure, which was supported by Mr. Bush, would set the capital-gains tax rate at 28%.
Gains on assets acquired after Dec. 31, 1991, and held for more than a year would be indexed to inflation. 

In addition, Senate Budget Committee Chairman James Sasser (D., Tenn.) and New Mexico Sen. Pete Domenici, the panel's ranking GOP member, are expected to try to remove some of the scores of provisions that wouldn't directly reduce the deficit in the fiscal year that began Oct. 1.
That effort could face strong opposition from senators whose pet projects would fall away, and the array of provisions promises a long, difficult House-Senate conference to settle differences between the bills. 

The Senate bill includes an expansion of deductions for individual retirement accounts.
Secretary Brady predicted last night that some sort of IRA plan that "is budget-sensitive will go forward," and said the administration might favor permitting penalty-free early withdrawal from IRAs for specific purposes "such as catastrophic health costs, education, or for a first home." 

All of this is being played out against the backdrop of the impending automatic Gramm-Rudman spending reductions, which would be avoided only if Mr. Bush were to sign a deficit-reduction bill into law by Monday. 

"The administration really is the one that both prolonged this issue over capital gains and has insisted on keeping it in the bill," House Speaker Rep. Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) told reporters. "They do bear the responsibility." White House Budget Director Richard Darman, on the other hand, blamed Democrats for trying to block a vote on the capital-gains issue. "We could avoid {the spending cuts}," he said on Public Television's "MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour." He added: "It would be very easy if Sen. Mitchell were to agree not to bring up procedural objections and we could have capital gains." 

Jeffrey H. Birnbaum contributed to this article. 

