.START 

Readers of Michael Murphy's Overpriced Stock Service must be wondering when the recession will end. 

In June, a headline in his newsletter advised: "Recession Coming; Good News for Bears]" That was followed, in August, with: "Recession has started." 

Mr. Murphy, perhaps, can be forgiven for "seeing" bad news before it is visible to others.
His Overpriced Stock Service is the mirror image of the tout sheets. 

The monthly newsletter advises readers to profit by finding stocks that are about to fall, rather than rise.
It is closely followed by some professional investors and by a band of loyal amateurs, both for its biting comments, generally going against conventional wisdom, and for its reputed knack for identifying tomorrow's losers. 

But with the stock market setting new records almost daily, short sellers, such as Mr. Murphy, have fallen on hard times.
Many of his current picks, such as AT&T, Capital Cities/ABC and Sony, have risen substantially since he predicted they would fall. 

Mr. Murphy, who signs the newsletter "Ursa Major" for "Great Bear," says that since 1983, when the newsletter was founded, he has covered 179 picks, with 79% producing a theoretical profit for readers. 

But currently he is recommending 45 short sales and he says he is ahead on only five, for a success rate of 11%. 

Mr. Murphy, who doesn't mince words in good times or bad, concedes, "This is about as bad as it gets." And on a day last week when the Dow Jones Industrial Average was soaring 41 points, he summed things up: "It's a lousy day to be short." 

Mr. Murphy advises readers when to sell short borrowed shares and, down the road, when to "cover," or close out the bet, by buying shares to return to the lender.
If the stock's price has dropped in the interim, short sellers profit in proportion to the drop.
Conversely, their losses mount as the share price rises. 

Not all his recent picks have turned out badly.
In the August issue Mr. Murphy wrote that "Flight International has been sinking like an overused Lear jet.
They are out of cash, under-depreciated and headed for a really rotten quarter." 

Then, in September, Flight International said that it had withdrawn previously published financial statements and that its auditors had raised questions about various accounting matters.
Its stock has fallen 20%.
But such bull's-eyes have become rarer. 

Among Mr. Murphy's current short-sale recommendations are Philip Morris, shorted at 86 3/4, trading at 180 before yesterday's stock split; Anheuser-Busch, shorted at 27, now 42; Coca-Cola, shorted at 37 7/8, now 70 3/8; and Merck, shorted at 53 7/8, now 77 1/4. 

"Consumer growth stocks -- that's the most overextended part of the market," Mr. Murphy explains. "We think the next recession will be consumer-led.
And the area of greatest excess" eventually falls farthest.
But, he says, on stocks such as Philip Morris it's unlikely he will come out ahead.
He is maintaining his short recommendation in the hope of cutting his losses. 

Mr. Murphy's "worst ever" pick was LIN Broadcasting.
Readers were advised to short the cellular growth stock in 1986, at a price of 27 1/2.
This June, when LIN became the object of a takeover battle, Mr. Murphy advised readers to cover at 128 1/2. 

Two of his 750 subscribers canceled, "but most people were grown-up about it," Mr. Murphy says. 

The lesson he derived is that betting against perceived foolishness doesn't always pay.
LIN has relatively modest earnings but-bulls say-great prospects.
Its stock was judged by Mr. Murphy to be rising on the greater-fool theory.
But now it is being sought by two suitors. 

"Sometimes a greater fool comes along," Mr. Murphy says.
And even if cellular stocks, as Mr. Murphy predicts, eventually plummet, his followers have already taken losses.
When stock prices become infected by "manias," he acknowledges, "they can persist at foolish prices for a long time." Being right doesn't always make one rich. 

One of his favorite groups of shorts is the "junk-yard play," involving buyers of junk bonds, bank lenders to junk-bond issuers, and others.
He believes, as many do, that much of America is dangerously indebted.
But with buy-out pools and Japanese capital bidding for assets, no company is too sick to attract a raider.
Thus, he says, shorting "is more dangerous today." 

Sometimes, one can hear him pleading for a little bad news. "The whole game of leveraged buy-outs -- it's nuts," he says. "Maybe if the junk-bond market blows apart. . . ." 

Other short sellers who read Overpriced Stock Service say Mr. Murphy might do better by concentrating on fewer stocks.
His best picks, like Flight International, are based on balance-sheet or accounting problems of specific companies.
Debt is like a time bomb eating away at them.
But shorting groups of stocks on general premises or theories is riskier, other short sellers say. 

Mr. Murphy is the first to concede it when theories flop.
His "savings & loan play" was predicated on the notions that "the U.S. taxpayer would never be enough of a sucker to bail out the S&L industry" and that healthy thrifts would be held accountable. 

"We were wrong on No. 1; wrong on No. 2," Mr. Murphy wrote. "It leaves us with a bunch of bad short positions." 

The 47-year-old former computer systems analyst started Overpriced Stock Service as an offshoot of his other tip sheet, California Technology Stock Letter, which recommends technology stocks.
The latter produced a stellar theoretical gain of 118.8%, and was rated first out of 72 newsletters, in the three-year period ended Aug. 31, 1989, according to Hulbert Financial Digest. 

Overpriced Stock Service doesn't publish a "model portfolio" and it isn't rated by Hulbert.
Overall, Mr. Murphy says its readers are way ahead.
And he is trying to broaden out by bidding to manage money for the small but growing number of institutional investors willing to consider going short. 

The evolution of short-selling -- once a Wall Street sideshow -- could be one reason shorts are finding it rough.
With more people shorting stocks, it follows that finding overpriced stocks has become harder. "It's true for a lot of niche investing," a fund operator says. "The niches are becoming filled." 

Mr. Murphy, however, says he has no doubt that his fortunes will improve, probably with the next recession.
Once, in the mid-1980s, he suspended the newsletter for a year, when he found it hard to find short ideas. "It's easy to find shorts now," he says. "A lot of guys with negative net worth won't survive the next recession." And he adds: "We'd be glad to see the recession start." 

Nine tense minutes: Traders looking at their Quotron electronic-quote machines yesterday morning saw the Dow Jones Industrial Average seemingly plunge more than 200 points at the opening.
Actually, it was down only a few points at the time. 

It seems that Quotron Systems failed to adjust for a 4-1 stock split in Philip Morris.
A spokeswoman for Quotron, a Citicorp unit, said the glitch resulted from "human error," didn't cause any panic and was "corrected within nine minutes." She added: "This has never happened to Quotron before." 

-- John R. Dorfman 

