.START 

The House voted to reverse eight years of federal policy and support Medicaid funding for abortions in cases of poor women who are victims of rape or incest. 

The action dramatizes the resurgent power of the pro-choice, or women's rights, lobby since the landmark Supreme Court ruling in July upholding Missouri's restrictions on abortion.
And it sets the stage for a confrontation with President Bush over the underlying bill funding the departments of Labor, Education, and Health and Human Services. 

The administration has threatened to veto the estimated $156.7 billion measure if federal funding for abortions is expanded.
But Rep. William Natcher (D., Ky.), warned that the president risks defeat by attempting to kill the measure. "If I were George Bush, I'd sign this without reservation," said Mr. Natcher, who heads the House Appropriations subcommittee responsible for the measure and commands an important following on the floor. "I would vote to override," said the courtly Democrat. 

The decisive votes in the abortion debate came on back-to-back roll calls of 216-206 and 212-207.
But Mr. Natcher first forced a recorded vote, 364-56, to demonstrate the strength of the underlying measure that covers the heart of federal health and education programs.
Included in the measure is a landmark increase in federal aid to low-income, elementary-grade public school students, and any veto fight is sure to be cast in broader terms than abortion. 

Yesterday's vote leaves many restrictions intact, and except in cases of rape and incest, the general rule remains that the federal government wouldn't support Medicaid abortions except when the mother's life is in danger.
Prior to 1981, Medicaid estimated that it was funding fewer than 100 abortions a year for cases of identified rape and incest, and the issue has a greater symbolic importance politically than in federal dollars. 

The action came as high-level discussions within the House and Senate leadership indicate that Congress may yet consider a cost-of-living increase this year for itself and senior members of the judiciary and executive branch.
Leaders in the Senate, which has opposed a pay raise, have signaled their openness to the plan, and active consideration was given to amending a pending Treasury and Postal Service bill to allow cost-of-living increases for 1989 and 1990 to go into effect for all three branches. 

This option, which required re-opening the House-Senate conference on the $18.4 billion bill, was put off after a meeting of the top four bipartisan leaders Tuesday.
But lawmakers said a similar proposal is still an option for later this fall, when Congress is expected to need at least a second or third continuing resolution to keep the government funded until spending bills for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1 are passed. 

Yesterday's debate on abortion must be measured against a long record of House votes on the issue, and both chambers seemed surprised by the size of the shift after a decade of entrenchment.
Despite its liberal stand on other issues, the chamber has been more conservative than the Senate on the abortion question.
Beginning in the late 1970s, the House pressed first for barring Medicaid funding even in cases of rape and incest, and though the Senate resisted barring the funding for years in often heated negotiations, opponents of abortion prevailed months after Ronald Reagan's election in 

The Senate, often at the prodding of liberal Republicans, emerged again as the more liberal influence in recent years and forced the House to vote on the rape and incest issue months before the 1988 elections.
The lopsided outcome then was 216-166 against relaxing federal restrictions, and this history makes yesterday's vote the clearest signal of a shift in the politics of the issue. 

Far fewer members could afford to be absent given the heightened stakes this year, and lawmakers in both parties appeared under pressure to make some concession to the pro-choice movement.
No more than 72 Democrats supported continuing the current law, compared with 90 last year, while the number of Republicans in favor of making an exemption for cases of rape and incest rose to at least 39 on both roll calls yesterday from 30 last year. 

Regionally, the shifts were most striking in the deep South and more northern states like Kentucky.
Two switches in the Texas delegation put nearly half the state's delegation on record in favor of the rape and incest exemption, and individual Republicans in North Carolina and Louisiana delegations broke with the president and their own past votes on the issue. 

Among those switching was Florida Rep. Bill Nelson (D., Fla.), whose more liberal stand appears to match politics at home and his ambitions to run for governor.
The House vote came as a special legislative session, intended to adopt more restrictive abortion laws, crumbled in Florida.
Pro-choice advocates seized on the events as a twin victory. 

"The political momentum on this issue is so strong that if President Bush vetoes it, he will be making a big mistake," said Rep. Barbara Boxer (D., Calif.).
And though conservatives remain an obstacle in the Senate, similar language won approval last year by a 73-19 margin.
When inserted again this year, the provision wasn't even challenged on the Senate floor, as conservatives relied -- mistakenly -- on the House ultimately stripping out the language. 

"The anti-choice minority no longer inspires fear in elected officials," said Kate Michelman, executive director of the National Abortion Rights Action League.
But to many lawmakers, the greater change is that the pro-choice movement has begun to inspire fear of its own. "This record vote is going to be used district-by-district by a pro-choice movement that has no resort but to political power since the courts aren't with them anymore," said Rep. Les AuCoin (D., Ore.). 

