.START 

Painful memories don't disappear quickly. 

After a year, the blue-chip corporate bond market still is reverberating from the shock of the record $25 billion buy-out of RJR Nabisco Inc. 

Last October -- when RJR management first tried to take the tobacco and food giant private -- is bitterly remembered as the corporate bond market's version of Black Monday, and it has greatly changed the way many investors see investment-grade industrial bonds. 

Some investors still are shunning most high-grade industrials and buying utility and U.S. government bonds instead.
Having fallen from grace, high-grade industrial bonds have produced significantly lower returns over the past year than all other major types of investment-grade corporates. 

More investment managers now insist on special language in bond covenants providing some "event risk" protection against the perils of RJR-style buy-outs, even though there is widespread skepticism about how well the safeguards work. 

Once, industrial corporate bonds were considered among the nation's most conservative investments.
But in the age of blitzkrieg takeovers and highly leveraged buy-outs, investors have discovered that many high-grade industrial issues can be high-risk adventures that suddenly get transformed overnight into junk bonds. 

That's what happened a year ago, when RJR management stunned Wall Street with a $17.6 billion bid for the company.
Prices of RJR blue-chip bonds immediately plunged 17%, and investors realized that all but a handful of corporate giants were no longer safe from the takeover scourge.
A bidding war broke out and the company was eventually sold to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. 

This hasn't hurt all industrial bonds.
The biggest issuers, such as International Business Machines Corp., still enjoy great popularity, and investors in recent days have been snapping up investment-grade bonds of companies such as Du Pont Co.
But investors increasingly are much more selective in the types of corporate bonds they buy. 

"I'm not buying any corporates," says Roger A. Craig, who manages fixed-income investments at Banc One Asset Management Corp. in Columbus, Ohio.
He argues that industrial bonds still don't offer high enough yields "to compensate us for declining earnings as well as the threat of LBOs {leveraged buy-outs} and what we call junkification." 

These fears existed even before the RJR news.
But RJR showed investors that even an industrial giant could be swallowed up in a buy-out paid for by issuing huge amounts of new debt that depressed prices of older bonds in the secondary, or resale, markets. 

Lafayette Life Insurance Co. in Lafayette, Ind., won't buy any new publicly issued industrial bonds. "We continue to be very highly concerned about event risk," says Jeffrey A. Poxon, chief investment officer.
Instead, he is buying more utility bonds. "Nobody's concerned about an LBO on Consolidated Edison because you still have regulators there to deal with," he says. 

Lafayette also is buying more private placements, or bonds sold outside the public market to big institutions such as pension funds and insurance companies.
These issues generally contain significantly better protections for investors. 

There are signs that some of last year's corporate bond phobia has faded.
Nevertheless, investors' fears showed clearly in the relatively poor performance of investment-grade industrials. 

Since the RJR bombshell burst last October, long-term industrials have produced an annual total return -- including price changes and interest -- of 13.35%, well below the 16.80% on telephone issues and the 15.93% on electric utilities, according to Merrill Lynch & Co. 's bond indexes. 

Industrials trailed even farther behind U.S. Treasury bonds, which offered an annual return of 17.31% over the period, or federal agency bonds, which returned 19.88%.
However, industrials easily beat high-yield junk bonds, which returned 6.06% amid turmoil in the junk market. 

In the aftermath of the RJR Nabisco debacle, more companies have agreed to put special provisions in their new bond issues to help protect investors.
Typically, such wording gives holders the right to sell their bonds back to the company at full face value under certain circumstances, such as a hostile takeover or a debt-laden internal restructuring. 

But critics complain there are so many loopholes that this verbiage frequently offers little or no protection.
They have a strong case.
In July, Standard & Poor's Corp. began rating event-risk protection in bond covenants.
Of the 55 issues with some protections evaluated thus far, only one -- Enron Corp. 's 9 1/2% notes due 2001 -- received the top rating, E-1.
That is defined as "strong" protection.
And only two others received the second highest ranking of E-2, which means "significant" protection.
All the others ranked below that, says Solomon B. Samson, a managing director of S&P. 

Many investors pay close attention to these "E" ratings because it's tough even for experts to analyze complex bond covenants.
However, Wall Street underwriters disagree on how much importance investors attach to the ratings.
Several say investors claim to want event-risk protection until they discover they will have to pay for it by lower interest rates on their bonds. 

But Mr. Samson of S&P says, "Our experience shows unequivocally there's a tremendous interest in protection against event risk." He compares many protective covenants to a bulletproof vest: "If you wear a bulletproof vest, you're protected against some forms of aggression -- but someone still can shoot you between the eyes." 

Even the best bondholder protections offered thus far don't appeal to Ian A. MacKinnon, senior vice president and head of the fixed-income group at Vanguard Group of Investment Cos. in Valley Forge, Pa. 

"In general, the protections are not good," he says.
Thus, Vanguard remains suspicious of most industrial bonds. "If we have a conviction that event risk on a certain issue is minimal, we will consider it," he says. "But we have found very few industrials that pass our test." 

Bondholder protections "are long overdue, but I don't think they go far enough," agrees William H. Gross, managing director at Pacific Investment Management Co. in Newport Beach, Calif.
He notes the field still is "in its infancy," and that the new covenants "have yet to be tested" over time. 

Recently, there are signs of a pickup in corporate bonds.
The volume of new industrial issues, which slowed to a trickle late last year, has accelerated.
Also, some professional money managers say they have resumed buying industrial bonds because they think investors are overreacting. 

"I've begun nibbling" at a few industrial issues recently, says John W. Geissinger, senior portfolio manager at Putnam Cos. in Boston. 

Mr. Geissinger contends that the junk bond market's turmoil this year has made it tougher for corporate raiders and others to obtain financing, thus reducing the threat of king-sized takeovers and buyouts.
At the same time, the stock market's surge has made takeovers more expensive. 

Investor fears about corporates "are fading a little bit," says Mr. Geissinger. "But that's because the market has shown resiliency." If another big leveraged buyout comes along, "Everyone would get frightened all over again." 

Annual total returns, including price changes and interest income, on investment-grade bonds issued by industrial corporations, other investment-grade corporate bonds and U.S. Treasury bonds since Oct. 21, 1988. 

