.START 

Stung by mounting global competition, Renault of France and AB Volvo of Sweden are exploring a possible merger that would create the world's fourth largest auto company and the biggest truck maker. 

Volvo confirmed that it and Renault are in "preliminary" talks.
Government-owned Renault declined to comment except to say that it is actively seeking partners.
Neither company would discuss details nor comment on the likely outcome of the negotiations. 

But individuals in both countries said the talks have covered a wide range of options, including collaboration in both car and truck operations and perhaps even a full-scale merger of the two concerns eventually. 

People familiar with the talks emphasized that no immediate agreement is in the offing and that some very formidable corporate and political hurdles would have to be cleared before any alliance takes place.
One person said the obstacles to a major alliance may be insurmountable. 

Industry analysts also were skeptical about a combination of two such disparate vehicle makers.
Securities markets reacted coolly to Volvo's confirmation of the talks.
After the company's American depositary receipts soared 8.9% to $81 a share Tuesday in national over-the-counter trading in response to rumors of Renault talks, the issue fell back yesterday to close at $78.875. 

But the fact that Volvo and Renault are even considering the idea underscores the pressure on the European auto industry to consolidate as the car business becomes increasingly globalized. 

For some time, the auto industry has been considered ripe for a shakeout in Europe.
The smaller makers of luxury cars, such as Volvo, are under intense pressure because of stiffening competition in the crucial U.S. market.
And high-volume European makers of less-expensive cars, such as Renault, face rising competition not only from each other, as the European Community moves toward a single internal market after 1992, but also from the Japanese. 

Already, Nissan Motor Co. is making cars in Britain, and Toyota Motor Corp. plans to follow.
Honda Motor Ltd. this year announced plans for a joint manufacturing venture in Britain with Rover Group.
Mazda Motor Corp. may be next.
Even Chrysler Corp. of the U.S. says it hopes to export more U.S. products to Europe and plans to co-produce a four-wheel-drive leisure vehicle with Renault. 

Reflecting such pressures, Sweden's Saab-Scania AB has entered talks on a linkup with Ford Motor Co.
And both Ford and General Motors Corp. are pushing for an alliance with Britain's Jaguar PLC.
More combinations are likely to be pursued. 

In weighing an alliance, Volvo and Renault apparently are hoping to find a way to make up for their individual weaknesses.
Renault lacks an up-market label and an international presence.
Volvo lacks a full line of auto products and a significant presence in the EC. 

"Renault can't be anyone's partner of choice," says John Lawson, a London auto analyst for Nomura Securities Co. Mr. Lawson rates the chances of a successful Volvo-Renault merger as low as 20%.
But he adds that "there are times when forward-looking managements do sit down and think about what they need to survive long-term.
With the industry on the brink of sweeping change, Volvo may be feeling vulnerable and ready to seek a partner to share product-development costs and make it more of an an EC insider." 

A Volvo-Renault combination would create a full line of auto products under one umbrella with total production of about two million units a year, or about 20% of the European market, analysts say.
A Volvo-Renault truck combination would surpass West Germany's Daimler-Benz AG to become No. 1 world-wide in heavy truck manufacturing, with annual output of nearly 115,000 units. 

The two companies already work together in the car business.
Renault is the biggest supplier of drive trains and other major parts used by Volvo's small-car manufacturing affiliate, Volvo Car BV, based in the Netherlands.
From 1981 to 1984, Renault owned a minority stake in Volvo's car division. 

A Volvo-Renault union does face significant obstacles, including possible political objections by Sweden, France and the EC.
There is also the threat of labor unrest and the thorny question of how to protect Volvo's distinctive market position and independent identity in a linkup with a partner that is generally viewed as the weakest of Europe's major auto concerns. 

In Sweden, government clearance could be tricky, considering Volvo's dominant role in Swedish industry and the government's generally restrictive stance on foreign takeovers. 

In France, Renault's communist-led union, France's Communist Party and many in the ruling Socialist Party bitterly oppose anything that would end Renault's special status as a government agency rather than company.
Nationalized after World War II, Renault today is seen by the left as a kind of social laboratory, a symbol of state power.
Even the sale of the truck division would be resisted by some as a loss of national assets. 

Martin du Bois contributed to this article. 

