.START 

The Commerce Department confirmed its earlier finding that business telephone systems from Japan and Taiwan are being sold at below-market prices in the U.S. 

The ruling brought American Telephone & Telegraph Co., which petitioned for this investigation, a step closer to overcoming the unfair price advantages allegedly obtained by those Asian suppliers.
If the International Trade Commission, which also is investigating, subsequently rules that these imports are injuring U.S. industry, the Customs Service is expected to impose stiff anti-dumping duties on those goods.
Dumping occurs when a product is sold at prices below production costs or home-market prices. 

The Commerce Department, conceding that it received little cooperation from the Asian manufacturers, said it accepted AT&T's estimates of the so-called dumping margins that should be charged to their products.
The department assigned a dumping margin of 178.93% on telephone systems from Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.; 136.77% on those from Toshiba Corp.; 157.85% on all other Japanese telephone imports; and 129.73% on telephone systems from Nitsuko Ltd. 's Taiwanese subsidiary. 

These margins are calculations of the extent to which the systems are being dumped.
They would lead to punitive duties if the trade commission rules against the importers. 

The Commerce Department generally adopts a trade complainant's dumping estimates if the importers involved decline to cooperate with the investigation.
Lawyers for Matsushita and Toshiba said those firms gave up trying to respond to the department's questionnaires because of the prohibitive costs of obtaining information. 

The ITC, however, expects the Asian companies to contest AT&T's claim that U.S. producers have lost large numbers of buyers and rental customers to competing imports.
The commission will hear arguments from both sides Oct. 31 and plans to announce its decision Nov. 29. 

An AT&T spokesman said the company is pleased with the ruling, although it doesn't agree with the Commerce Department's finding that another Taiwanese supplier named in the complaint, Sun Moon Star, isn't dumping. 

The department said it is postponing until Dec. 17 a final judgment on similar products from South Korea.
Last July, the department issued a preliminary determination that imports from the Samsung Group and the Lucky Gold Star Group could be subject to anti-dumping duties ranging from 6.09% to 9.33%. 

The department said the U.S. imported $1.1 billion in such telephone systems from Japan and Taiwan last year. 

