.START 

Trygve Haavelmo, a modest Norwegian professor, won the 1989 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science for his pioneering work in econometrics, the use of mathematical and statistical techniques to develop economic theories. 

Prof.
Haavelmo, 77 years old, told Reuters, "I don't like the idea of such prizes." The award nonetheless will ease any personal economic problems he may have: It is about $469,000. 

The work for which Prof.
Haavelmo was cited was done in the early 1940s. "It was like a voice from the past," said William Poole, a Brown University economist and former member of the President's Council of Economic Advisers.
Michael K. Evans, a Washington-based economic consultant who has long worked with econometric models, said some of the Haavelmo work was considered important at the time, but little of it has survived. 

Of 20 U.S. economists interviewed, five said they had never heard of Prof.
Haavelmo.
Several said they remembered reading an article by him when they were in graduate school but had heard nothing about him since then. 

But Paul Samuelson, an economist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology who won the prize in 1970, said he was "pleasantly surprised" by the Haavelmo award. "Prof.
Haavelmo's work was important, and it has been absorbed into the mainstream of econometrics," he said. "Too often people seem to insist on asking, `What have you done for me lately? '" 

D. Gale Johnson, a University of Chicago economist, also had kind words for Prof.
Haavelmo.
His key article was his 1941 doctoral disseration, presented at Harvard. "It was a very important piece," Prof.
Johnson said. "It was a consolidation of a certain line of thought, some of which had been around for a while.
It improved our knowledge of how economic events occur." 

There is a good deal of politics in the Nobel award.
Since the prize was created by the Bank of Sweden in 1969, Americans have dominated it, winning or sharing the award 15 times.
Britons have won or shared it five times.
There has been a continuing effort to find winners from other countries, and some economists feel that the prize committee occasionally has stretched a little far to get non-U.S. and non-British winners. 

Prof.
Haavelmo is the second Norwegian to win the prize.
Ragnar Frisch won it in the first year the prize was awarded.
Early in his career, Prof.
Haavelmo worked as a research assistant to Prof.
Frisch, who also was cited for his early work in econometrics. 

There also has been a continuing effort to balance the award between conservatives and liberals.
In one of the more conspicuous examples of this, the award in 1974 was shared by Gunnar Myrdal, a liberal Swedish economist, and Friedrich A. Von Hayek, a conservative Austrian. 

Students and professors at MIT have a pool on the prize every year, said J. Joseph Beaulieu, an MIT graduate student of economics.
This year there were 31 entries, and no one picked Prof.
Haavelmo, in contrast to last year, when several students picked the winner.
This year's favorite, with eight entries, was Gary Becker, a professor at the University of Chicago. 

Mr. Beaulieu, who also picked Mr. Becker, said he and the other students had heard of Prof.
Haavelmo but it didn't occur to them that he might win. 

