.START 

With a periodicity coincidental to the orbital revolution of the sun's third nearest planet, an anomalous perturbation occurs at the Institute for Advanced Study, where people think about stuff, as Albert Einstein did here, without socks, for 22 years. 

The perturbation, or "P," can be stated as: (See accompanying illustration -- WSJ Oct. 12, 1989) in which "RMd" represents a memo from Allen I. Rowe, associate director for administration and finance, that begins, "Re: Deer Control Program" and "(GMr)#" is the resulting flurry of anonymous deer memos -- some sincere, some facetious -- from some of the Institute's 184 resident and visiting geniuses. 

In terms of density, the Institute for Advanced Study undoubtedly is close to its carrying capacity for geniuses.
The mail slots read Kennan, Dyson, Geertz, Bombieri and Weil, intellectual superstars all.
There is Piet Hut, who thought up Nemesis, the "Death Star," to explain the asteroid strike that may have done in the dinosaurs, and there is Edward Witten, the super-string theorist (don't even ask).
And while there are people in residence who only think about Star Wars and Just Wars, there are obviously others who are prepared to fight Deer Wars -- albeit anonymously. 

Princeton Township has been increasingly overrun with deer since 1972, when it banned the discharge of fire arms and, thus, deer hunting with shotguns.
Estimated deer population then: 220.
Now: 1,200.
The institute first allowed deer hunting with bows and arrows in 1984, and it alerts its residents with a low-key annual memo announcing the hunt.
This year, the memo went out on Sept. 30 and in it, Mr. Rowe stated that to keep the deer population at a "reasonable and sustainable level," a small number of expert bow hunters, duly authorized by Ramon Pressburger, "our Wildlife Control Officer," will be in the institute's 640 acres of woods, corn and soybean fields "beginning today" to cull the herd.
PA day later, the mailbox of at least one faculty member contained Mr. Rowe's memo, on which someone had drawn a deer's head, with an arrow through it, and blood, in red ink, dripping from the wound.
It appeared to be the opening shot in Deer Wars '89. 

By the middle of last week, a new memo was in circulation.
This one cited a Harvard "study" proving that a deer "bristling with arrows and plunging about in a vulgar display of agony will effect more damage {to foliage and property} per square foot than a normal, unpunctured and unstimulated deer. . . ." 

A graph showed increased damage in square-foot increments as a rising S-curve for each arrow in a deer. "Note: behavior of deer containing more than 36 arrows tended to level off," the memo tweaked.
It was signed by the pseudonymous "Prof.
Nomo Mentum." It is said that the 23 permanent faculty members, 11 emeritus professors and roughly 150 visiting research scholars here think so hard that they can't think for very long.
And since they are here strictly for thinking -- they have no students, classrooms, laboratories or exams to grade -- people presume that they have plenty of time for frivolity and non-academic controversy. 

But a random telephone survey of the professorial ranks turned up no one who would admit authorship of any memo.
Not the "Interested Party" proposal a few years back that suggested the importation of a breeding pair of timber wolves, which would not only limit the deer supply but also the number of children and dogs on institute premises.
Nor the "In Defense of Hunting" memo, which argued that the woods were already so dangerous because of Lyme-disease ticks, poison ivy, bikers, joggers, dogs, the "occasional flasher" and "some ferocious Princeton {University} students" that a few days of hunting weren't so terrible.
Nor even the eyewitness account memo: "The arrow went through the doe's neck.
We all saw it strike. . . . We came to several pools of blood with prints of her knees beside them." 

One well-known treatise, contrasting the no-waste, in-accord-with-nature deer-killing and skinning ways of the noble Navajo with the wasteful-racist-savagery of the white man, is attributed, by those who heard it read, to an anthropologist who visited a few years back. 

The institute's administrators say that the deer dither is no more than a neutrino-sized blip in the serenity of this thinking man's nirvana.
Physics profs profess almost zero-gravity attraction to the issue.
Astrophysicist John N. Bahcall, who thinks a lot about how the sun shines (the "solar neutrino problem"), says his kids are "deeply opposed" to the deer hunt, but he has no opinion himself.
Freeman Dyson, a physicist who thinks about and usually has opinions on almost everything, just laughs. 

Prof.
Emeritus George F. Kennan, the distinguished historian, is staying mum.
Prof.
Emeritus Albert O. Hirschman, the distinguished economist who noticed in 1984 that he didn't receive a memo warning that the hunt was on, reasons wryly that this was a clever design by the administration to cull the ranks of the professors emeriti, who might stroll innocently into the woods. 

The mathematicians may stand accused of rushing daily to the 3 p.m. tea and gobbling the cookies before the physicists, historians and social scientists arrive, but they show some compassion for the deer. 

"I like them.
I let them eat the plants in my garden," says Enrico Bombieri, the IBM von Neumann Professor of Mathematics. "The population is too large, but I don't think bow and arrow is a very effective way of reducing it." 

"After seeing `Bambi, ' nobody wants to kill a deer," says Prof.
Luis A. Cafferarelli, whose current major interest is free boundary problems in differential equations.
Maybe they should catch and move them, he suggests. 

Too expensive, says John Kuser, who teaches forestry at Rutgers and heads Princeton Township's ad hoc deer committee.
You need heavy snow and starving deer, and it still ends up costing $300 per deer.
You'd need to catch 500, and since the deer population can double annually you'd have a yearly bill of $150,000, he says.
And no place to send them.
You can't give them away. 

Deer polarization has neighbors warring across Eastern U.S. suburbs.
And in Princeton it spreads well beyond the institute.
There are the deer lovers, the so-called Bambi-syndronists, and deer haters, the so-called deer-are-long-legged-rats-with-big-ears school, who tend to side with deer hunters, the so-called Rambo Fascist Pigs.
Stan Waterman, the underwater film-maker who shoots sharks with a movie camera, walks two black French poodles in the institute woods most afternoons and makes plenty of noise, which doesn't sit well with the camouflaged hunters he occasionally spots in tree notches. "I find it appalling," he says. "It's the Rambo mentality." 

Fellow resident and diver, Peter Benchley, author of "Jaws," says local deer are "wretched, sickly creatures starving to death" and need to be culled.
One wrecked his wife's car a few years back, and, he says, deer are rooting around in people's garbage cans all over town. "If only they didn't have those saucer eyes and Walt Disney behind them.
The Bambi complex seems to have taken over around here." 

James A. Quitslund, associate director and spokesman for the institute, doesn't track pro and anti-deer sentiment, but he thinks that visiting scholars, especially those with children who come from places with few or no deer, tend to view them fondly, whereas many longtime residents tend to despise the whole species, especially since the arrival of Lyme disease spread by deer ticks.
He says the subject is "a little sensitive." 

Mr. Pressburger, the wildlife control officer, says, "I've got to be careful what I say," his nonpaying job being one that requires heaps of diplomacy.
He will say that his hunters are screened for temperament as well as safety skills and that they are mostly cops and "working people," who usually hunt before and after work, 10 at a time maximum, in specifically assigned areas away from walking trails. 

So far, he says proudly, there hasn't been a single confrontation or complaint, and 92 deer have been "harvested." Some institute scholars yukked it up over reports that only one deer was killed during the first hunting year.
But that was on purpose, says Mr. Pressburger.
Instead of hunting, the hunters walked the woods showing themselves to strollers and joggers, meeting institute people, chatting them up, being polite and friendly and explaining their safety consciousness and why what they were doing was best for the deer in the long run.
They did this to avoid triggering a backlash among institute scholars and their families. 

"You know, we're not dealing with a bunch of dummies here," Mr. Pressburger says. 

Franz Moehn, described in a recent book as one of the institute's most revered figures, undoubtedly has the most experience in actual deer-handling.
He is the institute's chef, and among the buffet platters he arranged for a fall reception last Friday were slices of succulent venison.
From New Zealand, he says, not from out back. 

