.START 

French researchers said they have convincing evidence that they can predict which children in families plagued by an inherited form of cancer are likely to develop the disease as adults. 

The scientists at the International Agency for Research on Cancer in Lyon said they could accurately track whether a gene that causes a cancer of the thyroid is transmitted from a parent to a child.
The cancer, known as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2a, affects about one in 25,000 people. 

The report marks only the second instance in which scientists have developed a method to accurately identify who has inherited a risk of developing a cancer.
In 1986, U.S. scientists developed a test to detect which children had inherited a genetic defect that causes a rare childhood eye cancer called retinoblastoma.
The inherited eye cancer usually develops within the first two years of life.
The predictive test has allowed children with the genetic defect to be watched carefully for the first signs of malignancy and to be cured without losing an eye. 

The French advance is the first to identify individuals who have inherited a genetic defect that doesn't lead to cancer until adulthood. 

Both cancer tests are based on the ability of scientists to trace a gene's passage through a family by using so-called gene probes.
In recent years, the probes have led to the discovery and diagnosis of genes that cause cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and other genetic illnesses.
But the cancer tests are unique in that they can be used to identify who in a family must be frequently monitored and who is free of the danger and needn't be checked for symptoms. 

While the two existing cancer tests can predict the occurrence of relatively rare tumors that cluster in certain families, there is growing evidence that scientists soon will be able to use similar gene probes to predict who in the population is at risk of developing a wide range of common cancers, such as cancer of the colon, breast, lung and brain.
In recent months, scientists in several laboratories around the world have found preliminary evidence suggesting that several genes are involved in these diseases. 

In the report published in today's New England Journal of Medicine, the French researchers tested genetic material in blood collected from 130 members of 11 families in which multiple endocrine neoplasia was common. 

Children with a parent who had the disease earlier in life have a 50% chance of inheriting the gene that causes the disease, which causes tumors in the thyroid and adrenal glands and can be lethal if not treated early.
All children of such parents currently must undergo yearly examinations to test their blood for the presence of a chemical released by the glands when a tumor begins growing.
The tests are uncomfortable and expensive. 

In the study, the researchers said they were able to detect, by use of the probes, which parents and grandparents carried the gene and which were free of it.
In 24 of 30 instances, the researchers found that the test clearly distinguishes those who have inherited the genetic defect (and were at risk of developing the cancer) from those who were lucky enough not to inherit it.
Therefore, the test could be used to help spot which children in the next generation also had the gene. 

The probes are fragments of genetic material that reside so near a gene that both the probe and the gene are usually passed along together at conception.
The scientists use the probes because they have yet to find the gene itself that causes the cancer.
In 1987, scientists first reported locating the gene on chromosome number 10 of the 23 chromosomes in every cell that contain an individual's genes. 

