.START 

Representatives of Texas billionaire Robert Bass have signaled a willingness to be helpful to American Airlines parent AMR Corp. in handling a $7.54 billion bid from Donald Trump, according to people familiar with the situation. 

Mr. Bass, of Fort Worth, Texas, is said to want to maintain a friendly posture toward AMR Chairman Robert Crandall.
Mr. Crandall's first choice is believed to be keeping the nation's largest airline independent without resorting to any defensive transaction. 

But if such a transaction became necessary, Mr. Bass could serve as a friendly buyer in a leveraged buy-out or as a friendly investor who could help foil a takeover by buying a blocking equity stake. 

In either case, Fort Worth-based AMR could turn to Mr. Bass along with AMR employees, much as UAL Corp. Chairman Stephen Wolf teamed up with United Airlines pilots and British Airways PLC in a $6.79 billion bid to acquire UAL. 

AMR pilots are said to be talking with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. about the securities firm serving as their adviser.
Mr. Bass, advised by Merrill Lynch & Co. in his earlier exploration of bidding for UAL, may also be represented by Merrill on AMR. Shearson and Merrill executives declined to comment. 

One potential go-between in any talks between Mr. Bass and AMR is AMR director Dee J. Kelly, a partner in Mr. Bass's Fort Worth law firm of Kelly, Hart & Hallman.
It isn't clear whether any informal talks have yet taken place between AMR and Bass representatives. 

However, observers said Mr. Crandall must take care in any talks not to discuss possible pricetags for the company to avoid any possible interpretation that he is putting the company up for sale.
Mr. Bass wasn't available for comment yesterday, and AMR had no comment.
AMR disclosed Mr. Trump's bid Oct. 5.
Its next regularly scheduled board meeting is Wednesday.
Separately, AMR stock tumbled for the second straight day amid concerns about the likelihood that Mr. Trump can successfully pursue the company.
AMR stock fell $4.25 to $97.125 a share on volume of 2.6 million shares in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The stock fell $3.375 on Tuesday. 

The stock dropoff left the market price far from Mr. Trump's bid of $120 a share and closer to the $83-a-share price before his bid was announced.
The stock downturn reflected reports that Congress is about to adopt legislation that would delay any takeover by Mr. Trump.
Also, there were rumors, which were denied by Mr. Trump, that he might be selling shares.
The rumors were sparked by selling by Bear, Stearns & Co., his stockbroker. 

The stock's decline accelerated late in the day as word spread of a disclosure by AMR of a recent bylaw change, adopted Sept. 29, giving the board extra time to respond to any move by Mr. Trump to oust the board.
The amendment gives the board 10 days to set a record date for such a vote. 

In an unusual statement released by his lawyer, Jack Nusbaum of Willkie Far & Gallagher, Mr. Trump said, "I haven't sold a share of stock.
I intend to go forward in acquiring this company.
And I don't intend to sell a share of stock without alerting the marketplace to that possibility." Mr. Nusbaum said that such an alert would be disseminated before Mr. Trump sold stock. 

The issuance of the statement appeared to be necessary not only because Bear Stearns was selling, but also because some market professionals harbor a mistrust of Mr. Trump's intentions.
On several past occasions, Mr. Trump accumulated stakes in companies, disclosed the stake, and then sold after the price rose in response to the disclosure. 

Mr. Trump has said those stakes were merely "investments." Mr. Nusbaum said, "He really wants it known that this isn't a stock play.
He wants the world to understand that he is committed.
He hasn't sold a share of stock and has no intention of doing so." Mr. Trump hasn't disclosed the size of his AMR holdings, describing them only as "substantial." 

Meanwhile, the House Public Works and Transportation Committee may begin as early as today to work on a bill allowing the Transportation Department to approve or reject airline leveraged buy-outs in advance.
The Senate Commerce committee has approved a similar bill.
The House version provides for a 30-day review period, which could be extended an additional 20 days, for the acquisition of 15% of a major airline's voting stock.
The Senate bill applies to purchases of 25% or more and imposes a 90-day review period.
Capitol Hill aides said the differences are likely to be resolved without difficulty. 

Separately, Mr. Trump yesterday named his brother Robert as an interim successor to the late Mark Etess, one of three Trump casino executives who died in a helicopter crash Tuesday.
Mr. Etess was president of the Trump Taj Mahal casino resort.
Prices of some $625 million of Taj Mahal bonds fell in the junk-bond market yesterday on the news of the casino executives' deaths. 

Laurie McGinley contributed to this article. 

