.START 

Yields on money-market mutual funds slipped back to September's levels, reflecting this week's retreat of short-term interest rates. 

For the week ended Tuesday, the average seven-day compounded yield declined to 8.60% from 8.62% the prior week, Donoghue's Money Fund Report said.
The seven-day yield was unchanged at 8.60% during the last two weeks of September. 

Assets of the 395 funds tracked by Donoghue's jumped about $2.1 billion to a record of $343.8 billion after declining the previous week.
Money was added to each category of funds, Donoghue's said. 

After three weeks of stagnation, the 30-day compounded yield on money funds increased slightly to 8.61% in the week ended Tuesday.
That rise, from 8.60%, was a result of higher short-term interest rates in the previous reporting week, said Brenda Malizia Negus, editor of the Holliston, Mass.-based newsletter. "The yields went up a little bit last week and the 30-day figures are reflecting that," she said. 

Ms. Negus noted that interest rates generally declined following Friday's employment report. "Everyone was expecting some Federal Reserve intervention" to spur business activity, she said. 

At the auction of U.S. Treasury bills Tuesday, the average six-month yield fell to 8.01% from 8.36% the previous week.
And at Citicorp's weekly auction of commercial paper, rates also were lower.
Money funds invest in these and other so-called money-market instruments. 

Yields on certificates of deposit sold to consumers, which compete directly with money funds, were little changed in the week ended Tuesday.
Banxquote Money Markets, a New York information service, said the average six-month CD was sold with a yield of 8.12%, down 0.01 percentage point from the previous week.
The average one-year CD, meanwhile, added 0.01 percentage point to 8.16%. 

The average seven-day simple yield on money funds declined to 8.26% from 8.28%, while the average 30-day simple yield added 0.01 percentage point to 8.27%.
Compound yields assume that dividends are reinvested and that interest rates remain constant for one year. 

The average maturity of funds was unchanged at 38 days. 

With a seven-day yield of 9.9%, the Summit Cash Reserves money fund was the highest yielding taxable fund for the week ended Tuesday.
The fund realized short-term capital gains this week, which it passed on to customers, Donoghue's said. 

Merrill Lynch & Co. 's Ready fund, with a yield of 9.63%, and its CMA MS fund at 9.54% were the next highest yielding funds, Donoghue's said.
None of these funds is absorbing management fees to boost yields. 

The highest yielding funds of much of this year, including Dreyfus Corp. 's Worldwide Dollar, have absorbed fees to increase net payout in an effort to attract deposits.
The Dreyfus fund had a seven-day yield of 9.52% in the most current week. 

