.START 

In a hard-fought victory for the oil and auto industries, a House subcommittee voted to gut the Bush administration's plan to require production of cars that run on alternatives to gasoline. 

On a 12-10 vote that followed heated debate, the Energy subcommittee removed from the administration's proposed clean-air bill a provision that would require the auto industry to produce annually, by 1997, one million autos capable of running on a clean-burning alternative to gasoline and to sell them in the dirtiest cities. 

Instead, Detroit would simply have to demonstrate to the Environmental Protection Agency that it could produce and distribute such vehicles. 

The amendment, offered by two Texans -- Rep. Jack Fields, a Republican, and Rep. Ralph Hall, a Democrat -- also would weaken proposed performance standards that would apply to the non-gasoline fuels to be produced. 

"It allows Detroit to not build the cars it doesn't want to build and it allows Big Oil not to sell the fuel it doesn't want to sell," said Daniel Weiss, a lawyer with the Sierra Club, referring to the subcommittee's action. 

Although the alternative-fuels proposal was a centerpiece of the administration's bill, the amendment was supported by eight of the committee's nine Republicans, including Rep. Norman Lent of New York, the chief GOP sponsor of the president's package. 

It was largely Democratic lawmakers who fought for the president's proposal, and several blasted the administration for a confused and half-hearted lobbying effort.
During the debate, Rep. Lent said White House Chief of Staff John Sununu had told him that the administration didn't oppose the amendment.
Moments later, subcommittee chairman Henry Waxman (D., Calif.) said EPA administrator William Reilly had told him that the administration did oppose it. 

A senior administration official said later that while the administration did prefer the president's proposal, it was pleased that the subcommittee included some kind of alternative-fuels provision in the bill.
He said, too, that the administration had been assured that subcommittee members would work to strengthen the amendment in the full committee. 

After voting on alternative fuels, the subcommittee completed its work on the clean-air measure.
But there are likely to be fights in the full committee over provisions involving toxic releases from chemical plants and controls on acid rain -- areas in which the subcommittee made no substantive changes to the president's proposals. 

In addition, further battles are expected over changes the panel did make, including those on alternative fuels.
In earlier votes, the subcommittee voted to tighten tailpipe-emission standards beyond the administration's proposal, to require auto makers to install on-board canisters to catch fumes released during refueling and to reject an administration proposal to give auto makers more flexibility in meeting emissions standards. 

Supporters of the alternative-fuels amendment said that one of their chief aims was to remove what they contended is a bias in the president's bill in favor of methanol as an alternative to gasoline. 

The low-polluting cars that would be required under Mr. Bush's proposal would have to be designed to burn an 85% methanol blend or a fuel that would burn just as cleanly.
After the year 2000, the fuel would have to be 100% methanol, or a fuel that burned just as cleanly. 

The amendment, however, would enable oil companies to produce an alternative fuel that wouldn't burn as cleanly as methanol -- provided they could show that it would be used in so many cars that it would achieve the same overall reduction in pollution as would occur under the first stage of Mr. Bush's proposal. 

The amendment would facilitate the use of non-methanol fuels -- notably reformulated gasoline, which the oil industry prefers.
Auto makers also favor that option because it wouldn't require them to redesign cars as extensively as would a methanol requirement. 

The American Petroleum Institute, which represents the oil industry, said the amendment "will achieve at least the same level of air-quality improvement as the Bush administration clean-air proposal, but in a more efficient and cost-effective manner." 

Supporters described the amendment as an attempt to move cautiously on alternative fuels.
They pointed to concerns about the toxicity of methanol and about consumer reluctance to drive cars that aren't powered by gasoline.
Moreover, some lawmakers suggested that the subcommittee's decision earlier to tighten tailpipe-emission standards beyond the president's proposal made it unnecessary to have as stringent an alternative-fuels program. 

