.START 

The United Airlines machinists union asked the Labor Department to block the proposed $6.79 billion employee-management buy-out of UAL Corp. on grounds that it violates federal standards governing employee investment funds. 

In a three-page letter addressed to Labor Secretary Elizabeth Dole, the machinists union charged that the proposal from UAL's management and pilots is "unfair" based on rules and regulations in the Employment Retirement Income Security Act, commonly known by its acronym, ERISA. 

In the letter, the union asked the department "to immediately review and bring an enforcement action" against the proposed buy-out.
The move could further undermine UAL's efforts to win government approval for the buy-out. 

The Labor Department declined any immediate comment on the letter. 

The buy-out group is already facing growing Transportation Department criticism of airline leveraged buy-outs and foreign stakes in U.S. carriers. 

As the flood of East bloc immigrants further aggravates West Germany's shortage of low-cost urban housing, the Bonn government is rushing out new building programs. 

Chancellor Helmut Kohl's center-right government is seeking to encourage construction of a million new apartments over the next three years.
The German Tenants Association estimates that West Germany currently has a shortage of about 800,000 apartments. 

West Germany will take in an estimated 200,000 East German refugees and 350,000 ethnic Germans from elsewhere in Eastern Europe this year alone.
The refugees and a rising West German birth rate are projected to swell the population by three million to around 64 million by the end of the century. 

The Ifo Economic Research Institute in Munich estimates that 400,000 apartments will have to be added to the market every year until the year 2000 to ease the country's housing crunch. 

The Indian government unveiled a $390 million program aimed at providing one million jobs a year for the nation's urban poor.
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi said the plan would create new jobs, finance entrepreneurs and contract labor for building houses.
According to government figures, about 10 million people in the country are unemployed and 34% of India's 880 million people live below the poverty line, defined as being able to afford a daily diet of 2,000 calories. 

American basketball stars Danny Ferry and Brian Shaw are generating a lot of interest in Italian basketball, but they haven't generated a lot of wins yet for their Messaggero Roma team, owned by the Ferruzzi group.
Messrs.
Ferry and Shaw, both of whom signed million-dollar-plus contracts with Messaggero, are among the Italian league's top scorers.
But they also made crucial mistakes in recent games, including a 98-89 loss to Knorr Bologna.
With the team coming under heat, its coach scheduled closed practices. 

The U.S. abstained in a vote at the South Pacific Commission in Guam in which 26 nations, including Australia, Britain, France and New Zealand, voted for an immediate ban on drift-net fishing in South Pacific international waters and waters surrounding member islands.
Experts say the huge nets create "walls of death" by trapping almost all sea creatures in their paths.
Thomas Reese, a deputy assistant administrator with the U.S. Agency for International Development, said that Washington supports the idea of a temporary moratorium but that "the word ban causes a problem." 

Japan's Hitachi Ltd. plans to double its imports of parts and finished goods to 262 billion yen ($1.82 billion) by 1993 from 131 billion yen in 1988.
Hitachi said the action is designed to help reduce the trade imbalance between Japan and its trade partners.
The company first launched a policy in 1985 to increase its import levels.
Since then, the amount of imports has increased at a 15%-to-45% pace annually.
Under the new plan, the imports will come from Hitachi's overseas plants in the U.S. as well as European and Southeast Asian countries. 

Malaysia Airlines rejected a compensation offer from Boeing Co. for the delay in delivering two Boeing 747-400 aircraft.
Malaysia's national news agency quoted the airline's Managing Director Abdul Aziz Abdul Rahman as saying that "the rate they offered is not favorable to us" and that counterproposals would be forwarded to Boeing in the next two weeks; he declined to discuss the amount offered by Boeing.
The first of the six Boeing 747-400s on order by the airline arrived in Malaysia last Sunday.
And in other airline news, American Airlines said it plans to start services to Australia on Feb. 4. 

The opening of the Tasaki-Riger diamond-polishing works in northern Israel marked the first joint venture between Israeli and Japanese firms. 

The two participants are Japan's Tasaki Inju Co., one of the world's largest producers of pearls, and Israeli diamond merchant Dov Riger.
Under their agreement, the joint venture will custom cut and polish diamonds for the Japanese market, with Tasaki handling sales. 

Moshe Schnitzer, president of the Israel Diamond Exchange, told the opening ceremony that "This is a most welcome step forward, because Japan is Israel's most challenging market." 

After the U.S., Japan is the second-largest importer of Israeli diamonds. 

People across the Soviet Union are captivated by a faith healer, Anatoly Kashpirovsky, who says his television sessions cure a variety of ills.
A recent program featuring Mr. Kashpirovsky was watched by an estimated 200 million Soviet viewers. . . . The owners of a ship wrecked off Eriskay, Scotland, in 1941 with 2,000 to 4,000 cases of Scotch whiskey on board said they plan to salvage what's left of the cargo.
However, most of the cargo is believed to have been looted in the 1940s, an event memorialized in the movie "Tight Little Island." 

