.START 

WCRS Group PLC's planned sale of a majority of its advertising unit, which includes Della Femina McNamee WCRS in the U.S., has been delayed, according to people close to the discussions. 

The sources said that WCRS is still likely to sell most of the ad business to Paris-based Eurocom, and that it hopes to announce a deal soon.
But they said discussions have been bogged down by haggling over details.
Meanwhile, at least one other potential bidder has emerged: another French company, Boulet Dru Dupuy Petit, known as BDDP. BDDP's top executive, Jean-Claude Boulet, met Tuesday in Paris with WCRS's chief executive officer, Peter Scott, the sources said. 

A BDDP executive confirmed that the French agency has considered bidding for WCRS's ad business.
But the executive added, "We aren't interested in them at the moment, anyway.
There is nothing between WCRS and BDDP." 

Even if BDDP were interested in making a bid, it might be biting off more than it could chew.
The French agency, with billings estimated at $550 million, is smaller than WCRS's ad-agency business, whose Della Femina unit alone has billings of $660 million.
BDDP earlier this year bid unsuccessfully for London's Boase Massimi Pollitt, which was ultimately bought by Omnicom Group, New York.
BDDP has since been scouring the U.S. and the U.K. for acquisitions. 

Nevertheless, WCRS might consider BDDP as a backup if its talks with Eurocom fall through, some industry executives suggested.
WCRS initially announced last month that it was in talks to sell a portion of its ad business; it hopes to largely remove itself from the agency business in order to concentrate on its more profitable line, media-buying.
The British communications firm already owns half of Carat Holding S.A., one of the largest buyers of advertising time and space in Europe, and has said it wants to buy the majority. 

Extricating itself from the ad business, however, has taken longer than WCRS executives initially expected.
According to executives familiar with the WCRS-Eurocom talks, a deal would call for Eurocom, which already owns a 20% stake in WCRS's ad business, to raise its stake to about 70%.
Ultimately, Eurocom would probably buy the entire operation. 

The deal also would enhance the position of Jerry Della Femina, flamboyant chairman of Della Femina, the agency best known for creating pathological liar Joe Isuzu.
Industry executives said Mr. Della Femina would be given a world-wide title, perhaps as chairman or co-chairman of the combined WCRS and Eurocom ad businesses.
Mr. Della Femina, who was majority owner of Della Femina when he sold it to WCRS for about $30 million, would also be given an additional multimillion dollar sum, the executives said. 

Mr. Della Femina wouldn't comment except to say, "I'm loyal to WCRS, so I would support anything they decide to do." 

Reached in London, WCRS's Mr. Scott said "nothing has changed" since the agency's statement in September about its discussions to sell part of the unit. 

But industry executives said that WCRS and Eurocom initially hoped to come to an agreement by about two weeks ago, when WCRS managers from around the world convened for a meeting in Switzerland.
The company later planned to announce the deal yesterday, and now hopes to be able to complete it sometime next week, industry executives said.
They said the deal has been held up by haggling over some relatively small details. 

"There's no major discrepency in price," one source close to the company said. "They're arguing over terms and details, whittling here and there. . . . As soon as an issue is decided, they go back and want to renegotiate it." The executive added that the delays may have prompted renewed interest by BDDP. 

Saatchi's Shares Respond Saatchi & Saatchi Co. shares, buffeted by takeover rumors, rose sharply on London's stock exchange yesterday after the company's largest shareholder said it had been approached by third parties regarding a possible restructuring. 

But in the U.S., Saatchi American Depository Receipts fell slightly, closing at $16.50, down 25 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, as Wall Street discounted the notion of any immediate action.
Each ADR represents three Saatchi shares. 

Wall Street executives said they believe one or more parties have been acquiring Saatchi shares.
But they were unconvinced that the moves would result soon in a restructuring or takeover of the troubled advertising and consulting giant.
Several said they believed a restructuring was far more likely after Saatchi completes the planned sale of its consulting arm, and after it reports its annual results, sometime around Thanksgiving. 

"Someone is out there stirring the pot," said Emma Hill, an analyst with Wertheim & Co. "But is it anyone real, someone who can realize significant shareholder value?
I don't know." 

Ad Notes. . . . 

NEW ACCOUNT: Roto-Rooter Services Co. awarded its $4 million telephone directory ad account to Ketchum Yellow Pages, a unit of Ketchum Communications Inc., Pittsburgh. 

WHO'S NEWS: Michel Richardot was named WPP Group's Director of Europe effective Jan. 1.
He will report directly to WPP's chief executive, Martin Sorrell.
Mr. Richardot was previously on the board of Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide and vice chairman of Ogilvy & Mather Europe. 

