.START 

I have a friend, a charming and cheerful woman who seems to be able to do everything.
She has a job.
She has a young child.
She has a husband whose political job requires her time as well.
And she writes books. 

A few years ago, she and her sister wrote a book, and awhile back they discovered that a woman had plagiarized their work. "There were whole paragraphs lifted," my friend wrote me a few weeks ago, and she was upset. "I'd like the punishment to fit the crime, like having her come over and mow my lawn or do the laundry to pay back the time she gained by recycling our words." 

In fact, that's a perfect idea.
Wrongdoers need to be punished for what they did, deterred from acting again, made to repay their victims and publicly penalized in a way that will stop others from committing like crimes.
Those are the four parts of punishment. 

If this word thief had to mow my friend's lawn and do her laundry for a few months, all four goals would be met: She'd be punished, she'd think twice about stealing words again, my friend would be repaid in the best way possible, and the public humiliation and notoriety would make other would-be plagiarizers think twice. 

The idea isn't exactly new.
A hundred years ago, Gilbert and Sullivan's Mikado had as his object all sublime to let the punishment fit the crime. ("All prosy dull society sinners/Who chatter and bleat and bore/Are sent to hear sermons/From mystical Germans/Who preach from ten till four.") 

But now the idea is catching on in real life.
Creative sentencing or alternative sentencing or innovative sentencing -- the concept has many names -- is being tried by judges throughout the land as hard-core criminals -- the rapists and muggers and drug dealers -- fill up our prisons. 

Drunk drivers and teen-age drug dealers are sentenced to watch autopsies.
A marijuana smuggler is told to work with AIDS patients.
Criminals are given the option of going to jail or facing public humiliation by buying ads of apology.
A slumlord is forced to live in one of his own buildings.
Juvenile delinquents are ordered to join the Boy Scouts.
Felons are being sentenced to do good deeds -- community service -- for the aged or the poor or the churches or the schools in their towns. 

All of this saves money.
It costs upward of $40,000 a year to keep some prisoners in prison.
It costs more to build one jail cell in some cities than it does to build a whole house.
And the wrongdoers who aren't sent to jail get to keep their jobs and earn their salaries -- and pay their taxes. 

In fact, what good does it do to send Wall Street thieves, political scoundrels, errant evangelists and other nonviolent jerks to prison?
Very little.
But it does no good, either, just to impose huge fines and let them go back to their chosen line of greed.
No, some kind of stiff fine coupled with community service seems to be the best choice.
Strip them of their ill-gotten gains, but put their minds and bodies to use helping the poor and the old and the disabled and the uneducated. 

Then, let them rejoin society and hope that one or two, at least, continue their public-service work.
That's what happened with a Maryland man charged with drug possession in the 1970s. 

"Instead of sending him to jail, I gave him an alternative sentence," the judge told the Washington Post earlier this year. "I gave him a suspended sentence and required that he spend so many hours over the course of a year working as a handyman at a home for aged.
A year later, he came back into the courtroom, and accompanying him were a half-dozen old people from the home.
They told me he'd finished his hours months and months earlier, but he'd continued to work there.
They loved him.
They were all like one big happy family.
They'd all gone to his wedding." 

Who knows what would have happened if he had been jailed?
He might have served his time, come out and led an upstanding life.
Maybe.
Maybe not.
But one thing is clear: Society -- in this case, the old folks at the home -- wouldn't have benefited. 

It might make some of us gloat a little to see Jim Bakker or Leona Helmsley or Zsa Zsa Gabor be sent to prison.
But wouldn't we all be better off if they were sent to do odd jobs at a home for the aged, if they were told to help care for the babies born addicted to crack or born with AIDS, if Mrs. Helmsley were told to work in a shelter in the Bowery, if Mr. Bakker were told to work with kids in the gangs of Los Angeles, if Ms. Gabor were told to help with the children of immigrant farm workers? 

For that matter, wouldn't Mrs. Helmsley, Mr. Bakker and Ms. Gabor be better off afterward, too? 

A far more difficult issue is punishment for violations of ethics rather than law. 

It boils down to this: How long must a person pay for his ethical sins?
Even murderers or would-be murderers are forgiven when they re-enter society, are deemed to have paid their debts and are urged to find good jobs. 

But the athlete who cheats, the newspaper reporter who lies, the professor who cribs -- they seem to be tainted for life.
How can they be rehabilitated in the eyes of their peers?
No editor would hire a person who stole someone else's work or who was caught making up quotes.
But what if the incident occurred 10 years ago?
No college would hire a teacher who fudged his research.
But what if the fudge took place 15 years ago?
Murderers often are ostracized -- jailed -- for less time. 

It's wrong to force a professor to pump gas or sell aluminum siding for the rest of his life because of an ethical lapse.
It's dumb to make a reporter go into retailing because of a stupid mistake she made early in her career.
Yet university presidents and newspaper editors can't just overlook those sins.
They themselves would be ostracized if they hired cheaters. 

Maybe there should be an unwritten code for rehabilitation of the ethical sinner.
Maybe the ethical sinner should go off and work with the poor and the hungry and the sick and the uneducated for a year or two. 

Maybe that's a way to punish the wrongdoer, to deter him from acting again, to repay society, to publicly show others the consequences of ethical crimes. 

At the very least, it's a way to help the poor and the hungry and the sick and the uneducated. 

And that's not all bad. 

Mr. Gartner is editor and co-owner of the Daily Tribune in Ames, Iowa, and president of NBC News in New York. 

