.START 

Copper futures prices quickly rebounded from Tuesday's declines as traders turned increasingly bullish. 

The December contract ended with a gain of 0.55 cent a pound at $1.2860. 

Follow-through selling from Tuesday kept prices under pressure early in the session.
But it waned around midsession and prices recovered. 

One analyst said the ability of the market to minimize the early decline and subsequently recover in part was due to a lack of aggressive selling by computer-oriented funds. 

"Prices just didn't get low enough to trigger heavy fund selling," he said. 

One development that may have contributed to the rebound was a widening gap between the demand represented by outstanding futures contracts and the supply available to fulfill those contracts.
The open interest, or the number of contracts that remain to be either nullified by an opposite trade or fulfilled by delivery of the commodity, in the December contract yesterday rose by 513 contracts to 18,950 contracts.
But the supply of copper in Commodity Exchange warehouses for delivery against that contract declined by 206 tons to 9,287 tons. 

The December open interest is equivalent to 236,913 tons of copper.
John Gross, president of J.E. Gross & Associates, a copper industry advisory firm based in New City, N.Y., noted that tonnage represented by 11,313 contracts of open interest in December options on copper futures must be added. 

That makes the total open interest in copper futures and options equal to 378,326 tons.
The wide disparity between open interest and deliverable supplies isn't as great as the numbers suggest because the vast majority of futures contracts are simply nullified by offsetting trades and most option contracts typically expire unexercised. 

Moreover, the December futures contract won't cease trading until Dec. 27.
In recent months, similar potentially tight supply vs. open interest situations have been resolved without delivery problems.
Such an ending for the September contract was helped along by the exchange decreeing that those contracts required payment of 100% of the contract's value, rather than the 6% or so in margin, or good faith money, for which a trade usually can be initiated.
This move cut buying of the September contract and lessened demand for delivery of copper against it. 

Also, Mr. Gross noted, copper options expire in November, so the pressure of that open interest will be relieved a month before any delivery crunch occurs in futures. 

Richard Hirsch, a trader for Sharps Pixley Inc., New York metals brokers, said the market recovered from an overreaction to Tuesday's announcement that a major hurdle had been cleared in the Highland Valley mine's labor negotiations. 

"By rising on Tuesday to a life-of-contract high and then plunging to end lower for the day, the December contract performed what is known as a key reversal," Mr. Hirsch said.
The move created the expectation of further selling yesterday, which occurred in early trading. 

"The reason the decline wasn't further extended and selling waned was that the reaction was greater than what was warranted by the Highland Valley development," Mr. Hirsch said. "The company is still on strike, the union is yet to be heard from and the company's force majeure on shipments is still in effect.
Putting this together with other production problems world-wide didn't warrant the kind of reaction that took place." 

Force majeure is a term meaning the inability to meet a contractual agreement because of conditions beyond the shipper's control. 

Michael Frawley, a metals trader for PaineWebber, New York, noted that demand for copper continues strong in the U.S. and the Far East. "Although the market is still susceptible to further bouts of short-term liquidation, it's expected to continue to be strong through the end of the year," he said. 

Demand for copper typically begins to pick up at this time of year and usually peaks in March. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

ENERGY: Petroleum prices were mostly higher, keeping the week's rally alive.
But late selling of the November gasoline contract on the New York Mercantile Exchange helped hold down crude oil futures.
Unleaded gasoline for November delivery fell 0.26 of a cent a gallon to finish at 55.73 cents.
West Texas Intermediate crude for November delivery was up eight cents a barrel to $20.25.
But that followed a rise of 25 to 30 cents a barrel in spot values of North Sea crudes on European markets.
In addition, refiners raised their field prices for U.S. crudes by 25 cents, bringing the posting for West Texas Intermediate to $19.25 a barrel. "Technically, the market is in a bull move," said Eric Bolling of Edge Trading Corp.
But he said the short-term direction of the market is likely to be determined by fundamental factors as indicated by the American Petroleum Institute's weekly reports on U.S. oil inventories.
The latest report, which was released after the close of trading, could be interpreted as bearish.
It showed larger-than-expected increases in inventories of gasoline, which rose 2.1 million barrels, and crude oil, which rose 3.7 million barrels. 

GRAINS And SOYBEANS: Futures prices closed narrowly mixed in relatively quiet trading.
A brief short-covering rally early in the day ran out of steam, analysts said.
Most traders were content to even up their holdings ahead of the release of the government's latest crop size report after the close of trading today.
Corn futures for December delivery on the Chicago Board of Trade eked out a small 1.75 cent-a-bushel gain, closing at $2.35 a bushel.
November soybean futures closed unchanged at $5.5225 a bushel on the Board of Trade. 

PRECIOUS METALS: Silver and gold futures prices rose despite a strong dollar through most of the day.
Silver for December delivery advanced 4.3 cents an ounce to $5.1430, while December gold was up 90 cents an ounce at $366.10.
January platinum declined 60 cents an ounce to $486.30.
Craig Sloane, precious metals analyst for Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co., said silver was the leader and helped buoy gold while the dollar was at its strongest, early in the day.
Before the New York market opened, the Bank of Japan raised its discount rate, or its base rate on loans to commercial banks, half a percentage point to 3.75%. "This caused a knee-jerk downward reaction in the dollar, but it came back strongly by the time New York opened," Mr. Sloane said.
The dollar lost some of its strength later, and when precious metals futures trading ended it was down from its highs for the day, he said. 

