.START 

The House Ways and Means Committee soundly defeated a proposal that would have speeded refunds of some $19 billion in overcollected federal taxes paid by utility companies' customers. 

The utilities prevailed after their political action committees poured a total of $610,000 into the campaigns of Ways and Means committee members since Jan. 1, 1987, according to a computer-aided tabulation of Federal Election Commission records.
Those contributions were part of $10.3 million given by those PACs to all House and Senate candidates during that period. 

Some who got the biggest donations turned against the utilities in yesterday's committee vote, including the sponsor of the refund proposal, Rep. Robert Matsui (D.,Calif.).
But when the long-awaited vote was tallied, the utilities prevailed, 22-13. 

During an extraordinary drafting session held to dispose of the Matsui controversy, the tax-writing panel bowed to what bill co-sponsor Rep. Byron Dorgan (D., N.D.) described as "intensive lobbying" by the electric, telephone and gas utilities. 

The battle was unusual because Mr. Matsui was the chief sponsor of the 1986 legislation that he sought to repeal.
He said he came to believe that the utilities were unfairly keeping money that belonged to consumers.
He also charged that the utility lobby was attempting to all but buy votes with heavy campaign contributions to himself and his colleagues. 

The utilities argued that current law preserved legitimate tax benefits and that repeal would raise their borrowing expenses and cost consumers much more in the long run. 

After earlier siding with the utilities, Rep. Matsui received just over $60,000 for his 1988 re-election campaign from PACs sponsored by telephone, electric and gas utilities.
That was the most to any Ways and Means member and the second-highest total of any House member. 

"It's disappointing, but it wasn't any surprise to me," Rep. Matsui said about yesterday's tally.
He added, though, "The issue isn't over.
The amount of overcollection is increasing in some cases." 

The money in question has been collected from customers by utilities across the nation to pay for future taxes.
But because of the 1986 tax-overhaul act, which dropped the top corporate tax rate to 34% from 46%, $19 billion of that deferred tax money now won't have to be paid to the government after all. 

Utilities don't dispute the debt they owe to consumers; the only issue was whether the money would be paid back quickly or, as the utilities would prefer, over decades.
The Matsui measure would have repealed a provision of the tax act that provides for refunds to be paid out over a 30-year stretch in some cases.
Yesterday's proposal would have permitted the state regulators to return the money to customers in as few as three years. 

Perhaps as much as half of the so-called excess deferred taxes is owed to business customers; the typical residential customer is probably owed something like $100.
Ordinarily, state utility regulators would decide case-by-case how quickly the money would flow back to consumers through rebates or lower rates. 

Among those opposing the utilities was Rep. Michael Andrews (D., Texas), who received $34,850 from utility PACs for his 1988 re-election.
That was the third-highest of any member of the tax-writing panel, but Rep. Andrews said he wasn't convinced the utilities would be hurt by making speedier refunds. "I think the utility companies terribly overstate their case," he said after the vote.
State regulators "are in a far better position to decide," he added. 

All Republicans on the panel sided with the utilities, except for Rep. Willis Gradison of Ohio.
He doesn't accept any PAC funds.
The other 12 got an average of $16,575 from the utility PACs since Jan. 1, 1987.
Topping the GOP list were Reps.
Dick Schulze (R., Pa.), who got $22,100 in the last election and $20,126 so far this year, and Guy Vander Jagt (R., Mich.), who received $28,505 during the more than 2 1/2-year period. 

Democrats were divided more evenly on the issue.
The 10 who voted with the utilities got an average of $17,865.
They included Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, who got $48,600, Rep. Beryl Anthony of Arkansas ($32,850) and the utilities' main champion on the issue, Rep. Ronnie Flippo of Alabama ($29,250). 

But the dozen Democrats who voted against the utilities got even more, an average of $19,422.
The average was pulled up by Rep. Matsui, whose 1989 donations brought his total for the period to $68,075, and Rep. Andrews ($36,350).
Also high on the list were Reps.
Sam Gibbons of Florida ($26,200) and Charles Rangel of New York ($17,150). 

