.START 

Whitehall Financial Group ended talks about buying the bulk of Integrated Resources Inc. 's core businesses, escalating concern about Integrated's future. 

Stephen D. Weinroth, Integrated's chairman and co-chief executive officer, insisted that the financial services concern still has "a bunch of possibilities" that it is working on to sell the core companies.
Mr. Weinroth said he told Whitehall "that we really had serious interest on a deal that was much more attractive" to Integrated. 

While Mr. Weinroth wouldn't identify the other party, there is industry speculation that it is Eli Broad, chairman and chief executive officer of Broad Inc.
A spokeswoman for Broad said, "We don't comment on rumors related to corporate developments." Broad is a financial services concern based in Los Angeles that was formerly called Kaufman & Broad Inc. 

In a statement, Whitehall cited "serious concerns regarding the value of the core companies," along with worsening conditions in debt financing markets.
Whitehall, a partnership of a branch of the Bronfman family and London investor Mandy Moross, told Integrated that it failed to obtain financing under its August agreement to purchase Integrated's core businesses for $310 million.
But the companies were still talking about an alternative transaction that involved payment in cash and securities in the core company that would be created. 

B. Lance Sauerteig, Whitehall's managing partner, said there wasn't any specific thing that caused Whitehall to end the talks.
He cited general problems in the overall financing market led by the subordinated debt market, and the ripple effect that occurred after Campeau Corp. ran into a liquidity crisis last month in which Campeau put its Bloomingdale's unit up for sale and required a $250 million cash infusion from one of its major shareholders. 

Negotiations on a deal "passed the critical mass point" Tuesday, Mr. Sauerteig said.
As late as Tuesday morning "I thought maybe there was a deal," he said, but with concerns about how long Integrated would be able to maintain its vital sales force of brokers and financial planners, "it just made the risks too big to come to a deal that was satisfactory." 

Integrated, which has been struggling to avoid a bankruptcy-law filing since it failed to make interest payments in June on nearly $1 billion of debt, would use proceeds from the sale of the core businesses to restructure debt.
Integrated debt has been hammered recently, with senior debt trading at about 21 cents on the dollar and subordinated debt trading at five cents on the dollar. 

In New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, Integrated common stock fell 12.5 cents, to $1.75. 

Integrated had told its sales force of planners and brokers that it hoped to reach a definitive agreement with Whitehall by next Sunday, and many of those sales representatives were using that deadline to determine whether they would continue to stay affiliated with the company.
Any large defection by the representatives would affect the value of Integrated's assets. 

Mr. Weinroth stressed that "in a fundamental way there are no significant changes" in Integrated's value.
He conceded the sales force would leave unless something is done soon to sell the core companies.
But although he talked about other possibilities he cautioned, "I'm not promising a deal." 

