.START 

May Department Stores Co. said it will sell its Caldor discount-store division to an investor group for $500 million and spin off its Venture unit to shareholders. 

The twin deals, underscoring the turmoil in the retail industry, suggest chains can no longer command premium prices because so many are now up for sale.
They include Bloomingdale's, which is being sold by cash-strapped Campeau Corp., as well as Bonwit Teller, B. Altman, Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field's. 

Industry sources said May was unable to get its asking price of more than $600 million for Caldor, which operates 118 stores in the Northeast, and about $800 million for Venture, which has 75 stores in the Midwest. "It's a buyer's market," said Thomas Tashjian, an analyst at Seidler Amdec Securities Inc. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, May shares dipped 25 cents to close at $48.875. 

A spokesman for St. Louis-based May, which runs such well-known department stores as Lord & Taylor, acknowledged that "the number of retail properties offered for sale, as well as the recent problems in the debt markets for highly leveraged retailers, have made transactions more difficult." 

The transactions also indicate that the highly competitive nature of the discount-store industry is limiting growth opportunities for chains the size of Caldor and Venture.
The market "is saturated in terms of competition," said Kurt Barnard, who publishes the trade newsletter Retail Marketing Report. 

Indeed, May said it would use proceeds from the transactions to expand its core department-store business and buy shares of its stock.
May is said to be especially interested in acquiring Marshall Field's, a chain of 24 mostly Midwestern department stores that B.A.T Industries PLC put on the auction block last month.
The May spokesman declined to comment. 

May didn't disclose how much it expects to gain from the two deals.
It said only that the investor group would pay $500 million for Caldor and assume $52 million in debt, and that Venture would pay its parent a cash dividend before the proposed spinoff. 

But Edward Weller, an analyst at Montgomery Securities, estimated that the Venture dividend would amount to at least $300 million, bringing the total value of the twin transactions to more than $850 million. 

The majority owner of the company being formed to buy Caldor will be Odyssey Partners L.P., a New York investment firm.
Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Capital Corp. will own a 20% stake in the new company, and a Caldor management group led by the chain's chairman, Don R. Clarke, will own less than 10%.
Debt financing for the deal will consist of a bridge loan of about $460 million from an affiliate of Donaldson Lufkin and a $100 million working-capital facility provided by Citibank.
May also will acquire a 20% interest in the new company.
A spokesman for Caldor, based in Norwalk, Conn., said the chain would ring up operating profit of more than $60 million in the fiscal year ending Feb. 3 on sales of $1.7 billion.
Last year, Venture had operating profit of $81 million on sales of $1.28 billion. 

May said it expects to complete the Caldor sale in November and to record an "immaterial" book loss on the transaction.
May added that its planned spinoff of Venture would be a tax-free transaction, subject to a favorable ruling by the Internal Revenue Service. 

