.START 

THE HOUSE VOTED to ease restrictions on federal funding of abortion. 

Moving to reverse eight years of federal policy, the chamber voted 216-206 to permit Medicaid funding for abortions in cases of poor women who are victims of rape or incest.
Such funding currently is limited to those women whose lives have been endangered by pregnancy.
The action appeared to set the stage for a confrontation with Bush over the underlying bill funding the departments of Labor, Education and Health and Human Services. 

Florida's legislature adjourned a special session on the abortion issue, called after a U.S. Supreme Court ruling in July, without passing any laws. 

EAST GERMANY EXPRESSED a willingness to discuss internal change. 

The country's hard-line Communist leadership reaffirmed the nation's commitment to socialism, but said demands for the types of changes sweeping much of Eastern Europe "are open to discussions." The statement by the Politburo capped a day of mixed signals about East Germany's future course.
According to party sources, the ruling body also warned of possible labor unrest and demanded a report on the nation's "critical situation" from leader Honecker. 

The Politburo didn't directly mention the country's growing opposition movement, but urged East Germans to refrain from street demonstrations. 

SOUTH AFRICA'S DE KLERK MET with leading anti-apartheid activists. 

Amid signs that the Pretoria government might be prepared to negotiate with the outlawed African National Congress, de Klerk held talks with three apartheid foes, including Anglican Archbishop Tutu.
It was the first such meeting since de Klerk assumed the presidency and followed Tuesday's pledge to free eight black political prisoners.
The clerics urged him to release Mandela, legalize banned political groups and lift the state of emergency. 

State-run radio in South Africa said the government was ready to negotiate voting rights with genuine black leaders and called the ANC "authentic." 

A Norwegian professor was awarded the 1989 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science.
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in Stockholm cited Trygve Haavelmo, 77, for his pioneering work in econometrics, the use of mathematical and statistical techniques to develop economic theories. 

NASA tentatively rescheduled the launch of the space shuttle Atlantis for Tuesday.
Technicians at Cape Canaveral, Fla., meanwhile, began replacing a faulty engine computer that caused the space agency to scrub today's planned liftoff.
The spacecraft is to carry five astronauts who are to launch the Jupiter-bound Galileo space probe. 

Bush conferred in Washington with Italy's President Cossiga and expressed concern about an Italian firm suspected of selling to the Soviet Union technology used to build a supersonic jet fighter, officials said.
The two leaders also urged more Western aid to Poland's Solidarity-led government. 

Tens of thousands of Armenians rallied in the capital of Yerevan and called for creating self-defense units, activists said.
A 19-month-old feud between the republic and neighboring Azerbaijan over control of the enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh has deprived Armenians of food and fuel and appeared to be nearing full-fledged civil war. 

A Syrian pilot landed a Soviet-made MiG-23 fighter jet in northern Israel and officials said he requested political asylum.
The air force officer would be the first Syrian pilot to defect to Israel.
Damascus, however, denied that the flier had defected, saying the plane was forced to make an emergency landing because of mechanical problems. 

Seven Latin American leaders convened a meeting in Peru to discuss the proposed expulsion of Panama from their Group of Eight.
Panama's membership was suspended in 1988.
The Central American and South American presidents also are expected to express support for the Andean nations' war against drug traffickers. 

The Census Bureau reported that the number of Hispanics in the U.S. has grown more than five times as fast as the rest of the population since 1980.
The bureau said the Hispanic population totaled 20.1 million as of March 1989.
The bulk of the Hispanics in the U.S. are of Mexican origin. 

The Teamsters leadership was criticized for a lack of cooperation in the first progress report by a court-appointed administrator overseeing the union.
The administrator and two other officers were appointed by a federal judge as part of the union's settlement last spring of civil racketeering charges. 

Syrian-backed Moslems agreed to rejoin Lebanon's Christian-Moslem truce commission, strengthening a cease-fire that began last month.
In Saudi Arabia, Arab mediators met with Lebanese lawmakers, whose sessions aimed at reaching a political solution to Lebanon's 14-year-old civil war had been suspended because of a lack of progress. 

