.START 

California regulators are expected to adopt today a telephone rate change that would allow Pacific Telesis Group to earn higher profits by operating more efficiently.
The move is likely to accelerate a national trend toward "incentive" regulation. 

Under the plan, phone companies and consumers would split any profits exceeding a specified rate of return.
The companies also would have to boost productivity substantially before they could raise basic rates to cover inflation.
Its adoption by traditionally pro-consumer California is expected to influence the adoption of similar plans proposed by regional Bell companies in Texas, New York, Washington and other states. 

But consumer advocates worry that incentive regulation could create a "no lose" situation for the phone companies that could leave ratepayers worse off than they are under current rate-of-return regulation.
California consumers currently get back all excess earnings of phone companies, not just half, noted Gene Kimmelman, legislative director for the Consumer Federation of America.
Further, he said, there's nothing to prevent the companies from seeking major rate increases if they don't fare well with the incentive plan. 

Sharon Nelson, incoming president of the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners, said the California decision will be "very influential," but the apparent failure of an incentive plan in New York will cause many states to "take a hard look" at potential risks for ratepayers.
Nynex Corp. said it will request expanded incentives and $900 million in rate increases by 1991 to compensate for a sharp drop in earnings that has occurred under a plan adopted in 1987. 

G. Mitchell Wilk, president of the California Public Utilities Commission, said he expects to adopt "a new regulatory framework" that's very similar to a plan recommended in August by the commission's staff. 

The commission's staff proposal would allow Pacific Telesis and GTE California, a unit of GTE Corp., to earn a 12.75% rate of return and keep half of any profits between 12.75% and 16.75%, providing a potential maximum return of 14.75%.
Under current regulations, the companies are limited to a return of 11.34%.
The companies could request a rate increase if returns fell below 8.75% for two years in a row. 

"It's a win-win for everybody," said Mr. Wilk, adding that the plan would protect consumers, while encouraging Pacific Telesis's Pacific Bell unit and GTE California Inc. to cut costs, offer new services and compete more effectively. "Traditional rate-of-return regulation makes no sense in telecommunications today," given increasing competition and shrinking monopolies, Mr. Wilk said. 

Besides splitting excess profits, the California proposal would limit increases in basic phone rates to the amount that inflation exceeds a 4% annual productivity increase.
The companies would gain increased flexibility to meet competition by lowering prices for existing services and to introduce new services without the yearlong delays of traditional rate hearings.
The plan would take effect in 1990 and be reviewed by the commission after three years. 

Mr. Wilk said he believes the productivity factor -- the key variable affecting phone rates and revenues under the plan -- will be set between 4% and 5%.
That level would limit increases in basic rates to less than 1% a year, if inflation continues at current rates between 4.5% and 5%. 

However, the Consumer Federation's Mr. Kimmelman said, "We think local rates ought to be going down" because the regional Bells have generally enjoyed record high earnings and declining costs. 

Mr. Wilk counters that California consumers will be better off, with lower overall phone bills.
Small expected increases in local rates will be more than offset by expected decreases in toll call and long-distance rates, he said.
Later this year, the commission expects to allow competition for toll service within a local exchange and to reduce charges to long-distance carriers by about $90 million, Mr. Wilk said. 

Mr. Wilk said he couldn't predict the amount of a rate reduction that the commission will adopt for 1990, although it has been estimated between $130 million and $250 million.
Analyst Robert Morris III of Goldman, Sachs & Co. said he would reduce his 1990 earnings projection of $3.25 a share for Pacific Telesis if the rate reduction exceeds $150 million. 

Despite bullish predictions on Wall Street, analyst Joel D. Gross of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette said, "I don't see earnings exploding" as a result of incentive regulation.
But he said there is a potential for Pacific Telesis earnings to grow at a faster rate, averaging 8% over the next five years, compared with about 5% in the previous five years. 

Pacific Bell executive vice president Gary McBee said the plan gives the company "the opportunity to earn well if we perform well.
It's not going to be easy." In the long run, however, the plan will be "very good for the business," Mr. McBee says. 

Mr. Wilk said the earnings potential provides a strong incentive to increase operating efficiency, while the productivity factor and profit-sharing protect consumers against excessive rate increases.
The New York failure is unlikely to be repeated in California because the two situations are "not comparable in any way," Mr. Wilk said.
The New York plan froze basic rates, offered no protection to Nynex against an economic downturn that sharply cut demand and didn't offer flexible pricing.
In contrast, the California economy is booming, with 4.5% access line growth in the past year. 

Now Nynex is proposing an expanded incentive plan starting in 1991 that includes a 2% productivity factor, profit-sharing above a 14% return and rate increases if returns fall below 12%.
The company wants to raise basic residential and business rates substantially, so that it can meet competition by lowering rates for toll calls, high-speed data lines and centrex services. 

New York Public Service Commissioner Eli M. Noam said incentive regulation is a sound policy, but "there may be a need to fine-tune the plan" to improve Nynex's returns.
The commission could act by the end of the year, he said.
In Texas, Southwestern Bell Telephone Co., a unit of Southwestern Bell Corp., is proposing to freeze basic rates for five years, expand services and spend $344 million to modernize its network.
In exchange, the company wants the opportunity to earn a higher rate of return, share excess profits with consumers and reduce prices for competitive services, said Southwestern Bell Telephone vice president William Free. 

"The California decision should be helpful in our ongoing negotiations (with regulators).
We're very competitive with California, particularly in the kinds of industry we're trying to attract," Mr. Free said. 

The Texas Public Utility Commission is expected to act on the plan by late 1990. 

