.START 

The dollar shrugged off a surprise rise in Japanese interest rates and gained despite concerted selling by central banks, while the Fed's interest rate stance subdued stock and bond traders. 

Dollar traders decided that the Federal Reserve isn't going to trim interest rates soon as part of the major industrial nations' coordinated attack on the currency's strength.
Stock and bond investors reached a similar conclusion and bid prices lower for the second day in a row. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed 11.97 lower at 2773.36.
Treasury bond prices fell about 1/2 point, or $5 for each $1,000 face amount. 

The Bank of Japan raised its discount rate, or its rate on loans to commercial banks, to 3.75% from 3.25%.
The dollar initially fell in response but quickly recovered and climbed above 145 yen at one point, despite several rounds of central bank dollar-selling by central banks. 

By midday, Fed-watching traders saw that the U.S. central bank wasn't allowing interest rates to drift lower and concluded that the Fed remains more concerned about fighting inflation through firm interest rates than about helping to rein in the dollar.
The U.S. currency later fell back a little on rumors, which weren't confirmed, that leading central bankers were calling an emergency meeting. 

"The Federal Reserve is holding their trump card until we're through the next series of economic numbers," said Michael Strauss, chief economist for UBS Securities Inc.
The September producer-price index, due tomorrow, is expected to show a strong rise-perhaps as much as 1%, some analysts say-because of higher energy prices.
The Fed wouldn't reduce interest rates before such an important inflation indicator is out, Mr. Strauss said. 

Stock investors were shaken by fears of disappointing third-quarter earnings reports as well as interest-rate concerns.
Bond prices sagged because traders expect yields to climb as a big backlog of new government-agency bonds comes to market over the next two weeks. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices fell, with declining issues on the New York Stock Exchange swamping advancers, 1,021 to 458.
Big Board volume totaled 164.1 million shares. 

Bonds lost ground.
The yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond rose to 8.05%. 

The dollar gained.
Late in New York, the currency was quoted at 1.9166 marks and 144.57 yen, compared with 1.9080 marks and 144.55 yen late Tuesday. 

