.START 

President Bush yesterday called in Senators Boren and Cohen of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence to, as the AP put it, "mend fences" damaged in the Panama flap.
The President was being too gentle.
He should be demanding a return of the foreign-policy powers Congress has purloined.
Otherwise, the next crisis will be handled no better than the one last week. 

Usurpations by congressional committees of executive-branch authority have been detailed often in this space.
We also have chided Presidents for too easily surrendering to what can best be called political blackmail. 

Presidents now get "omnibus" appropriations bills -- big, disorderly bales of paper that arrive at the last moment to effectively destroy the President's budgetary powers.
Special prosecutors backed by Capitol Hill harass public servants, converting executive-branch policies into alleged felonies.
A Speaker Jim Wright happily skips down to Managua to negotiate foreign policy, arrogating to himself powers that the Constitution clearly bestows on the presidency.
He was chucked out of Congress only after violating the rules of that body. 

The Panama affair shows why this cannot be allowed to continue.
The reason has little to do with whether you like George Bush better than Senator Boren or Republicans better than Democrats.
It has to do with whether a trillion-dollar enterprise called the United States government functions even half-well or descends finally into Balkanized anarchy.
Panama was an embarrassment.
Some future crisis, if addressed with similar confusion and ineptitude, could be far worse. 

Defense Secretary Cheney and National Security Adviser Scowcroft both complain that congressional "micromanagement" of national-security policy was heavily to blame for the Panama failure.
That has the ring of an alibi -- neither Defense nor the White House performed well either -- but it just happens to be true.
Major Giroldi, who led the abortive coup against General Noriega, thought he was doing business with the CIA.
What he didn't know was that the CIA is no longer a viable covert-operations organization.
It is, in effect, run by Senator Boren's committee, not the President, and has been effectively immobilized by that committee. 

When Noriega's rescue forces were rushing to his aid and someone had to make a decision on whether to stop them or let the coup fail, the CIA was only a bit player.
The President relied on Army advice and that advice, that Giroldi couldn't be trusted, was either beside the point or wrong.
American generals don't care much for small actions in gritty little Third World countries, but it just happens that those are the military problems that most engage us in this era.
The President, the American people and the Panamanian people want Noriega out, and the military helped muff a chance to make that happen. 

Would we have been better off if the CIA had not been neutered?
The answer is yes.
The purpose of covert operations is to deal with small problems before they become big ones that can be addressed only with military forces.
Properly conducted, they save lives and avoid the kinds of embarrassment that Noriega has been generously handing out to Americans.
Congress is entitled to review covert operations.
It is not institutionally capable of running them. 

What caught everyone in Washington by surprise was the outraged reaction of the American public to the Panama fiasco.
Even some of the most liberal Senators, such as Kerry of Massachusetts, quickly sensed this sea change and joined the chorus of voices criticizing the President. 

It would be a misreading of the Kerry flip-flop to assume that the congressional left, having worked so hard to grab the President's power, wants to give it back.
But if even a Kerry has caught a whiff of grapeshot from the voters, it means that President Bush is in a strong position to start taking back the authority he and former Presidents have lost.
If you want Noriega, you have to take him.
If you want to protect the presidency, you have to chase the interlopers away. 

As a result of the Panama fiasco, a lot of people, in the U.S. and elsewhere, now will be watching the American presidency with interest.
That will be a good thing only if President Bush decides to exercise greater vigor in dealing with both the Noriegas of the world and the problems of his office. 

