.START 

Commodore International Ltd. unveiled its first significant ad campaign in years in its most daring move yet to turn around lackluster U.S. operations. 

Commodore Chairman Irving Gould has long been skeptical of advertising.
He fired Tom Rattigan as the personal-computer maker's chief executive two and a half years ago because, among other things, he thought Mr. Rattigan was planning to spend too much money on an advertising campaign. 

But Commodore -- whose Commodore 64, a tiny personal computer, was once a major factor in the market -- has seen its share nearly disappear from charts of the U.S. market.
International Data Corp. said Commodore's share fell to 1% last year from 2.1% in 1987 and 3.6% in 1984.
As a result, even though the parent company has stabilized after skirting bankruptcy four years ago, the U.S. subsidiary has only occasionally had a profitable quarter.
So Harry Copperman, who became president of Commodore's U.S. operations in May, has been allowed to give advertising a try. 

Commodore, based in West Chester, Pa., will spend $15 million on advertising through year end, focused on its Amiga computer and aimed mainly at the consumer and education markets.
It is also working on a campaign for early next year to bolster the Amiga's prospects in the business market. 

"The window of opportunity is getting small," said Mr. Copperman, a veteran of 22 years with International Business Machines Corp. and Apple Computer Inc. "I think Irving understands that this is his last chance to run for the roses." 

Mr. Copperman said he plans to narrow his focus to certain markets.
Education is a major one, because he thinks IBM hasn't yet figured out that market and because Apple, the dominant force, is in a transition, trying to persuade schools to move to the Macintosh from the Apple II. Commodore will also push into the home market, taking advantage of such features as the Amiga's ability to let people edit home movies. 

Mr. Copperman said he won't try to take on IBM and Apple head-on in the business market but thinks he can get in through the back door.
He said the Amiga's slick graphics and ability to have more than one program running at once lend themselves to computerized, interactive training programs, for instance. 

"The view used to be that the Amiga was a general-purpose machine," he said. "It can be, but it's not ready to be positioned that way.
There isn't the richness of software yet." 

Mr. Copperman also said the company is taking the long view on some of the advertising.
He said the advertising isn't expected to pay for itself in the fourth quarter.
Instead, he said he's hoping the ads will also help with such long-term problems as finding more national dealers that will carry the Amiga, a longstanding concern for Commodore. 

The ads themselves are slick, especially the television ads.
Created by Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer, the ads feature a teen-ager named Stevie, a virtuoso on the Amiga who shows that it is "The Computer for the Creative Mind." In one ad, Stevie's parents answer the door and find three astronauts, including Buzz Aldrin, who want to talk to Stevie about plans for the new space station.
Then Los Angeles Dodgers manager Tommy Lasorda calls for advice on his team's lineup.
The Pointer Sisters arrive for help on their new album, followed quickly by composer Burt Bacharach, rock 'n' roll pioneer Little Richard and, finally, former House speaker Tip O'Neill. 

The print ads are a series of case studies of Amiga users, including jazz guitarist B.B. King, who writes music on it. 

