.START 

Two men were indicted by a federal grand jury for allegedly promoting a scheme that generated $4 billion in fraudulent government-securities transactions to create false tax deductions worth $140 million. 

Jeffrey L. Feldman and Paul J. Foont were charged in a 15-count indictment filed in federal court in Manhattan.
They were accused of conspiring to defraud the Internal Revenue Service, helping others evade taxes, and filing false partnership returns.
The tax deductions resulted from fraudulent interest expenses created in 1981, the indictment alleged. 

Michael Feldberg, an attorney for Mr. Feldman, said he is "puzzled by the indictment" because the "transactions at the heart of the indictment pertain to a series of transactions that occurred between 1978 and 1984, but the government hasn't charged wrongdoing in other years when the transactions were essentially the same." Alan Levine, a New York attorney for Mr. Foont, said Mr. Foont will "vigorously contest the charges and we are confident that he will be vindicated." 

According to the indictment, Messrs.
Feldman and Foont conducted the alleged scheme through a series of partnerships known as the "Cralin partnerships." The partnerships were promoted to provide significant tax benefits to investors, the indictment said. 

U.S. Attorney Benito Romano said that individual investors in the partnerships are not charged with wrongdoing in the case and that evidence didn't establish that investors committed any crimes. 

Mr. Feldman, 42 years old, resides in Skillman, N.J., and was a principal in the Cralin partnerships.
The indictment alleges that he received specified percentages of the amounts raised by the partnerships and of the partnerships' net asset values.
Mr. Foont, 40, lives in Manhattan and was chief trader for the Cralin partnerships, and held executive positions in several of the partnerships. 

Specifically, the defendants are charged with creating fraudulent interest expenses in 1981 through prearranged, bogus transactions in government securities.
Arraignment is scheduled for Oct. 19. 

