.START 

Another bidding war may be shaping up for American Medical International Inc., even as the investment group IMA Holdings Corp. says it has secured financing for its $3 billion offer for the hospital company. 

IMA Holdings, which includes Chicago's Pritzker family and Wall Street's First Boston Corp., earlier this week agreed with American Medical on acquisition terms that reflected a cut in the offering price to $26.50 a share from $28, for 63 million shares, or about 86% of American Medical's common stock. 

But in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, American Medical said that since Oct. 5 it has been approached by two other possible suitors.
American Medical didn't identify them, but said both had previously submitted bids. 

American Medical said it intends to pursue the inquiries, including possibly entering into talks with one or both groups. 

"We've had expressions of interest, not offers," an AMI spokeswoman said. "We won't disclose their identity unless we get firm offers.
Right now, these are just explorations." 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, American Medical shares closed yesterday at $24, up 25 cents, on volume of 1.5 million shares. 

First Boston, a unit of CS First Boston Group, was calm about possible renewed bidding for American Medical. "We continue to think it's a superior company.
Therefore it doesn't surprise me that there's considerable interest in it," a First Boston official said. 

First Boston, which already has about $1 billion outstanding in short-term loans to complete takeovers, would buy another $578.4 million of the high-yield, high-risk junk bonds to help finance IMA Holdings' revised offer.
Chemical Bank has committed to provide as much as $326.7 million of financing, and has offered to form a bank syndicate to provide $509.1 million.
IMA has financing commitments from six other banks for another $747.2 million; IMA also said it has equity commitments in the amount of $285 million. 

Reflecting recent turbulence in the $200 billion junk bond market, IMA earlier withdrew its original $3.35 billion offer for American Medical after First Boston revised its lending commitment to IMA. Lenders also balked because of pending congressional action on a proposal on tax deductibility of interest payments in some securities. 

In Chicago, a spokesman for the Pritzkers couldn't be reached. 

Analysts speculated that one of the new suitors could be a group including Fort Worth, Texas, investors Sid and Lee Bass.
Last month, that group boosted its stake in American Medical to 12.7%. "They've been very open in their effort to enhance shareholder value," said Margo L. Vignola, an analyst at Salomon Brothers Inc. Another "prime suspect," she said, is a group including Clayton & Dubilier Inc., a New York investment firm.
The group launched a failed $1.7 billion bid for American Medical last March. 

Analysts also mentioned former suitors Brian M. Enterprises Inc., whose principal is a Roseland, N.J., attorney.
He proposed last June that American Medical be acquired by a new employee-stock ownership plan. 

Separately, IMA Holdings said in another SEC filing that if its tender offer succeeds it plans to sell an unspecified number of American Medical's hospitals to repay a $315 million loan from an unidentified lender. 

