.START 

Breaking up state-owned monopolies is hard to do -- even for British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, the world's leading champion of privatization. 

Mrs. Thatcher, after reaping nearly #26 billion (about $40 billion) from a decade of public-asset sales, is stirring deep discontent over her biggest and trickiest denationalizations yet.
Starting in late November, the Conservative government intends to raise about #20 billion from divesting itself of most of Britain's massive water and electricity utilities.
Ten separate water utilities will be floated at once.
The subsequent electric-utility sale, expected to fetch #13 billion, will mark the world's largest public offering. 

Britain spearheaded the 1980s privatization boom, encouraging most Western countries to sell or consider selling state enterprises to revive stagnant industrial bases and score gains for popular capitalism.
The idea continues to gain ground in nations such as Portugal, Jamaica, Mexico and Italy.
But as in Britain, harsher political resistance now is slowing privatization in the U.S., France, Indonesia, Australia, the Philippines, China and elsewhere.
The Japanese government last month canceled its $20 billion fourth sale of shares in Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp. amid a persistently weak share price for Japan's largest company. 

The United Kingdom water and electricity sales look unpopular, even among Tory voters, largely because of unforeseen environmental concerns.
The water industry, under legal attack by the European Community Commission, must spend #18.6 billion to improve poor drinking-water quality and revamp an outmoded sewage-treatment system.
The electricity industry is struggling with expensive and inefficient nuclear-power plants.
Complicating things, the government is injecting greater competition than in past flotations by breaking up these English and Welsh industries in advance. 

"I don't recall a privatization that was ever easy.
Every one has been difficult," says a U.K. government adviser.
But the coming sales are probably the most difficult, he concedes, especially with green (environmental) politics now "the flavor of the month." 

Delays loom, and some investors are skittish.
To assure success, the Thatcher government has been forced to write off almost all of the water industry's #5 billion debt, lure investors with new incentives and promise to keep half of the nuclear capacity in public hands.
In the latest of several embarrassing setbacks, the government last month postponed the electricity-industry sale for as long as six months because of protracted wrangling over a new power-buying system.
A last-minute compromise severely restricts outsiders from supplying electricity for eight years, discouraging some would-be U.S. players. 

The upshot: Privatization could become a political albatross for the ruling Tories, especially if they finish the electricity selloff dangerously close to national elections expected in 1991.
Lingering public discontent also could hurt the government's planned divestiture of state-owned coal and railroad industries. "I can't see the political mileage extracted from {future} privatizations that they have gotten from earlier ones," says John Chesshire, who heads the energy program at England's University of Sussex. "Privatization is losing momentum." 

The U.K. government decided to dismember the water and electricity businesses ahead of denationalization because it failed to break up British Gas PLC and British Telecommunications PLC beforehand.
It sold both of those state monopolies almost intact, sparking sharp criticism that they lacked real competition and customer accountability. 

But polls show Britons strongly oppose selling the 10 water authorities in England and Wales, because they fear higher bills and lower water quality.
An early September survey by NOP Market Research, for instance, showed 72% of respondents disapproved of privatizing the water industryas did 56% of Tory supporters.
Only 4% of those polled said they intended to buy shares in the regional water companies. 

"Increasing awareness about the environment and water quality has made the {privatization} issue much more sensitive," says Paul Batchelor, who runs a London-based privatization-consulting group at the U.S. accounting firm Coopers & Lybrand.
Water, as an essential of life, seems "a very real public service, something that is very dear to Joe Public's heart," concurs one U.K. pollster.
Tories don't need to reverse public sentiment entirely for the water sale to succeed, he adds. "But the problem is they might come out behind the opposition {party} in the opinion polls." 

The government isn't taking any chances.
It's aggressively wooing investors with an estimated #15 million advertising campaign based on the theme: "You can be an H2Owner." English and Welsh officials last month sent promotional letters to 20 million customers, a record for a U.K. privatization.
And for the first time, the government is offering a share-price discount -- of about 8%.
Mrs. Thatcher figures voters will set aside any political misgivings in favor of a tempting quick profit.
She may be right.
By yesterday, more than 2.5 million people had requested applications to buy shares in the new water companies. 

Environmental and competition issues are turning the electricity-industry sale into an equally messy quagmire.
The huge monopoly both generates electricity -- at coal and nuclear-power plants -- and distributes it to England and Wales.
Privatization will create two generating companies, ranking among the world's five biggest private electric utilities, plus a jointly owned transmission company and 12 different distribution companies. 

The government pulled seven aged nuclear-power stations from the proposed sale in late July, because of mounting public concern about the escalating costs of closing them later.
London's financial district and environmentalists now are clamoring to keep the rest of the nuclear facilities in public ownership, too. 

"It would have made so much more sense to remove all the nuclear plants from privatization" last summer, says John Wilson, a U.K. utility analyst at London stockbrokers UBS-Phillips & Drew.
Financial analysts believe many investors may avoid purchasing shares in National Power, the generating company that would inherit the remaining five unreliable and uneconomic nuclear plants.
But dropping them entirely would create another dilemma for Mrs. Thatcher.
Without them, National Power becomes an unjustifiably dominant market force, controlling nearly two-thirds of the generating capacity. 

Critics contend that the Thatcher government already is reneging on its commitment to full-blown competition in privatizing the electric-power industry.
The compromise accepted by her cabinet last month, for instance, allows independent generators to compete freely for just 15% of customers until 1994 and for another 10% between 1994 and 1998.
The industry had wanted such restrictions to last between 10 and 15 years. 

sales, 1979-1988; translated from British pounds at current rate 

