.START 

The court-appointed administrator overseeing the International Brotherhood of Teamsters has criticized the union's leadership for lack of cooperation in his first report to a federal judge. 

In the report, filed last week in federal court in Manhattan, administrator Frederick B. Lacey recounted several instances in which the efforts of three court-appointed officers had been stymied by union officials, in particular James Grady, the union's general counsel. 

Mr. Lacey, a former federal judge and prosecutor in Newark, N.J., and the two other officers were appointed by Judge David Edelstein as part of the union's settlement last spring of civil racketeering charges brought by the U.S. attorney in Manhattan.
In its suit, the government accused the union's leadership of depriving its 1.6 million members of their rights through a pattern of racketeering.
Among other things, the government claimed that organized crime figures had routinely hand-picked top union officials. 

"The events of recent days," wrote Mr. Lacey, "suggest that at least some of the IBT leadership may now believe it is in their own best interests to cooperate as little as possible -- or even not at all -- with the court-appointed officers." 

Mr. Grady and union officials declined to comment.
A union spokesman said, "We'll discuss the matters in court." On Friday there will be a hearing before Judge Edelstein during which Teamsters attorneys and the court-appointed officers will discuss the progress report, said the spokesman. 

Under terms of the settlement, the Teamsters agreed to broad reforms, including election of top officials by the rank and file and oversight for three years by a court-appointed administrator, an investigator and an elections official.
Charles Carberry, a former top federal prosecutor who is now a partner at Jones, Day, Reavis, & Pogue, is investigator.
Michael H. Holland, a partner at the law firm Cornfield & Feldman is elections officer.
In the progress report, Mr. Lacey cites several occasions when, after he and Mr. Grady had reached agreements during meetings, Mr. Grady wrote a letter that "in content and tone was inconsistent with our cordial face-to-face meetings." Following such a letter, Mr. Lacey said he would complain by phone or telecopier about the inconsistency.
Mr. Grady would then apologize, calling it a misunderstanding, according to Mr. Lacey. 

Mr. Lacey said that such misunderstandings were apparently meant "to demonstrate that the IBT leadership, including General President ÕWilliamå McCarthy, were playing it `tough. ' " 

Mr. Lacey complained in his report that the incidents waste time and Teamsters' money. "The latest `misunderstanding' will cost the Teamsters several hundred dollars," wrote Mr. Lacey.
Under the terms of the settlement, the union must pay all expenses related to the officers' oversight. 

Another incident involved Mr. Carberry's request for office space in New York City.
Mr. Grady seemed cooperative in June and most of July, said Mr. Lacey in his report.
But when the time came for the Teamsters to sign the lease in late July, Mr. Grady balked, Mr. Lacey said.
Mr. Grady later offered to furnish space for Mr. Carberry and his investigative staff at Teamsters headquarters in Washington.
Mr. Carberry said the matter is close to being resolved. 

Unresolved is the dispute over Mr. Holland's responsibilities as elections officer and whether the union will pay to hire three members of a support staff, a consultant and a public-relations firm in preparation for next year's democratic elections. "We view this {staffing} as unnecessary and unwarranted," wrote Mr. Grady in a July 26 letter to Mr. Holland. "Further, your duties do not commence in a real sense until the local elections are held in the fall of 1990." 

That letter, said Mr. Lacey in his report, "has given me grave concern about how and in what manner the Teamsters in the future are going to act under the {terms of the settlement.}" 

On Friday, Judge Edelstein will hear both sides in the dispute over Mr. Holland's role. 

