.START 

If California is truly a window on America's tomorrow, the nation's bankers have reason to worry. 

Japanese-owned banks now control about 25% of the banking market in the most populous U.S. state, thanks largely to pricing so razor-thin that American banks have virtually ceded certain types of lending. 

Roger V. Smith, the president of Silicon Valley Bank in Santa Clara, knows all about that.
He tells why his bank has given up calling on local technology companies backed by Japanese investors.
He says that after a sales call on a small company that was sagging financially but had Japanese backing, his bank would have offered a loan at three percentage points over the prime rate, the benchmark for commercial loans.
But a Japanese bank made the loan at the incredibly low rate of 0.25 percentage point over the federal funds rate, the far-lower rate that banks charge each other for loans. 

Stunned by such incidents, Mr. Smith says "it's a waste of time" to seek similar companies' business. "If a Japanese company is in on a deal, there is a different price." 

Moreover, Japanese banks are making inroads all across the U.S.
In Providence, R.I., Terry Murray, the chairman of Fleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc., says he was shocked when his company went shopping for letters of credit -- basically, bank guarantees of payment -- for some of its nonbanking subsidiaries.
Japanese banks offered letters of credit for a fee only about a quarter as much as what U.S. banks were charging. 

Some bankers wouldn't be surprised to see Japanese banks capture 25% of the U.S. commercial-loan market by the mid-1990s.
In six years, Japanese banks have come from nowhere to become the leading providers of letters of credit for U.S. municipal bonds.
Last year, foreign banks, mainly Japanese, provided letters of credit for $12 billion in municipal-bond offerings -- 69% of the market. 

"The Japanese are absolutely running circles around us," Mr. Murray says. 

American banks also are suffering from more than pricing problems.
Compared with most of their major competitors, U.S. banks are hobbled by structural impediments that include barriers to forming national networks, rigorous reporting requirements and disadvantageous tax and accounting standards.
And they are hurt by some self-inflicted wounds. 

But the message is unmistakable: U.S. banks, once riding high in global finance, are losing their grip on the nation's and the world's credit reins. 

More than 260 foreign banks are operating in the U.S., and their slice of the domestic banking pie has grown to more than 21% from 14% in 1982.
At the same time, U.S. banks are retreating from the international arena.
Among major industrialized nations' banks, only U.S. banks now have fewer cross-border assets, chiefly loans and securities, than they did in 1983; such assets now total $102 billion.
In contrast, Japanese banks have increased their international assets fourfold to $129 billion. 

"Clearly, the U.S. has lost and continues to lose position globally," says Willard C. Butcher, the chairman of Chase Manhattan Corp., the parent of the second-largest U.S. bank.
Guido Schmidt-Chiari, the chairman of Austria's Creditanstalt, agrees. "American banks are definitely losing importance," he says. "Just look at how Bank of America, Chemical and others have retreated from Europe." 

More is at stake in U.S. banks' slippage than mere national pride.
In a financial crisis, control of credit often determines the outcome.
On Oct. 19, 1987, when the stock market crashed, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York leaned on New York banks to meet the cash needs of Wall Street firms.
The banks generally responded, and a national economic calamity was narrowly averted. 

But would the banks have acted as quickly if the final decisions had rested in Tokyo or London?
It's hard to say. 

"In a credit crunch," Citicorp Chairman John S. Reed warns, "financial institutions would be faced with a choice: Which customers do you take care of?
In such a situation, banks would have a natural bias toward their hometown players." 

And a credit crunch is always possible. "If Eastern Europe and the Soviets were to open up to Western investment," Mr. Reed adds, "it would absorb immense amounts of capital.
It's in this country's national interest to have four or five American international banks.
At best, we now have one or two players." 

H. Robert Heller, a former Federal Reserve governor, echoes that view: "American business isn't being served by U.S. financial institutions on a global basis.
American business is directly affected by this.
They don't have the support of their hometown bank in promoting their exports." 

American banks certainly aren't out of the game already.
They still lead in devising new financial products, such as commodity swaps to insulate buyers and sellers against future price swings, and in turning various loans, ranging from creditcard receivables to boat loans, into securities and selling them to investors.
They operate out of a huge domestic market; the dollar is the world's major reserve currency, and English is the world's language of business.
And though only Citibank ranks among the world's top 20 banks in assets, it is the world's most profitable; J.P. Morgan & Co. also ranks high in profitability. 

But the slippage of U.S. banks is real.
To a great extent, it is an inevitable consequence of America's huge trade deficit and low savings rate. "I view Japan to capital as I view Saudi Arabia to oil," Mr. Reed says. 

U.S. banks also have themselves to blame.
Until recently, they have been running on slimmer and slimmer capital bases ever since the Civil War.
Now, faced with higher capital requirements imposed by the Bank for International Settlements, many of them can't afford to be patient investors in new businesses; so, they are selling assets.
Manufacturers Hanover Corp. agreed to sell 60% of its CIT Group Inc. to Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. for $1.28 billion.
BankAmerica Corp. sold its Italian subsidiary to Germany's Deutsche Bank AG for $600 million.
And Chase Manhattan sold Nederlandse Credietbank, the sixth-largest Dutch bank, to France's Credit Lyonnais. 

In addition, U.S. banks' $60 billion of troubled Third World loans are dragging down their earnings and raising their cost of capital.
Yoshihisa Tabuchi, the chief executive of Japan's Nomura Securities Co., says: "The reason American banks are having such trouble is because they didn't observe the basic principles.
The Latin American debt problem came from their side; they forgot the principles of sound management; the S&L difficulty is the same." Adds Hans-Ulrich Doerig, Zurich-based member of the managing board of Credit Suisse, "Americans always act on fashion, a fad; they want to be with it." 

U.S. banks also have been burned by scores of poorly planned acquisitions.
In London, U.S. banks, including Citicorp and Chase Manhattan, paid top dollar for British securities firms, only to see cutthroat competition, in the wake of deregulation of British financial markets, wipe out profits.
Just weeks ago, Chase became the latest U.S. institution to flee the British government bond market. 

And legal barriers preventing U.S. banks from establishing interstate networks and offering securities and insurance products have hampered competitiveness, especially vis-a-vis European banks.
The U.S. has long distrusted concentrations of power -- a populism that may have served a frontier nation well but is a handicap in a global economy. "Our banking system is an antique," says Christopher L. Snyder Jr., the president of Loan Pricing Corp., which sells data on commercial loans. 

