.START 

A Fig Leaf a Day 

Keeps the Doctor Away 

CHIMPS discover a powerful antibiotic, say amazed human scientists. 

It may sound like a headline from a supermarket tabloid, but it's true.
The chimps' discovery was brought to light by Richard Wrangham, a Harvard University anthropologist who studies the behavior of African chimpanzees and other animals in the wild. 

Years ago he noticed an odd chimp behavior -- the animals occasionally picked leaves off a certain plant, then swallowed them whole.
Examination of the animals' droppings showed the leaves weren't digested, suggesting they weren't eaten for nutrition. "The idea finally hit me that the chimps were taking medicine," says Mr. Wrangham. 

How they learned to do that is a mystery.
But why they do it was clarified in 1985 when Mr. Wrangham asked Eloy Rodriguez, a biochemist at the University of California at Irvine, to analyze the leaves, which are from a plant called Aspilia.
Sure enough, they were found to contain a chemical that, in test-tube studies, kills certain worms, fungi and shows "some activity against viruses," says Mr. Rodriguez.
Recently the scientists identified another probable chimp medicine -- young fig leaves, in which they found a substance previously known as a remedy for psoriasis and other skin disorders. 

Several drug companies are interested, says Mr. Rodriguez, but the potential for human medicines remains uncertain.
The most likely near-term benefit from the research is the use of the plants as remedies for farm animals in the Third World, he adds. 

Biodegradable Traps 

To Boost Lobster Catch 

MANY LOBSTERS are alive and well and living in lost traps, say University of Maine researchers.
During the past two years, the scientists have studied "ghost lobster traps" -- lost ones that sit on the ocean floor after lines to them are severed by storms, passing boats and other strains.
The contraptions, these days made of plastic-coated wire, can snare lobsters for a decade or more when lost.
That lessens the lobster catch and, more seriously, has been thought to take crucial breeding lobsters out of action. 

The researchers estimate that as many as 50,000 traps are lost annually by Maine lobstermen alone.
Only an estimated 20% of lobsters wandering into them escape the traps' "kitchens," or entrances, and fewer still get out of the "parlors," or main compartments. "Every time I've come across a ghost trap when diving, there's been a lobster in it," says George Kupelian, a graduate student and the study's coordinator. 

Using underwater videocameras, the scientists have found that lobsters trapped in the ghosts stay alive by eating mostly fish and crabs that come into the traps.
That's important because it indicates traps with biodegradable panels that corrode away after a few months underwater would effectively prevent loss of lobsters.
The study may help persuade lobstermen to abide by a Maine law that will require use of such traps beginning next year. 

The study also exploded a myth -- that cannibalism is rife among trapped lobsters, worsening the lobster losses.
In fact, trapped lobsters eat each other only rarely, such as after molting when they are soft and vulnerable, researchers found. 

Scientists Doubt Claim 

On Superconductivity 

RESEARCHERS have reported a new superconductor temperature breakthrough, but few scientists are buying it. 

The report, by Wayne State University researchers, follows a rash of similar claims two years ago -- including one from Wayne State, in Detroit -- that couldn't be duplicated.
Now scientists treat such reports as if they were claims of little green men landing in Kansas. 

But the Wayne State group asserts its finding differs from the earlier ones.
The scientists, who are collaborating with Ford Motor Co., say a yttrium-containing compound that they made repeatedly lost electrical resistance -- the hallmark of superconductivity -- in tests over 11 days at temperatures above minus 64 degrees Fahrenheit. "To the best of our ability, we think we have checked" all sources of error and ruled them out, says Wayne State physicist Lowell Wenger. 

If confirmed, the finding would be a major leap for superconductivity, which promises better computers and other electrical devices.
The highest temperature now known for the phenomenon is minus 234 degrees Fahrenheit. 

At least two groups, at the University of Houston and Princeton University, are trying to replicate the Wayne State experiment.
Confirmation will be hard, though the compounds are made in pure oxygen at high pressures and only 30% to 40% of samples work in tests so far, says Mr. Wenger.
Meanwhile, most superconductor researchers say they have better things to do. "We still look askance" at such claims, says Gregory Yurek, president of American Superconductor Corp., a Cambridge, Mass., start-up. 

Odds and Ends 

CLAUSTROPHOBIC patients often freak out in MRI scanners, which confine people in a coffin-sized space while taking pictures of internal organs.
So hospitals increasingly outfit patients with special glasses and mirrors to fill their vision with outdoor pictures while in the machines, says the American Hospital Association. . . . Boston researchers hope soon to begin clinical tests with a cow-blood extract as a temporary substitute for human red-blood cells.
Biopure Corp., which is developing the substitute, also plans to sell it for dogs and cats. 

