.START 

The West German government is becoming convinced that Erich Honecker, the ailing East German leader, is likely to resign or be removed from office soon. 

According to a senior aide to West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who asked not to be identified, the 77-year-old East German Communist party chief has cancer.
Mr. Honecker was twice hospitalized this summer with a gall bladder ailment, and his physical condition has been the subject of intense speculation in the Western media. 

However, the cancer, confirmed by West German intelligence through sources in East Germany, doesn't appear to be immediately life-threatening, the aide said.
Hence, political factors in East Germany appear decisive in determining how much longer Mr. Honecker stays in power. 

The aide and several other government sources in Bonn said that while Mr. Honecker could be forced to resign within days, he also could remain in office until December, when the 163-member Central Committee of the ruling Communist Party holds its semiannual strategy meeting.
Some East German officials have hinted that this gathering could be used as an occasion for outlining future reforms. 

"Honecker is on his way out," says Bernard von Plate, a specialist on East Germany at the Research Institute for International Politics and Security, a West German think tank near Munich.
The question now, he says, is who would replace Mr. Honecker and what this may mean for the pace of political reform. 

The confusion over Mr. Honecker's status reflects the general state of affairs in East Germany.
For months the government seemed paralyzed as thousands of East German citizens fled via Hungary's newly opened border with Austria.
Thousands more have gained passage by occupying West German diplomatic missions in Prague and Warsaw. 

The crisis entered a new stage last week when the government shook off its paralysis and moved forcefully against protesters who demanded democratic freedoms.
Since then, there have been suggestions of a possible easing of the government's stance amid mounting criticism of Mr. Honecker.
It's still not clear to what extent that criticism is originating from within the ruling Politburo.
During his 18 years as East German leader, Mr. Honecker has kept a hammerlock on power by loading the ruling Politburo with like-minded Stalinists.
These officials, most of them elderly, are still in place.
The move toward change, analysts say, so far appears to be concentrated at the lower levels of the party hierarchy and in areas outside the firm grasp of central authorities in East Berlin. 

The recent protests, for example, were concentrated in the cities of Dresden and Leipzig, and it is in these places that local officials have shown greater willingness to talk to the demonstrators. 

West German Defense Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg told reporters in Washington Wednesday that it is "inconceivable" for East Germany to stay as it is in view of the changes now sweeping through the Soviet Union, Poland, and Hungary. 

The East German leader is also feeling growing pressure from his allies in Moscow.
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev visited East Berlin last weekend to help celebrate East Germany's 40th birthday.
According to the senior aide to Chancellor Kohl, Mr. Gorbachev in his private meetings with Mr. Honecker pressed hard for changes and for a more tolerant view toward the demonstrators. 

But the Soviets appear frustrated by the situation in East Germany.
Vyacheslav Dashitchev, an adviser to Mr. Gorbachev, said during a broadcast on West German television Wednesday he didn't think changes under the current East German regime were possible.
He added, however, that the successors to Mr. Honecker would be from the younger generation and it would be up to them to transform the society. 

West German officials say they do not expect sudden moves toward reform in East Germany.
More likely, they say, is that Mr. Honecker or his successors will start a dialogue with the fragmented opposition groups aimed at developing reform proposals for next May's Communist Party congress. 

