.START 

Sony Corp. plans to name CBS Records President Walter Yetnikoff chairman of a new entertainment committee that will oversee both the record unit and Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. 

Sony recently agreed to pay $3.4 billion for Columbia, and another $200 million to buy Guber Peters Entertainment Co., a television and movie company.
Sony named that company's co-chief executive, Peter Guber, to be chief executive and co-chairman of Columbia; his partner, Jon Peters, will serve as the other co-chairman of Columbia. 

In a telephone interview yesterday, Mr. Yetnikoff said the committee would have "overall supervisory responsibility" for the movie studio.
But he stressed that Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters, who also will be on the entertainment committee, will be in command at Columbia. "Music and movies will report to me, but that doesn't mean I'm running movies," Mr. Yetnikoff said. "Obviously, they know the movie business and I don't." 

Mr. Yetnikoff, who was head of CBS Records when Sony purchased it three years ago for $2 billion from CBS Inc., is a colorful, outspoken executive whom Sony generally has left alone to run CBS Records.
It was Mr. Yetnikoff who approached Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters on Sony's behalf, and introduced them to Sony Corp. of America Vice Chairman Michael Schulof.
Mr. Schulof will also serve on the entertainment committee, which is expected to have seven or eight members from the movie studio and record company. 

Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters haven't been available to comment on what other management moves will be made at Columbia, but studio president Dawn Steel is expected to remain in her post under the two executives.
It isn't clear whether Ms. Steel would be asked to serve on the entertainment committee. 

Meanwhile, Sony and Guber Peters executives are continuing negotiations with Warner Communications Inc. in an attempt to extricate the two producers from a five-year contract that requires them to make movies exclusively for Warner.
Sony earlier this week said it will go ahead with its acquisition of Guber Peters even if the Warner contract isn't settled.
Initially, Sony had said it wouldn't complete the purchase of Guber Peters unless the matter was resolved.
Warner is in the process of being acquired by Time Warner Inc. 

Warner has declined to comment on the talks, but the company is taking a tough stance on the Guber Peters contract and has threatened to file suit against both Sony and Guber Peters.
Among other things, Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters produced "Batman" for Warner. 

