.START 

ESOPs Offer an Option 

For Retiree Health Plans 

COMPANIES worried about skyrocketing health costs for retirees might consider phasing out their retiree insurance program and phasing in an employee stock ownership plan. 

That's what Boise Cascade Corp., Ralston Purina Co. and Whitman Corp. are doing.
Here's how it works: Instead of the company paying retirees' health bills, employees receive preferred stock during their working years.
When they retire, they can use the proceeds to buy company-arranged group health insurance. 

The big catch: There's no guarantee that the stock will generate enough money to pay retirees' insurance premiums.
But that's part of the idea.
The employees take the risk -- not the company. 

Of course, ESOPs aren't designed simply to reduce health costs.
Among other things, they can make hostile takeovers harder by putting blocks of stock in relatively friendly hands.
Still, Boise, Ralston and Whitman all say that proposed changes in accounting rules for retiree health costs were a catalyst to action. 

Currently, companies account for such outlays as they are paid.
But under the changes, proposed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board to go into effect in 1992, companies will have to deduct in current years what they expect to pay for health benefits when employees retire.
That is expected to cause substantial damage to bottom lines unless companies take action.
An ESOP, on the other hand, provides tax benefits to the company. 

ESOPs are "a technique to deal with tomorrow's problem today," says James Geld, a principal at William M. Mercer Meidinger Hansen Inc., a benefits-consulting firm.
Companies might want to hurry, though.
Congress is taking a serious look at removing tax benefits for ESOPs, which could cool corporate enthusiasm for using the technique. 

New Tests May Show 

If Cancer Drugs Work 

SOME PHYSICIANS report encouraging results with controversial new tests that determine the effectiveness of chemotherapy drugs. 

The $800 tests, developed by Irvine, Calif. 's Oncotech Inc., are designed mainly to identify chemotherapy drugs that won't work, says Paul Kanan, chief executive officer.
But they also give some indication of which drugs will shrink tumors, he says. 

Richard Nalick, director of gynecologic oncology at Good Samaritan Hospital in Los Angeles, says he uses the assays to rule out the use of certain drugs for patients with ovarian cancers.
That can save thousands of dollars in hospital and doctor bills and avoid horrible side effects for patients who would have been treated with highly toxic drugs. 

Some experts, however, are skeptical.
Tests for cancer drugs have been around for years and none has been found highly effective, says Daniel Von Hoff, director of research at the University of Texas Cancer Therapy and Research Center in San Antonio.
The Oncotech assays still haven't been proven effective in rigorous clinical trials, he says. 

Still, some physicians using the Oncotech tests expect them to become more widely accepted soon.
Says Naren Kapadia, a medical oncologist in Waukegan, Ill.: "I think it's going to be the way of life in the next five years." 

Family Members Paid 

To Provide Home Care 

TO CONTAIN the cost of caring for AIDS patients, John Alden Life Insurance Co. is taking a novel approach. 

The insurer is paying family members and friends as much as $15 an hour to care for people with acquired immune deficiency syndrome at home, according to the plan's administrator.
The program soon will cover patients with any chronic or life-threatening disease, such as cancer. 

The Miami-based carrier is waiving a standard provision in insurance contracts that bars payments to family members and friends providing home care. 

This is believed to be the "first exception that's ever been made to pay a family member to do anything," says Gordon Nary, executive director of Chicago-based AIDS Medical Resource Center, which administers the program for John Alden. "Paying a family member is a very inexpensive way of keeping people out of a hospital." John Alden also pays homemakers to cook for these homebound patients and helps pay for experimental drugs. 

Insurers have shied from such programs, fearing family members would submit inflated bills.
John Alden, however, has work schedules approved in advance by case managers. 

Hospitals Slow to Put 

Computers in Wards 

HOSPITALS have been slow to adopt one seemingly sure-fire cost-control method: computerizing medical records and other clinical data. 

While most have installed computers to handle financial affairs, few have extended systems into patient wards, says Margret Amatayakul, associate executive director of the American Medical Records Association.
One big problem: With price tags of $6 million to $8 million on computer systems, many hospitals simply can't afford to computerize. 

Moreover, some are leery because computers apparently haven't saved other institutions much money.
But in many of those instances, industry observers say, hospitals haven't had the stomach to cut staff after installing a system. 

But, at LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City, which has one of the most advanced computer systems in the country, Bette Maack, director of the medical records department, says, "We all agree that {the computer system} is saving money in many ways." en 

