.START 

A top Chrysler Corp. official said that the auto maker just about broke even on operations during the third quarter, an estimate that surprised some analysts. 

Most Wall Street analysts had estimated that Chrysler's third-quarter earnings fell to about $58 million, or 25 cents a share, from $112.5 million, or 50 cents a share, a year earlier.
But Chrysler Chief Financial Officer Robert S. Miller Jr. told a group of bankers in Frankfurt, West Germany, that, excluding an expected $1.33-a-share gain from the sale of 45% of the company's holdings in Mitsubishi Motors Corp., "I doubt we did much better than break even." Mr. Miller added that fourth-quarter earnings will depend "on how severe the discounts" are in the U.S. market.
Chrysler is already offering rebates of as much as $2,000 on some 1990-model vehicles.
A Chrysler spokesman confirmed Mr. Miller's remarks. 

Yesterday, Chrysler stock closed at $24, down 62.5 cents, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

Analysts said Chrysler's estimate was lower than expected, but not a total shock in light of the intense competition in the U.S. auto market and the relative volatility of earnings in a quarter when the Big Three auto makers traditionally have their highest expenses and weakest revenues. 

Still, Chrysler's earnings estimate highlight the vulnerability of the No. 3 U.S. auto maker at a time when Japanese auto makers are gearing up for another major assault on the U.S. market. 

Chrysler, like Ford Motor Co., General Motors Corp. and some Japanese auto makers, spent heavily on rebates and other incentives to boost sales during the third quarter.
Chrysler also cut U.S. vehicle production during the quarter to trim bulging inventories. 

Analysts estimate that the combination of big rebates and sharp production cuts pushed the North American auto operations of each of the Big Three into the red during the July-September quarter. 

But while GM and Ford have extensive overseas auto operations and non-automotive businesses to offset losses in their North American vehicle operations, Chrysler depends on its North American auto business for the bulk of its earnings. "They just don't have the resources" the other auto makers have, said Smith, Barney, Harris Upham Co. analyst Wendy Beale Needham. 

Chrysler also may have hurt itself by overspending in its effort to maintain market share during the quarter, some analysts said yesterday. 

"They could have gotten away with {lower} rebates," said Morgan Stanley analyst Scott Merlis. "A lot of Chrysler models have 20 days of inventory or less.
So a $1,500 rebate could have been a $750 rebate." A 60-day to 65-day supply of unsold cars is considered normal. 

Other analysts said they were confused by the way the company chose to break the news of the earnings disappointment. 

"Why would Steve Miller make a statement like this in Germany?" asked PaineWebber analyst Ann Knight.
Ms. Knight said it wasn't immediately clear to her whether Mr. Miller was referring to Chrysler's overall earnings, or just its North American automotive operations.
When she was unable to get clarification from Chrysler officials, she made an unusual announcement to traders over PaineWebber's in-house public address system, telling them that if Chrysler did no better than break-even overall, "it will be an unpleasantly surprising short-term {event} but my neutral rating {on the stock} is unchanged." 

Through the first half of this year, Chrysler earned $692 million, or $2.96 a share, compared with $504 million, or $2.27 a share, a year earlier.
Now, some analysts said they will cut their estimates for Chrysler's full-year profit.
Chrysler earned $1.05 billion, or $4.66 a share, in 1988, and the consensus among analysts had been that earnings for 1989 would be roughly flat. 

"This would indicate that my fourth-quarter number of $1.20 a share is too high," said Ms. Needham. "I had $4.35 for the year.
I might be in the $3.75 range" after revising the forecast, she said. 

