.START 

In his thoughtful new book, "Judicial Compulsions: How Public Law Distorts Public Policy" (Basic, 322 pages, $22.95), Jeremy Rabkin takes us into the entangled world of judicial activists, partisan judges, federal regulators and litigious special interest groups.
His topic is administrative law, but the bad news the professor from Cornell brings to us from this front is equally applicable to such other areas as criminal law, malpractice and product liability.
In all these fields, judges have taken much of the formation of public policy out of the hands of elected representatives and those accountable to them.
The result not only produces government of dubious legitimacy but consequences that often have been perverse. 

Administrative law is not high on the list of fascinating subjects for most people.
The very words "administrative law" sound dry and dusty.
Often enough when pondering whether Section 7(b)(3) can be reconciled with 4(a)(17), both of Title III of the Clean Sludge Act of 1983, I have had occasion to reflect on the adage that working in the law is like eating sawdust without butter.
Mr. Rabkin has eaten the requisite amount of sawdust but he spares his readers and places administrative law in its larger policy and constitutional contexts.
Judicial review of regulatory decisions often determines the success or failure of crucial national policies regarding clean air and water, nuclear safety, safe work places, equality of the races and sexes, and so on through the seemingly endless programs that Congress has outlined but left to regulators and courts to flesh out. 

Mr. Rabkin demonstrates that in this area courts have, largely unthinkingly, and with considerable assistance from Congress, perverted the concept of rights.
These were once thought to be something the individual possessed and could defend in court.
But the individual had to show an injury to himself.
These last two decades, it has come to be thought that individuals can go to court to assert their own parochial views of the public's legal rights. 

This is contrary to the traditional rule that a citizen cannot sue a prosecutor to require him to enforce law in a particular way, or even to enforce a law at all.
Courts recognize "prosecutorial discretion," which means that important aspects of policy are left in the hands of executive-branch officials who are accountable only to their superiors and to legislative oversight.
Modern administrative law, however, has lost this constitutional perspective and allows private lawsuits to control agencies' enforcement discretion.
This necessarily shifts important segments of policy-making from those politically accountable to private persons and courts. 

In "Judicial Compulsions," Mr. Rabkin examines three agencies whose priorities have been distorted as a result.
The Office for Civil Rights, for example, enforced laws dealing with discrimination in federally funded programs.
The NAACP Legal Defense Fund sued, claiming that OCR had a neglected duty to ensure racial balance in public schools by requiring that students be assigned by race.
This was a long step beyond the existing ban on intentional racial segregation, and it was something the law's sponsors had said was not required.
The named plaintiffs were not shown to have been hurt by the alleged agency "default." The suit was a demand for a particular social policy, and one not necessarily wanted by the millions of people, black and white, whose rights were supposedly being vindicated. 

Confused and complex litigation proceeded for almost 20 years as other groups made claims and judges responded piecemeal.
The perspective fostered by litigation rarely provides an overall understanding of the best public policies, the tradeoffs between them, or the best allocation of resources.
Ultimately, OCR devoted less than 10% of its resources to discrimination against blacks, while women got one third and the handicapped more than half.
Why?
Because the largest portion of complaints regarding discrimination was brought by middle-class parents seeking more extensive support services for their handicapped children.
Litigation ended up diverting almost all of OCR's efforts away from the primary problem for which the agency had been established.
Public law had perverted public policy. 

Mr. Rabkin assigns the blame to "a disoriented legal culture," reflecting "not simply the obfuscations of visionary law professors or the confusions of impulsive judges, but the underlying ambivalence in modern American liberalism." We have created "increasingly large government programs capable of rearranging society to serve consciously formulated plans, while at the same time seeking to accommodate deep-rooted suspicions . . . of centralized administrative power." The result has been to allow persons not harmed by regulation to litigate abstract policy.
In a subversion of legal traditions, outcomes often are determined by the policy preferences of judges and ideological litigants rather than by those of Congress and the president.
As Mr. Rabkin's lucid book reminds us, the implications of this go far beyond administrative law, touching the very cornerstone of constitutional government. 

Mr. Bork is the John M. Olin scholar in legal studies at the American Enterprise Institute. 

