.START 

Ford Motor Co. said it signed a memorandum of understanding with a group of investors led by Pittsburgh businessman Carl L. Valdiserri to sell its Rouge Steel operations. 

The auto maker declined to disclose the amount it would receive in the transaction and underscored that a final agreement hasn't been reached yet.
Peter J. Pestillo, Ford's vice president of employee and external affairs, said at a news conference that Ford normally wouldn't have made an announcement at this stage of negotiations, but that news of the possible sale had leaked to the public. 

Yesterday's announcement ended months of speculation that Ford would unload the steel producing operation which has been the cornerstone of its expansive River Rouge manufacturing complex here.
Ford wants to sell the facility because it doesn't want to pay modernization costs, which it estimates will total $100 million annually for "several years." Rouge Steel began operations in 1923. 

Rouge Steel turned a modest annual profit last year for the first time in this decade, Ford said. 

The memorandum calls for Ford to sell the unit to Marico Acquisition Co., an entity created solely to own Rouge Steel.
Marico would consist of a group of equity partners, including Mr. Valdiserri, the retired chief operating officer of Wierton Steel, Ford and two unnamed businesses. 

One of the unnamed partners is a steel fabrication entity and the other isn't in the steel business, Ford said.
The auto maker wouldn't say how the equity interests would be divided among the partners, but expressed hope that the transaction would be completed by year end. 

Ford has long wanted to sell the facility but has been pressured to keep it by the United Auto Workers union, which represents about 3,300 workers at the plant.
In May, union officials said Ford was discussing selling the facility to an Ohio manufacturing firm.
But Ford declined to confirm or deny any negotiations and a sale never materialized. 

In 1982, the auto maker entered talks to sell Rouge Steel to a Japanese steel producer, but those talks also ended unsuccessfully. 

Mr. Pestillo said he's uncertain whether Ford is contractually obligated to gain UAW approval to complete the sale.
But, he added, "in any event, we want to do it in a way that is satisfactory to employees." The contract between Ford and the UAW expires next September. 

UAW officials, surprised by the announcement, declined comment. 

Ford said it intends to purchase 40% of its U.S. and Canadian steel requirements, or about 800,000 tons annually, from Rouge Steel for the next 10 years.
That's about the amount Ford currently purchases from Rouge Steel.
The steel fabricating partner will purchase about 700,000 tons of steel annually from the entity.
Rouge Steel produces about 2.3 million tons of steel a year. 

Meanwhile, in a matter unrelated to the transaction, Ford said due to "market conditions," including slower auto production schedules, it will cut back production at Rouge Steel in the near future.
The cutback will result in about 50 layoffs. 

