.START 

Gibbons, Green van Amerongen Ltd., a leveraged buy-out firm, is sailing into rough waters. 

Two recent buy-outs engineered by the firm, once the third largest buy-out boutique, have encountered financial snags.
And those snags have emerged less than six months after the departure of one of its founding partners, Leonard Green. 

The problems at Gibbons Green may be another sign that the heady days of the buy-out business are waning and that some of its second-tier players may not emerge untarnished. 

Last month, Gibbons Green flopped in an attempt to refinance a $450 million bridge loan for its $980 milllion buy-out of Ohio Mattress Corp.
The deal was one of the first victims of a slump in the junk-bond market, the financial underpinning of many leveraged buy-outs, in the wake of a liquidity crunch at Campeau Corp. 

Yesterday, it was disclosed that Sheller-Globe Corp., which Gibbons, Green purchased last December for $240 million in a joint venture with United Technologies Corp., "has experienced difficulties in funding its working capital requirements." 

In a formal offer to repurchase outstanding Sheller-Globe notes, United Technologies said the difficulty arose "primarily because of possible misrepresentations about Sheller-Globe that may have been made" at the time of the buy-out.
Earlier this month, Gibbons Green sold its interest in Sheller-Globe to United Technologies. 

Laurie Shahon, a managing director of Knoll International Holdings Inc., which sold Sheller-Globe, a car-parts business, denied any misrepresentation, describing the matter as a "routine accounting dispute." United Technologies declined to elaborate. 

In an interview, Mr. Green said the two buy-outs, which he wasn't involved in, were "part of a pattern of philosophical differences" that prompted his departure, announced on May 4.
He is in the process of raising his own fund of about $300 million.
Mr. Green, now head of Leonard Green & Partners in Los Angeles, said he favored buying companies that aren't subject to cyclical fluctuations, and which have a favorable "price-valuation" relatonship. 

A spokesman for Gibbons Green declined to comment and said its partners, Edward Gibbons and Lewis M. van Amerongen, weren't available to comment.
However, the problems of the two buy-outs could hurt investors' returns, which Gibbons Green has claimed have totaled 86% annually.
The firm has done 30 buy-outs totaling $6.5 billion in value. 

Some investment bankers said that although each of the two transactions has different problems, Gibbons Green apparently paid a steep price for both companies.
One said he believes that two funds managed by Gibbons Green invested about $50 million for a 46% stake in Sheller-Globe, and lost a substantial part of that investment when it sold the stake to United Technologies for less than it paid. 

Gibbons, Green might recover some of the money if it succeeds in any claim against Knoll. 

This week, Gibbons Green sent letters to investors in its buy-out fund detailing its latest problems with Sheller-Globe, and the firm's planned remedies. "My sense is that they certainly have their work cut out for them, and they're taking steps to rectify the situation," said Scott Sperling, a partner for Harvard University's endowment arm, a Gibbons Green investor. 

According to Securities Data Corp., the firm's other big buy-outs have included: Bath Iron Works Corp. for $500 million; Horace Mann Cos. for $484 million; Foodmaker Inc. for $476.3 million; and Budget Rent-A-Car Corp. for $333 million.
Like other funds, Gibbons, Green keeps 20% of profits from its deals, and charges an annual management fee of 1% to 2% of the money in the fund. 

If the bridge loan for the Ohio Mattress buy-out isn't refinanced soon, the pain is likely to be greater for Gibbons Green than for First Boston Corp., the lender.
Under terms of most bridge loans, the lender gradually assumes more control of the borrowing company if the loan remains unpaid for very long. 

