.START 

The lower wages and labor force participation rates of the disabled are often attributed to their diminished ability to work.
I believe that this explanation ignores an important and neglected dimension -- namely, that disability steals time.
Disabled people need, on average, more hours per day for sleep and personal care, are more likely to be incapacitated by illness (meaning more sick days a year) and have shorter life expectancies (meaning fewer potential working years in a lifetime). 

The U.S.'s disability policies are mainly directed at providing services to restore the individual's health or to supply training that would maximize the capacity to use the remaining, smaller, stock of health capital.
In the past decade, these initiatives have been understood as helping the disabled toward independence: control of their own lives, and participation in the activities and markets open to the non-disabled. 

The Americans With Disabilities bill under consideration by Congress tries to help the disabled by granting them rights to jobs, workplace accommodation and access to public places and services.
But the disabled cannot have it both ways.
They cannot both demand independence and insist upon rights to equal job opportunities, equal access to services and more equal incomes when the social costs of those rights are imposed upon the general public.
In order to enforce the rights granted under the bill, disabled people will have to turn to lawyers and regulators, because the enforcement process promises to be a litigious one. 

Broadly defined rights, enforced by a combination of civil lawsuits and regulations, can easily be confused with entitlements.
Entitlements can transform a poorly defined target population -- we cannot precisely identify the fuzzy boundaries that define the disabled -- into a cohesive, articulate and vocal minority, dependent on the federal government for its continued well-being.
In order to enforce their rights, disabled people will have to turn to lawyers and regulators.
More and more people will identify themselves as disabled, and more resources will be allocated to litigation and regulation.
Charles Murray may get another opportunity to test his "Losing Ground" model. 

Mr. Oi teaches economics at the University of Rochester.
He is blind. 

(See related editorial: "Toward More Crippling Lawsuits..." -- WSJ Oct. 13, 1989) 

