.START 

Lockheed Corp. 's $32 million third-quarter net loss, brought on by $165 million in charges from cost overruns on fixed-price development contracts, is bound to be only the first in a symphony of sour notes for aerospace companies. 

Many more airplane makers, their profit levels plunging for the past few periods, again are likely to post meager results due to increased expenses on fixed-price accords with the military. 

Yesterday, Lockheed reported its 50-cent-a-share loss versus net income of $300 million, or $5.06 a share, a year earlier.
The year-ago figures include a one-time gain from discontinued operations of $177 million.
Sales decreased to $2.1 billion from $2.3 billion. 

"Once one company signals it's taking write-offs, it provides the impetus for others to do it now, rather than later," says Lawrence Harris, an analyst with Bateman Eichler, Hill Richards Inc. 

He notes that some companies may be especially eager to take loss provisions for the three months ended Sept. 30 because Lockheed's stock price has remained relatively steady since the Calabasas, Calif., concern first disclosed its intention last week to take the charges. (Some of that, though, is attributable to takeover speculation spurred by Dallas investor Harold Simmons's 10.43% stake in Lockheed.) 

Surely, some companies will demonstrate improvement for the quarter.
Martin Marietta Corp. and General Dynamics Corp., which in the past has been hampered by strife at its electric boat division, should both report slight year-to-year gains.
And defense electronics companies such as Raytheon Co., E-Systems Inc. and Loral Corp. -- inured to federal budget cuts because of the diversity of their projects and growing opportunities overseas -- "are better off than the metal-benders," says Gary Reich, of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. 

But besides Lockheed -- which chalked up its deficit to problems in manufacturing the wings on the Air Force C-17 cargo plane and in modifying the Navy's EP-3E reconnaissance aircraft -- Northrop Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. are also candidates for write-downs, analysts say. 

In a fixed-price development contract, the company locks itself in at what it thinks it will take to bring a particular weapons system into production.
If there are engineering changes or other hitches along the way, as there nearly always are, the company almost always swallows the extra cost. 

"The idea of eliminating the customer's risk and putting it totally on the supplier is a zero-sum game," asserts Donald H. White, president of General Motors Corp. 's giant Hughes Aircraft Co. unit. "There is no way to win." 

Los Angeles-based Northrop already has taken several adjustments on classified programs, and Mr. Harris says he doesn't "think we've seen the last of that." Meanwhile, St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas, which last quarter took a $72 million charge to reflect problems on the C-17, is also having troubles with the T-45 Navy training jet; the company recently told analysts that it is potentially liable for all or part of the cost of two major fixes on the program and that it is presently booking zero profit on the contract due to overruns. 

At this point, though, it's anybody's guess whether any special items will be recorded in the third quarter or later instead. "It's a crap shoot, pure and simple," Mr. Reich says, pointing out that Lynch, Jones & Ryan's brokerage-by-brokerage snapshot of analysts' earnings estimates shows wide-ranging predictions for most Pentagon contractors.
But, he hastens to add: "We should never be surprised by a write-off.
We should always expect some of these to be coming." 

Eventually, the fixed-price squeeze will ease.
Top Pentagon officials for some time "have indicated a lot of sympathy for the industry," says Barry Blechman, president of Defense Forecast Inc., a Washington research firm.
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and, in particular, Deputy Secretary Donald Atwood have promised "to bring some relief" by preventing the further proliferation of these contracts. 

But enough fixed-price arrangements are already signed and sealed to keep aerospace executives in an uproar.
Lockheed has sworn off bidding on all such pacts in the future.
Northrop, at its annual meeting earlier this year, said it passed over 14 programs in 1988 because of the "unsatisfactory terms and conditions" offered by the government. 

"It's fair to say that we're going to feel the impact of these contracts for a number of years," says LeRoy Haugh, vice president for procurement and finance at the Aerospace Industries Association, a trade group.
In the meantime, the companies will be aiming to exploit any advantage they can from this unfavorable situation -- the industry's equivalent of making chicken salad out of chicken feed. 

For instance, Boeing Co., depending on where it stands over the next few weeks with the striking machinists union, might be inclined to take a hit against operating income in the third quarter in a bit of fiscal legerdemain.
Clearly, the company is going to show improved operating profit, having delivered an impressive 86 jets during the period.
Mr. Harris even anticipates a bottom line of $1.15 a share and Mr. Reich expects one dollar versus 63 cents a year ago. 

But Boeing, too, is vulnerable on fixed-price military contracts, and a write-off could make the company look less prosperous while negotiating a new labor pact. "I find it hard to believe they'd want to show an 80% earnings gain during a walkout," Mr. Harris says. 

