.START 

Presidents make poor hostage negotiators.
This thought comes to mind as we watch President Bush and his team frantically trying to liberate something called a "capital-gains cut" from the political dungeons on Capitol Hill.
We're in favor of producing a cut in the capital-gains rate, but we'd hate to see the Bush team end up in the cold light of day looking like Desert One. 

We stood back a step from this melee a few days ago to suggest that Presidents would fare better in such negotiations if they were armed with line-item-veto authority.
But, we hear, the administration's negotiators are too busy negotiating to consider firing an item veto at the reconciliation package.
That's pretty ironic, because it looks to us as if Majority Leader George Mitchell already is exercising item-veto authority over the capital-gains proposal. 

What Senator Mitchell is doing certainly quacks like an item veto: He's using Senate procedures, from the 60 votes needed to override the Byrd "germaneness" rule to a potential filibuster, to kill one item in a larger bill.
To counter this arsenal of congressional-item vetoes, President Bush has essentially nothing other than the current round of frantic negotiation and vote-begging.
The President ends up looking little different than any lobbyist wandering the halls of the Senate office building, looking for a "vehicle" to carry his capital-gains cut.
We're perplexed that Presidents don't balance the odds by laying stake to an item-veto power of their own. 

Meanwhile, one part of the White House negotiating team roams the Capitol Hill frontier, trying to find a capital-gains proposal it can call its own.
We recall that Mr. Bush campaigned on an easily understood plan: a permanent cut in the capital-gains rate to 15%.
The cognoscenti explain, however, that an up-or-down vote on something so clean and efficient isn't possible.
The Democrats' class-warrior leadership vetoes the possibility of such a vote, and the party's capital-gains enthusiasts can't let a Republican President take sole credit for another tax cut. 

In hindsight, of course, it would have been nice if the White House or its allies in Congress had worked out a strategy and gone on the offensive early with a clean proposal.
Mom and Pop support was obviously waiting to be tapped.
In the event, Democratic Rep. Ed Jenkins took the initiative by proposing a rate cut to 19.6%.
Though on balance a positive step, the Jenkins proposal was hostage to the deficit: The lower rate would last only two years to produce a quick revenue spike, then ascend back to 28% with indexation.
The White House signed on, Democrats heard from back home, and the proposal prevailed. 

Mr. Bush's representatives are now over in the Senate considering an entirely different proposal under discussion by Democrat David Boren and Republican Bob Packwood.
The exact terms and numbers are fluid, but there'd essentially be separate sliding-rate schedules for new and current assets.
For new assets, it likely would establish a capital-gains rate of around 26.6% on short-term gains, with the rate descending in one-year increments of 5% until it reaches an effective rate of 14% on assets held for 10 years.
All this would be theoretically permanent. 

The sliding scale of course presumes to sanctify one kind of economic activity, "long-term investing," over another.
By giving the shorter holding period a minimal cut, it reintroduces pre-1986 notions of progressivity to punish disfavored economic participants.
Whatever the economic basis for the sliding scale, its rationale reflects a brand of tired economic conservatism not seen the past eight years.
It would be seen as a victory for white-shoe investors over the entrepreneurial buccaneers, the people who finance the riskiest start-up firms, take their relatively short-term gains if they occur and reinvest them in another high-risk venture. 

We recognize the arguments in favor of the sliding scale.
It's a tax cut, it's permanent and passage would show that coalitions in both chambers support economic growth.
The role played by Senator Boren and Mr. Jenkins shows the Democrats may yet have a national future.
We'd hate, though, to see the Bush White House give up more than it actually gets.
The capital-gains cut Mr. Bush campaigned on is a winning political issue and the House debate proved it has populist appeal.
If the price demanded by Mr. Mitchell gets too high, then a President rocking along with a 60%-plus approval rating should consider running the capital-gains cut back up the flagpole in 1990 and leaving it there until he gets the kind of cut he campaigned for. 

