.START 

Two major New York banks and two Southeastern super-regionals reported worse-than-expected results for the third quarter. 

Chemical Banking Corp. and Bank of New York Corp. reported losses, resulting primarily from additions to their loan-loss reserves for Latin American loans. 

Barnett Banks Inc., based in Jacksonville, Fla., said per-share net income rose 7% from a year earlier, while First Wachovia Corp. of Winston-Salem, N.C., reported flat per-share earnings.
Both bank holding companies attributed the lackluster performance to high interest rates they must pay on deposits because of increased competition. 

However, Citizens & Southern Corp., based in Atlanta, bucked the trend in the Southeast by posting an 11% increase in per-share earnings because of cost-cutting, consumer loan growth and a slight decline in non-performing loans. 

And Mellon Bank Corp. posted a profit, compared with a year-earlier loss.
The Pittsburgh bank holding company's fourth consecutive quarter of strengthened results reflected a 5% rise in net interest revenue, a 6% increase in service fees and a 25% drop in operating expense. 

Chemical Banking 

Following the lead of other banks, Chemical boosted its reserves for possible losses in its developing-nation loan portfolio by $600 million and at its Texas Commerce Bancshares Inc. unit by $300 million. 

The actions increase Chemical's reserve coverage for developing-nation loans to $1.83 billion, or about 41% of its $4.5 billion in such medium-term and long-term loans.
The reserve had been about 27% of its exposure.
Chemical said the $300 million for its problematic Texas bank reflects further pressures on that state's depressed real-estate market.
The bank said the real-estate concerns stem from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. 's recapitalization of several failed competitors in the Texas market. 

Those actions caused Chemical's book value to plummet 23% to $34.85 a share from $45.48 a share.
Stockholder equity stood at $3.18 billion, down from $3.32 billion a year ago. 

As a result, Chemical indicated it will file with the Securities and Exchange Commission to raise $500 million through an issue of new common shares.
Analysts expect the action to dilute 1990 earnings about 10% a share. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Chemical shares dropped $1 to close at $39.25. 

Bank of New York 

In the case of Bank of New York, a $400 million addition to loan-loss reserves for developing-nation loans brings its reserve coverage for these loans to $938.6 million, or 65% of medium-term loans.
The bank also added $200 million to reserves for troubled domestic loans.
Non-performing assets rose 12% to $1.21 billion from $1.08 billion on June 30. 

Bank of New York shares dropped 87.5 cents yesterday, closing at $49.50. 

Of the increase in bad loans, about $75 million stems from the bankruptcy-law filing of Dallas-based Lomas Financial Group Inc.
Much of the rest was due to previously identified troubled lending for a South Florida real-estate project and debt owed by the Dominican Republic. 

Felice Gelman, an analyst for Dillon, Read & Co., discounted fears that more troubles loom in the domestic loan portfolio. "The level of non-performing assets doesn't warrant the concerns.
They've been out of the market Õfor Florida real-estate loanså for two years," she says. 

Like many banks, Bank of New York is experiencing some pressure on its interest-rate margins.
Its net yield, or the difference between what it pays and earns on its money (including non-interest-bearing deposits), fell to 3.06% from 3.08%, or two basis points, in the second quarter. 

Barnett Banks 

Interest-rate margins also were a major problem for the banks reporting in the Southeast.
Barnett Banks said earnings from 14% loan growth and gains from costcutting efforts were offset by a decline of 20 basis points in its net interest margin from the year-ago quarter.
The banking company also cited a $36.6 million addition to loan-loss provisions, compared with an addition of about $29 million a year earlier.
Non-performing assets increased to $338.2 million from $324.4 million in the second period. 

Barnett, however, managed to buck the quarter-to-quarter trend of thinning margins with a nine basis-point improvement from the second quarter.
Gerald O'Meara, an analyst with Robinson-Humphrey Co., said the average yield in the bank's $5 billion installment-loan portfolio improved 28 basis points.
He added, however, that a 33-basis point drop in the yield on its commercial loan portfolio kept the bank from posting the results analysts expected. 

Barnett Banks shares dropped 25 cents yesterday, to $37.125. 

First Wachovia 

First Wachovia, which showed 15% loan growth and only a slight rise in non-performing loans on a year-to-year basis, said its interest-rate margin fell 32 basis points from the previous quarter to 4.17%.
The banking company was hurt by the drop in the prime lending rate, because some 43% of its loan portfolio is in spread-sensitive commercial loans. "The average yield on the commercial loan portfolio fell 53 basis points, essentially mirroring the drop in the prime," Mr. O'Meara said. 

Continued competition for short-term certificates of deposit forced First Wachovia to pay higher rates for funds in the quarter.
The average rate on these core deposits rose seven basis points from the second quarter -- in a period of declining interest rates, primarily on the loan side of the balance sheet.
Says Virginia Adair, an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., "We don't expect that scenario to change anytime soon." 

First Wachovia shares fell 62.5 cents yesterday, to $44. 

Citizens & Southern 

Analysts said they also don't expect the competition for big-deposit accounts from money-market funds -- a major factor causing the margin squeeze -- to ease anytime soon.
In response, banks like Citizens & Southern have been propping up deposit rates in aggressively competing for short-term certificates of deposit.
Indeed, Citizens & Southern said consumer preference is shifting toward higher-rate certificates of deposit and premium money-market accounts from banks.
Citizens' margin thinned to 4.39% from 4.65% in the second period. 

Citizens & Southern shares fell 12.5 cents yesterday, to $33.75. 

Mellon Bank 

Analysts said Mellon Bank's results were on target with expectations, but that Mellon's performance was somewhat mixed. "I was very encouraged by Mellon's drop in operating expenses, but I'd been hoping for double-digit increases in service fees," said Kenneth Puglisi, Merrill Lynch Research, New York. 

At the end of September, the reserve for loan losses totaled $720 million, or 4.09% of total loans, down from $918 million, or 4.93%, a year earlier.
Non-performing and past-due loans were $733 million, or 4.17% of total loans, down from $810 million, or 4.35% a year earlier, primarily reflecting the sale of assets to a kind of liquidating trust known as Grant Street National Bank. 

Domestic non-performing loans for the period increased to $338 million from $296 million because of non-performing real-estate loans.
That reflected the restructuring at a reduced interest rate of a large loan originated by one of Mellon's mortgage banking units to a home builder and the addition of a large midwest commercial mortgage to a non-accrual basis.
But non-performing LDC loans decreased to $382 million from $510 million. 

Assets grew to $31.15 billion from $30.84 billion a year earlier. 

Mellon shares closed at $34.75, down 25 cents. 

