.START 

With public limited partnerships souring at an alarming rate, investors clearly have little appetite for new offerings. 

Sales of new partnerships marketed by brokerage firms in the third quarter fell nearly 44% from a year earlier, according to figures compiled by Robert A. Stanger & Co., a Shrewsbury, N.J., firm that tracks partnerships.
Sales for the first nine months were down almost 29% from a year ago, continuing a downward trend in recent years that is unlikely to turn around any time soon. 

Limited partnerships, which invest in everything from commercial real estate to cable TV systems, shipping containers and oil and gas wells, have lives of about 10 years before they are dissolved and investors get paid off. 

But many older partnerships are seriously troubled or failing just as they are about to reach that stage.
The problems, especially in real estate, have prompted a flurry of investor lawsuits and caused serious financial difficulties at two of the decade's biggest syndicators, Southmark Corp. of Dallas and Integrated Resources Inc. of New York. 

As a result, partnerships "aren't a real popular vehicle at the moment," said William G. Brennan, partner in the Washington office of accountants Ernst & Young.
Even repeat investors, who used to buy additional units in a partnership or a favorite sponsor's latest offering every year, are on the sidelines because "there's been so much bad news on partnerships in general," he said. 

But Mr. Brennan believes there is a resurgence of so-called private placements, partnerships designed for small groups of investors who put in $25,000 or more.
The sales levels of these transactions are difficult to measure accurately. 

Although the 1986 tax act sharply reduced the tax benefits such investments can now offer, "I'm getting a couple of calls a week on private placements -- certainly traffic I wasn't getting a year or two ago," Mr. Brennan said. 

In the public arena, the strong sales of equipment leasing partnerships continue to buck the overall downward trend because of their high annual yields.
Many are currently paying between 12% and 15%, although part of that is a return of investors' own capital.
The dollars raised from new offerings in the third quarter increased 47%, to $355.3 million from $241.3 million a year ago. 

Sales of master limited partnerships also soared.
In contrast to illiquid limited partnerships, their units trade on exchanges like stocks.
Investors plunked down $159.8 million to buy them in the latest quarter, nearly eight times the $20.3 million such offerings raised in the third quarter of 1988. 

Two new master limited partnerships accounted for much of that increase: a $102.3 million oil and gas pipeline syndication by Kaneb Services Co. of Richardson, Texas, and a $57.5 million real estate offering by UDC Corp. of Phoenix, Ariz. 

