.START 

The House Banking Committee voted to subpoena Charles H. Keating Jr., the embattled chairman of American Continental Corp., to testify about how his savings-and-loan subsidiary incurred losses that may cost taxpayers $2 billion. 

The committee also voted to subpoena several past and current federal regulators, some of whom requested the subpoenas so that their disclosure of certain information would be protected from possible lawsuits in the future. 

Federal regulators seized the thrift, Lincoln Savings & Loan Association, Irvine, Calif., in April, one day after Phoenix-based American Continental filed for protection from its creditors under bankruptcy law. 

The Resolution Trust Corp., the new federal agency overseeing the sales and mergers of sick thrifts, filed a civil suit last month against Mr. Keating and his family.
Mr. Keating has also filed suit against the regulators, alleging unlawful seizure of property.
Improprieties have also been alleged over Mr. Keating's political contributions to U.S. senators of both parties, and their efforts to intercede on his behalf with the thrift regulators. 

"It is a case history that cries out for answers and full examination of the charges and countercharges," said Rep. Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas), chairman of the House Banking Committee. 

Four days of hearings are to begin Tuesday, when William Seidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., appears.
Mr. Keating is scheduled to appear before the committee Nov. 7. 

The committee also voted to issue subpoenas to Danny Wall, chairman of the Office of Thrift Supervision; Edwin Gray, the former top thrift regulator; David Ruder, former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission; and James Cirona, president of the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco. 

A Washington-based attorney for Mr. Keating said in a statement that the executive had notified Rep. Gonzalez that Mr. Keating "hasn't yet resolved whether to appear voluntarily." The statement said Mr. Keating "wants to cooperate with the committee to the maximum extent possible, but in light of the number and complexity of the legal proceedings in which he is involved, he wants to reflect on this decision." The Keating statement said he doesn't have any reason to believe a subpoena would be issued before he makes his decision about voluntary appearance. 

Until recently, Mr. Keating has spoken out personally in defense of his activities and has been harshly critical of regulators.
More recently, however, his reactions have been couched in legal terms and presented through attorneys. 

