.START 

In response to David Backhaus's Sept. 11 letter, "Why the West Subverts Germany's Better Half": Last summer I had the opportunity to spend three days in "Germany's better half," specifically in Weimar, Eisenach and Erfurt.
I recognize that three days does not an expert make, but what I saw differed significantly from what Mr. Backhaus reported.
The shops were essentially devoid of fresh fruits and vegetables, the ubiquitous (in the West) boom-boxes were priced equivalent to a month's wage, while black-and-white TV sets were twice or three times a month's pay.
The streets and buildings were covered with soot, as the "better half" is both unwilling and unable to spend its scarce resources to burn a fuel cleaner than soft coal and to add anti-pollution devices to its generating plants. 

The only gasoline station I saw had a sign indicating it was out of fuel.
Napkins were not available in restaurants (paper is scarce) and the meat (mostly pork) contained an unacceptably high level of fat. 

More important, however, is the recent exodus of Germans from the "better half" to the West.
There is a long line of East Germans waiting to get out.
Over the years many have even risked their lives to leave.
I have never been able to find a line of people waiting to enter. 

The problems of crime and drug abuse in the West are real and must be acknowledged.
If the West were to employ authoritarian methods, these problems could be solved.
Unfortunately, they may in part be the price we have to pay for freedom.
But we are aware of these problems and are working on means to solve them, without trampling on the rights of our citizens. 

Edward C. Weckel 

Bel Air, Md. 

Mr. Backhaus's words describing the paradise in East Germany ". . . There is no crime of consequence, no poverty, no drug abuse, no illiteracy, no pornography, no prostitution . . ." were almost the same as those describing the conditions in Hitler's Germany before World War II and almost the same describing the U.S.S.R. and countries behind the Iron Curtain until a couple years ago. 

Why?
Every child should know the cost of freedom, democracy's inherent deficiencies.
Every intelligent man and woman should use most efficiently the meager means available to him or her to get rid of the faults of the system and to improve it.
If we are producing more naive men such as Mr. Backhaus, we are bound to pay dearly for the shortcuts to reach "law and order" more efficiently. 

Millions of innocent victims killed by the "producers of instant paradises" should make us etch in our hearts Winston Churchill's wisdom that democracy is a very bad way to govern, but still the best one we have. 

Karel Kriz 

Mount Prospect, Ill. 

