.START 

It could be a dog house, up on bricks above the gluey yellow clay.
Except that it is bigger than a dog house -- and a human being lives inside. 

In the dank, dark interior of his two-room shack, 63-year-old Robert Britton sits on a bed with sheets gray-black with grime.
His conversation rambles at the edge of incoherence.
He hitches a pant leg up and down in an absent, almost mechanical way. 

You leave him, finally, standing on his porch. "Don't you worry about me," he says with a wild laugh.
A cold rain beats down on his grim little house and those surrounding it. 

To the north, up the winding, gunmetal-gray Mississippi River, Renee Lamm talks with quiet wonderment of her medical practice, straight out of the Great Depression. 

She is the only doctor in Lake County, Tenn.
The nearest X-ray machine is 35 miles away.
Dr. Lamm tries to diagnose with a second-hand microscope, then usually discovers her patients can't afford the medicine.
She recently helped save an infant boy with a liver abscess as big as a softball.
She blames sewage-polluted drinking water. 

"These are the kind of things you see in Haiti or Mexico," Dr. Lamm says softly. "Not the United States." 

But this is the lower Mississippi Delta, certified by Congress as the poorest region in America.
Poorer than Franklin D. Roosevelt's Tennessee Valley, poorer than John F. Kennedy's Appalachia.
Poorer and much blacker -- and thus politically neglected until a rising black vote began transforming Southern politics. 

Further proof of that transformation comes Monday, when a year-old commission makes its initial report to Congress and the White House.
It will test whether Washington, hamstrung by deficits and debating how many B-2 bombers to buy at $500 million apiece, has time and money for a rural region where infant mortality rates in some counties rival those of Third World countries. 

Behind the statistics assembled by the Lower Mississippi Delta Development Commission lie the paradox and the burden of Delta history. 

"We have the river.
We have a central location.
Yet we've had 100 years of poverty," says Ed Jones, a retired Tennessee congressman and a member of the commission. "It's not just economically based.
The effort to keep some down kept all down." 

Or, at least, most down. 

For here is a region that epitomizes the extremes of American wealth and poverty.
It is almost unbelievably fertile, with topsoil 25 feet thick or more.
It has mansions and big cars and a wealthy gentry that for decades has gathered round the fountain in the ornate lobby of Memphis's grand old Peabody Hotel.
It has fields of cotton like white flowers in bloom, rice and soybeans and venerable trees that lend a benignant grace to even the poorest dwelling.
Its place names roll off the tongue like molasses -- Tallahatchie and Yalobusha; Gilt Edge, Tenn., and Braggadocio, Mo. 

But, especially along the Mississippi, it has county poverty rates that range from 20% to 50%-plus.
In testimony before the commission, one Tennessee civic leader told of building a fence around a school to keep children from playing in raw sewage.
It has white as well as black poverty, and good ol' boys who gather over coffee to talk of dove hunting and running deer with dog packs. 

Official segregation, of course, is dead.
But a de facto segregation lives on.
In Helena, Ark., black youths cruise lower Walnut Street at night; whites cruise Cherry Street, a block away. 

What the Delta doesn't have is a stabilizing middle class. "Most of our `middle class' is two paychecks away from poverty," says Wilbur Hawkins, the commission's executive director.
As West Helena, Ark., attorney L.T. Simes dryly observed in one hearing: "Some have said that we have too many rich people and too many poor people." 

The poor tend to melt into the background, along back roads or in notorious neighborhoods such as Sugar Ditch, a place of shacks and open sewers finally cleared away by Tunica, Miss., after it helped land the town on CBS-TV's "60 Minutes" several years ago.
But they stand out grimly in a place they call The Line.
It is a grubby little neighborhood in West Helena where blacks bring their dreams to die. 

"You can get a lady here for $5," says Linda Messenger, an energetic federal worker who grew up not far away.
Then she talks of a woman who sold herself for 25 cents.
Behind a dumpster on a street. 

"In this area, a good husband is hard to find," says Ms. Messenger, who has three children and has married a second time.
After a series of brutal experiences, she reached a determined conclusion: "I'm not going to let men pull me down." 

Out beyond The Line, in a small house amid the soybean fields, a 31-year-old woman named Beulah (she declines to give her last name) struggles to survive with seven children and no husband in the home.
She sits watching Oprah Winfrey on TV and talking -- haltingly, as in a dream -- of her life and her children: "I just started so fast." 

Beyond sheer poverty and human wreckage, the Delta got a bigger dose than either the Tennessee Valley and Appalachia of what Mr. Jones, the former congressman, calls "the plantation mentality." It is an ingrained attitude -- a kind of caste system -- rooted in the region's history.
The land-owning rich remain complacently superior. "Whereas they once rode horses {to oversee their holdings}, they now ride pickups," Mr. Jones says.
The poor, too often, remain apathetic, without any realistic job prospects and utterly dependent on welfare. 

In Phillips County, Ark., home of The Line and the hardscrabble town of Elaine, government transfer payments are a top industry, bringing roughly $20 million a year. "Everybody's on relief and food stamps," Mr. Jones says. "You can't help them, except keep them alive." 

Even that can be hard to do.
The commission notes that 1980-84 infant-mortality rates in four Mississippi counties exceeded 25 per 1,000 -- worse than Panama's.
And its statistical portrait of the region portrays a social fabric fraying away like a cheap rug on the floor. 

The commission estimates that 47 of the 214 counties in its target area have poverty rates exceeding 30%, with many of the rest topping 20%.
Based on 1979-80 census figures, it says that in Lake County, Tenn., some households (a loose definition that could mean one person or a dozen) were trying to live on as little as $1,954 a year, excluding Social Security. 

That Pope County, Ill., had a high-school dropout rate just shy of 53%.
And that only four Arkansas counties accounted for one-third of that state's infant mortality in 

At rock bottom, measured by its estimated 50% poverty rate, is Tunica County, Miss.
Bobby H. Papasan, a thoughtful, candid man who is the former school superintendent there, defended his town and county on CBS.
But he admits, "One of the ways we kept down the dropout rate was to pass out cheap diplomas.
And, let's face it, our definition of high-school education may have been one of the lowest going." 

It is almost impossible for an outsider to see the world as Tunica children see it, he says over lunch at the Blue and White Restaurant.
He recalls questioning young children to determine the boundaries -- the outer limits -- of their world.
For many, the world ended short of the county line.
Today, he says, some of the best high-school graduates, girls as well as boys, go into the military.
It's a way out, an escape. 

But the Delta already has witnessed one great escape, a forced human migration that ranks with that of the Dust Bowl Okies to California.
The post-World War II agricultural revolution brought great machines that prowled the fields like metal beasts.
That uprooted tens of thousands of sharecroppers and propelled them into cities such as Memphis and Chicago. 

Sharecropping was bad.
The plantation owner tethered the sharecropper with lines of credit from the plantation store; when another plantation "bought" him, it paid off his debts.
But what the great migration left behind may be worse: A land that, for many, has no jobs of any kind. 

To create jobs, Democratic Rep. Mike Espy talks of building "value added" processing plants to supplement the largely agricultural economy.
As a case in point, he has already persuaded the Army to eat about 65% more catfish -- after cotton, Mississippi's largest cash crop, he says.
Mr. Espy, a House leader in the commission legislation, represents a Delta district where unemployment averages 12% but, among blacks, nears 50% in some counties. 

Rep. Espy, in 1986 the first black elected to Congress from Mississippi since Reconstruction, epitomizes a second revolution, a still-continuing political upheaval that has reshaped the Delta and made creation of the commission politically possible.
The civil-rights movement of the 1960s produced the Voting Rights Act and a swelling black vote.
That black vote, as much as anything, was responsible for the 1986 elections of several white Democratic senators, among them Georgia's Wyche Fowler, Alabama's Richard Shelby and Louisiana's John Breaux.
At the same time, traditionally gut-Democratic Mississippi has two Republican senators now, Thad Cochran and Trent Lott, who themselves are reaching out to black voters. 

These crosscurrents create a unique window in time when a concerted Delta development program is at least politically possible.
But creating it won't be easy, and funding it will be even harder. 

"The country's broke, unfortunately," says Arkansas Democratic Sen. Dale Bumpers, the prime Senate sponsor of the commission. "And you cannot put in enough Federal money, even if we had it, to solve the problem." (The commission is charged with designing a 10-year recovery program.) Instead, Sen. Bumpers talks of a combination approach: Some new money, a retargeting of existing federal programs, more federal-state-local cooperation and more federal purchases of Delta products. "It's supposed to take 10 years.
It may take a second 10 years," he says. 

At stake is the future of a region already bypassed by much of the postwar economic boom and now in danger of being left hopelessly behind in a computer-age America. "All we want is a little piece of the pie," says John E. Vaughn, the Tiptonville, Tenn., city attorney. "It's a wealthy country.
Just a little piece of the pie." 

