.START 

The Senate began debating its $14.1 billion deficit-reduction bill for fiscal 1990, with Democratic leaders asserting that the measure will be approved quickly and without a cut in the capital-gains tax. 

Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell told reporters that "without doubt," he had enough votes to block the capital-gains tax cut from being considered as part of this bill.
Although senators barely touched the legislation yesterday, Sen. Mitchell said he planned to work late tonight to complete the legislation and send it to a House-Senate conference. 

But the Maine Democrat acknowledged that Congress probably won't complete work on the bill in time to avoid across-the-board spending cuts mandated by the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law.
The spending cuts are to take effect Monday. 

Keeping a capital-gains tax reduction off the bill would be a major victory for Senate Democratic leaders, particularly Mr. Mitchell and Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas) of the Senate Finance Committee.
It would represent a setback, though not yet a defeat, for the Republicans and President Bush, who have made the tax cut a priority. 

Last night, Senate GOP Leader Robert Dole of Kansas said that Republicans would probably offer a capital-gains proposal today. "We're going to offer it every chance we have," he told reporters. 

Democratic leaders have argued that the gains tax reduction would be a boon to the rich and would widen the federal budget deficit.
Republicans insist that the cut would stimulate much-needed investment. 

GOP advocates of the tax change say their fight to get the cut won't end with the Senate's deficit-reduction bill, however.
Other legislative vehicles could carry their amendment, they say, and Senate leaders acknowledge that a majority of the senators would vote for a gains tax cut of some kind.
But more immediately, a capital-gains tax cut already is part of the companion deficit-cutting bill that passed the House, presaging a rough-and-tumble House-Senate conference. 

The heart of the massive deficit-cutting bill is a tax and spending measure that was approved last week by the Senate Finance Committee.
An important feature is an expansion of the deduction for contributions to individual retirement accounts for those who don't currently qualify for them.
The proposal has a strong chance of enactment, given the Bush administration's recent endorsement of the concept. 

The Finance Committee portion of the bill includes both tax increases and tax reductions, resulting in a net increase of $5.3 billion in taxes in the fiscal year that began Oct. 1.
Taxes would be raised through a laundry list of mostly obscure revenue-law changes, many of which are contained in a bill approved by the House. 

The measure also provides tax reductions, including the repeal of a law called Section 89, which compels companies to provide comparable health benefits to both highly paid executives and rank-and-file workers.
The House already has voted for repeal. 

On IRAs, the finance panel's bill would provide a 50% deduction for IRA contributions by individuals who aren't already eligible, and permit penalty-free withdrawals for purchases of a first home and spending for higher education.
It also would extend several expiring tax breaks. 

In addition, the bill would reduce Medicare spending in fiscal 1990 by about $3 billion, in part by curbing reimbursements to physicians.
The plan also would impose a nationwide limit on Medicare payments to doctors, but in a way that is far more acceptable to the doctors' lobby than a tough plan approved by the House. 

Yesterday, Health and Human Services Secretary Louis Sullivan mounted a campaign to halt Senate efforts to take the Social Security Administration out if the HHS.
In a letter to all senators, he said that "I would recommend a veto" of the entire bill if it removed Social Security from the department.
The bill also would raise spending in several areas, particularly for senior citizens.
The measure would raise the income threshold beyond which senior citizens have their Social Security benefits reduced. 

The tax increases include provisions that would prevent companies that have made leveraged buy-outs from getting federal tax refunds resulting from losses caused by interest payments on debt issued to finance the buy-outs.
The bill also would close a loophole regarding employee stock ownership plans, effective June 6, 1989, that has been exploited by investment bankers in corporate takeovers, and would curb junk bonds by ending tax benefits for certain securities, such as zero-coupon bonds, that postpone cash interest payments. 

It also would raise $851 million by repealing an automatic reduction in airport and airway taxes, speed up the collection of the payroll tax from large companies, effective August 1990, and impose a tax on ozone-depleting chemicals, such as those used in air conditioners and in Styrofoam. 

Other provisions would increase tax credits for child care and for low-income families.
The bill also would extend several popular tax credits that are scheduled to expire at year's end.
It would extend for two years, through Dec. 31, 1991, the credit that helps employers hire low-income workers, and the credits that encourage solar, geothermal and ocean-thermal energy projects by businesses. 

Permanent extensions would be granted credits that assist the construction of low-income housing and provide incentives for corporate research-and-development spending.
The House also voted to extend these two tax benefits permanently. 

In addition to the Finance Committee's measure, the bill includes spending cuts and increased federal fees.
Among its provisions are: 

-- Authority for the Federal Aviation Administration to raise $239 million by charging fees for commercial airline landing rights at New York's LaGuardia and John F. Kennedy International airports, O'Hare International Airport in Chicago and National Airport in Washington. 

-- Imposition of a $3-per-passenger fee on international commercial airline flights leaving the U.S.
The fee is expected to generate $111 million. 

-- A fivefold increase in the maximum Occupational Safety and Health Administration penalties, raising $65 million in fiscal 1990. 

-- Reinstatement of a three cent-per-barrel fee on oil produced by offshore wells to fund a proposed oil spill-cleanup fund.
It is estimated to raise $9 million in fiscal 1990. 

John E. Yang contributed to this article. 

