.START 

If you're a stock-fund investor, don't bet on beating the market. 

That's because more stock mutual funds are failing to keep with the broad market indexes these days.
A startling 66% of all diversified U.S. stock funds trailed behind the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index in the third quarter, according to Morningstar Inc., a Chicago firm that tracks fund performance. 

This was no fluke.
It was the sixth consecutive quarter that funds on average failed to match the market.
In the past five years, moreover, just 37.4% of all stock funds beat the S&P-down sharply from the 52.3% of the previous five years, Morningstar says. 

So what's the problem?
Too many funds and too few good stock pickers, some analysts say. 

There currently are 1,024 stock funds, up nearly fourfold from 10 years ago, according to the Investment Company Institute. 

"There aren't enough super stockpickers around to sit at the helm of an increasing number of mutual funds," says Tyler Jenks, research director for Kanon Bloch Carre & Co., a Boston fund-research firm. "The more the industry keeps turning these things out, the more you're going to see underperformance." 

Stock mutual funds have grown explosively in the 1980s, because small investors believed they needed professional advice to beat the stock market.
But if too many professionally managed funds keep underperforming, investors may decide to switch to index funds, designed to match the performance of the broader market.
That would be bad news for the actively managed segment of the nation's stock mutual funds, which collect annual management fees that can amount to 1% of assets. 

One reason many funds have lagged behind is their cash holdings, which often stand above 9% of assets.
Funds keep cash on hand so they can pay investors who want to take their money out.
High cash levels also act as a buffer against steep market drops.
But many fund managers have guessed wrong about where the market was headed, penalizing fund performance. 

Another drag on funds' returns is their operating expenses.
But many funds are so poorly managed that they fail to match the stock averages even before expenses, primarily because of poor decisions on when to get in or out of the market. 

Obviously, professional management doesn't guarantee success for investors.
And the so-called market timing game of boosting or shrinking cash levels to outguess the market has backfired for many stock funds. 

"As a group, funds are excessively bearish and flush with cash at market lows, when they should be loading up their portfolios with stocks," says Norman Fosback, president of Mutual Fund Forecaster, a Florida newsletter.
Conversely, Mr. Fosback says, funds typically are overinvested in stocks at market tops. 

Of course, many funds have consistently outpaced the indexes.
Fidelity Magellan Fund, Janus Fund and Lindner Fund, among others, have far surpassed the gain of the S&P 500 over the past 10 years. 

Overall, however, the recent five-year period has included quarters where only 10% or 15% of all diversified stock funds have outslugged the market. (To make the comparison fairer, Morningstar excluded international and other specialty stock funds that can skew the stock-fund average.) 

The past five years have been particularly tough for funds, because many hold stocks of companies with far smaller total market values than the S&P companies, Morningstar says.
The median market value for a company in a stock-fund portfolio is $3.7 billion, compared with $8.6 billion for the S&P 500.
And smaller companies' stocks generally have underperformed larger ones in the past several years. 

"It's pretty clear that the average equity fund isn't that much like the S&P, but has more of a small-cap focus," says Don Phillips, editor of Morningstar's Mutual Fund Values publication. 

When smaller stocks begin to lead the market again, Mr. Phillips says, more funds will outperform the S&P 500. "It's very likely the next five years will be strong for funds," he says. 

There's another factor to consider: The average fund return is figured by giving equal weight to all funds, regardless of size.
If the average was computed instead by giving more weight to the larger funds, the overall return would stack up better against the market.
Bigger funds tend to get that way because they perform well and thereby attract new money. 

The current calculation "shows the average fund return, but it misrepresents the return to the average investor," according to a report by Strategic Insight, a fund research firm. 

