.START 

As this town's Giants and nearby Oakland's Athletics approached the World Series, Mayor Art Agnos was asked if he would make the traditional bet on the contest with Oakland Mayor Lionel Wilson.
No, the San Francisco mayor said, because "there's nothing in Oakland I want." 

Mayor Agnos now says he was only joking, but Mayor Wilson wasn't laughing at the joke.
The first Bay Bridge World Series in history, and the first subway series since 1956, is rekindling the ancient animosity between the two cities that face each other across San Francisco Bay.
Unflattering stereotypes, Oakland's deep-seated inferiority complex and San Francisco's haughty hubris fuel the rivalry. 

Nobody ever sang of leaving his heart in Oakland. "We're the ugly sister," says Dave Newhouse, sports columnist for the Oakland Tribune. "We've been called the Buffalo of the West.
It hurts.
Oakland dislikes San Francisco, and San Francisco is indifferent.
If the Giants win, it will be devastating for Oakland, just one more rap that we'd endure from San Francisco." 

Oakland has had public-relations problems from the very beginning.
Its original Spanish name translates loosely to "Oak Grove Near the Sweathouse." It still smarts from former resident Gertrude Stein's observation that in Oakland, "there is no there there." 

In this century, Oakland became a sort of industrial annex of San Francisco, handling most of the shipping that comes into the bay.
It became the home of one of the country's most crack-ridden ghettos.
Its schools are so troubled that the state has forced a trustee on the school district, over local objections, to deal with its deficit.
San Franciscans tend to view the place as a war zone. 

San Francisco, on the other hand, has wallowed in mellow, self-congratulatory pride, billing itself as the most beautiful metropolis in the country, America's "city of light," a Boston with better weather.
San Franciscans see themselves as a tolerant, sophisticated Chardonnay-sipping crowd. 

But the stereotypes are gravely flawed, historically as well as in the here and now.
During the Gold Rush, Oakland was considered a much nicer place to live.
San Francisco was a windy, flea-infested sand dune.
Oakland's shores were lined with its oaks and 300-foot redwoods.
When the Barbary Coast of San Francisco was racked by prostitution, drugs and murder in the late 19th century, Oakland was known as the Athens of the West for its superior private schools. 

Today, a revived downtown Oakland surrounds a pretty lake.
Pleasant neighborhoods sit on rolling hills.
Oakland's summer weather is the best in the country, according to the U.S. Weather Service. 

As for San Francisco, it has its own crack-ridden ghetto in Hunter's Point.
The city's schools are hardly the best around.
Boxy new skyscrapers burden much of the skyline.
San Francisco's gluttony -- its residents spend more per capita at restaurants than anyplace else in America -- has earned it the sobriquet, "the Stomach by the Bay." 

The specter of another big earthquake haunts San Francisco.
While live people can hardly afford to live here, dead people can't be buried here-for fear that a quake will exhume them, and also to save room for more real-estate development. 

Nowhere, however, do the stereotypes ring so hollow as in baseball. 

San Francisco's most visible and audible baseball fans, while a minority, belie the mellow San Franciscan of the pretty myth.
They're the terrors of the National League. 

They behave like thugs.
They drink heavily, burn souvenirs of the Giants' opponents in the stands, shout obscenities, occasionally vomit in the aisles, and assault each other and bystanders.
In the unearthly fog and cold that often sweeps through San Francisco's Candlestick Park, the rowdiness seems nightmarish. 

Candlestick Park has a peculiar standing in baseball. "It's the ultimate challenge," says George Costa, who this year became head of security for Candlestick Park, "recognized as the worst {behaved} stadium in the major leagues." 

Mr. Costa, who has worked with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Secret Service, has sent his security forces, who wear military-style uniforms, to train at the San Francisco police academy.
He keeps a "hit list" of repeat offenders who show up at games, and with the district attorney's help has sought restraining orders to keep out unsavory San Francisco fans. 

Things have improved since the crackdown.
But trouble can erupt at any time, Mr. Costa says, recalling a typical game: "Sept. 15.
Padres.
Friday night.
Full moon.
Four fights." But last year, he says, the park averaged "a fight an inning." 

The Athletics' Coliseum, by contrast, is a balmy, sun-kissed park, one of the showcases of the major leagues.
Oakland fans are generally benevolent, family-oriented people who even applaud good plays by the opposition. 

"People think Giants fans are all mellow and wonderful, coming from San Francisco with flowers in their hair.
That's bull," says Tom DeVries, an Oakland resident.
Once, while on crutches with a broken foot, he took his family to see the San Francisco Giants.
In the first inning, three Giants fans in front of him jumped up at every pitch.
When he asked one of them to sit down, he says, "without preface, he turned around and swung at me.
I jerked my head back and he hit my wife.
He knocked her out." 

Mr. DeVries adds: "That incident was in keeping with the tone of fans in Candlestick.
It would have been extraordinary in the {Oakland} Coliseum." 

"Giants fans really get into booing their own team," says a longtime supporter.
More than 800 were ejected this season.
Some served time in jail.
In 1984, an apparently intoxicated fan fell to his death from a seat in the upper deck. 

The San Francisco Chronicle recently detailed the "fundamental differences" between the fans.
While A's fans wait for the seven-inning stretch, the newspaper said, Giants fans wait for the seventh-inning retch.
A's fans come by public transport, and wait for the Wave to start, while Giants fans come on motorcycles and wait for fights to start.
The typical date for an A's fan is his wife and kids; for a Giants fan, a 16-year-old runaway from Portland, Ore. 

Some blame the rowdiness on bad weather and losing streaks in the past. "Candlestick fans are hardier, tougher.
They've had to endure more," says William Orrick, a San Francisco lawyer.
Some fans are proud of their exuberance. "The A's fans are dead," says Marco Rodriguez. "You have to wind them up to get them out of the stadium." Giants fan Hank Klein says that A's fans "just sit and watch the game.
They only cheer if there's action." 

Candlestick Park has tried to civilize its fans this year with tofu hot dogs, a snack bar hawking trail mix and diaper-changing areas in the men's bathrooms.
There is a no-drinking, no-smoking family section for fans who want to be isolated from "immature and rude behavior," a Giants spokeswoman says. 

From Oakland's point of view, an opponent other than San Francisco would have generated more tourist revenue as well as more civility.
Oakland has estimated that a series with a team from another part of the country could have pumped up to $100 million into the area economy.
But the subway series, it is reckoned, may bring in 25% less. 

For San Francisco, where tourists leave their hearts and about $3 billion each year even without a World Series, the additional revenue is gravy. "We don't have to hit people over the head to get their attention," says Dale Hess, of the San Francisco Convention and Visitors Bureau. "We compete against the world: London, Paris, Hawaii." 

By contrast, when Oakland officials went to Japan two years ago, folks thought they were from New Zealand's biggest city -- Auckland. 

