.START 

A federal judge in Manhattan rejected a challenge by attorneys for Michael Milken to grand jury subpoenas seeking Mr. Milken's bills from American Express Co. from 1983 to 

Attorneys for Mr. Milken claimed that prosecutors were misusing the federal grand jury by having it retrace ground already covered in the investigation that led to the March indictment of Mr. Milken, the former chief of junk bond operations for Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. 

But U.S. District Judge Kimba Wood said in a conference with prosecutors and lawyers for Mr. Milken this week that the government had "made a sufficient showing" in a letter to the court that "the grand jury is investigating transactions separate from those that are the subject of the pending indictment" of Mr. Milken.
Judge Wood said that the government has shown that the American Express subpoenas were issued in connection with such separate transactions. 

Mr. Milken was charged in March in a 98-count indictment alleging racketeering and fraud in connection with securities trades.
Lawyers for Mr. Milken have repeatedly asserted his innocence and said he intends to fight his case in court. 

In the same conference with the judge, Assistant U.S. Attorney John K. Carroll, who is leading the prosecution of Mr. Milken, said that an expanded indictment of Mr. Milken will come in November.
Mr. Carroll previously had said the government would be unable to meet its Oct. 1 deadline for an expanded indictment.
But he didn't specify when a new indictment might be returned. 

TWO INSURANCE COMPANIES settle an antitrust lawsuit filed by Texas' attorney general. 

Travelers Insurance Co., Hartford, Conn., and St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Co., St. Paul, Minn., agreed to pay $500,000 each to the state of Texas as part of the settlement of the suit filed last year.
The companies also agreed to refrain from participating on certain committees of the Insurance Services Office Inc., an industry rating organization, for three years. 

Texas Attorney General Jim Mattox and other attorneys general have charged that the ISO was a vehicle for the insurance companies to conspire to raise rates, decrease coverage and create a crisis in commercial liability insurance.
Lawyers for Travelers and St. Paul deny that such a conspiracy existed and say the settlement was more cost-effective than fighting the lawsuit and winning. 

The settlement, approved yesterday by a state district judge in Austin, Texas, leaves six insurance companies as defendants in the Texas lawsuit, which was filed in March 1988.
Most of the remaining defendants were also sued in a federal antitrust action filed by attorneys general from several other states, including New York.
That suit was dismissed by a federal judge in San Francisco. 

THE ACTING U.S. ATTORNEY in Manhattan will join Willkie Farr & Gallagher. 

Benito Romano, who has been acting U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York since January, will join the New York law firm in early November. 

Mr. Romano, 40, was appointed to his prosecutorial post following the resignation of Rudolph W. Giuliani.
He had previously been a partner at the New York law firm of Dewey, Ballantine, Bushby, Palmer & Wood.
Otto Obermaier, a partner in the New York law firm of Obermaier, Morvillo & Abramowitz, will be sworn in as the new U.S. attorney on Monday. 

Although his tenure as U.S. attorney was short, Mr. Romano presided over a host of celebrated cases.
Among them was the Princeton/Newport trial, the first-ever prosecution and conviction of securities firm officials on racketeering charges.
Mr. Romano also helped negotiate criminal plea agreements with Robert Freeman, the former head of arbitrage for Goldman Sachs & Co., and former Wall Street securities trader Salim B. Lewis. 

At Willkie Farr, Mr. Romano will specialize in civil and criminal litigation.
Mr. Romano began his legal career at Willkie Farr in 1976. 

MYERSON & KUHN partner Philip S. Kaufman is leaving to join the New York law firm of Kramer Levin Nessen Kamin & Frankel as a partner, effective Monday. 

Mr. Kaufman has represented AmBase Corp. 's Home Insurance Co. unit.
James Killelea, general counsel for Home, said Mr. Kaufman will continue to represent Home at Kramer Levin. 

NORTH PROSECUTOR goes private: In another hat switch by a government lawyer, Michael Bromwich, a member of the trial team that prosecuted Oliver North, is going into private practice as a white-collar criminal defense lawyer. 

Later this month, Mr. Bromwich, 35, will join the Washington, D.C., office of Chicago's Mayer, Brown & Platt as a partner.
Before joining the independent counsel's investigation of the Iran-Contra scandal in 1987, Mr. Bromwich served four years as an assistant U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York. 

