.START 

The White House has decided, as a result of an internal review of its activities during the failed coup in Panama, that it automatically will convene a designated crisis-management committee to coordinate its handling of future emergencies. 

But despite the collapse of the coup, the White House has concluded that the national-security decision-making system otherwise needs only "fine-tuning," a senior administration official said. 

Some other minor changes will be made to improve communications among second-level officials, which administration aides acknowledge were dangerously faulty at some points during the Panama crisis. "Underneath the principal {officials}, the lateral communication wasn't too great," said the senior administration official. 

For instance, the White House has decided that in future emergencies, officials from such agencies as the State Department, the Pentagon and the Central Intelligence Agency automatically will be summoned to the White House Situation Room to coordinate the flow of information from overseas cables and telephone calls to top Bush aides.
White House aides are concerned that different agencies had different versions of information at some points in the Panama crisis. 

And the White House has decided that its sophisticated capabilities to conduct teleconferences bringing together numerous officials weren't used enough in the crisis. 

The changes called for in the review, conducted by National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft, amount to minor tinkering with the Bush administration's decision-making system.
Senior aides consider them "procedural and organizational changes," one said.
Critics of the administration are bound to argue that the changes don't go far enough to correct flaws in government coordination or to ensure better contingency planning.
Still, they represent a move toward a more structured decision-making system than President Bush has preferred so far.
Mr. Bush is more comfortable making decisions in informal gatherings with a handful of his top advisers, rather than in structured meetings with officials from many agencies. 

The senior official said the changes indicate that the president needs a "slightly" more structured decision-making system.
More importantly, he said, "what we need to do is ensure a little more formalized backup just under him." 

Mr. Bush will designate the so-called Deputies Committee, an already existing panel consisting of the second-highest officials at the State Department, Pentagon, Central Intelligence Agency and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to serve as his crisis-management team.
The committee's chairman is Robert Gates, who is Mr. Scowcroft's deputy on the National Security Council staff. 

The Deputies Committee already meets regularly to handle routine national-security business, and officials previously had considered it the group that would coordinate the administration's handling of emergencies.
But the panel never was convened during the Panama crisis. 

As a result of the review of that affair, officials said, Mr. Bush is likely to amend the secret, formal directive with which he set up his decision-making system to provide that the Deputies Committee automatically will be called to the White House whenever he declares that a crisis exists.
The president also is likely to specify precisely which officials will sit on the committee to handle a crisis. 

The White House has concluded that Mr. Bush and other top administration officials made decisions based on correct information during the Panama crisis, largely because of direct phone links between the Oval Office and U.S. military commanders and diplomats in Panama. 

But officials say the review found that at lower levels, the bureauracy had dangerously skewed or incomplete information.
At one point, for instance, officials in the State Department and the CIA thought the Panamanian officers leading the coup were offering to turn Panamanian strongman Manuel Noriega over to the U.S.
But President Bush and White House aides thought -- correctly, the administration now insists -- that the rebels refused to turn the leader over. 

Administration aides also implied the White House has begun considering new plans for destabilizing Mr. Noriega. "One of the things we'll be looking at are ways to increase his anxiety," a senior official said.
The U.S., he added, may "do things to indicate that he is vulnerable and that he needs to keep looking over his shoulder." 

