.START 

Banca Nazionale del Lavoro filed suit in U.S. District Court in Atlanta against its former Atlanta branch manager and a former branch vice president, alleging they approved more than $2 billion of unauthorized and illegal loans and commitments to Iraq. 

The suit alleges that Christopher P. Drogoul, a former first vice president and manager of BNL's Atlanta agency, and Paul Von Wedel, a vice president, concealed the transactions from BNL's senior management and from state and federal bank regulators. 

The former bank officers are accused of fraud, breaching their fiduciary duties as officers and employees, and violations of federal and state Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations acts.
The suit seeks unspecified damages. 

The suit alleges that Messrs.
Drogoul and Von Wedel acted in concert with others, but they are the only individuals named in the action. 

The suit alleges that the men "engaged in illegal conduct to enrich" themselves, but doesn't elaborate.
The suit is the first indication that BNL officials believe the ex-officers in Atlanta personally profited from the Iraqi credit scheme. 

BNL, the largest state-owned bank in Italy, previously has said that some $3 billion in unauthorized export credits to Iraq were issued through the bank's Atlanta branch.
Thus far, however, no motive for the issuance of the unauthorized credits has come to light.
U.S. and Italian authorities are investigating. 

Theodore H. Lackland, an attorney for Mr. Drogoul, declined to comment on the suit; Mr. Von Wedel couldn't be reached for comment. 

The suit alleges that Messrs.
Drogoul and Von Wedel, acting beyond their authority, executed a series of unauthorized credit facilities and loans with commercial banks in Iraq, the Iraqi Ministries of Trade and Industry, the Central Bank of Iraq and others. 

BNL alleges in the suit that the credits and loans were made at interest rates and fees below prevailing market rates, "a fact that was known or should have been known both to the defendants and those acting in concert with them." 

The suit also accuses the defendants of maintaining separate and secret books and records to conceal the transactions and distributing false and misleading financial information to BNL officials and regulators. 

