.START 

A tax dispute with the Canadian government could scrap a proposed 528 million Canadian dollar (US$449.3 million) oil and gas asset sale by Westmin Resources Ltd. to Norcen Energy Resources Ltd., the companies said. 

"Obviously, if we don't get a favorable ruling we'll have to go back to the drawing board," said Donald Webster, Westmin's executive vice president, finance and administration. "It (a negative ruling) could undo the deal.
We're very frustrated." 

The proposed sale, announced last February, would increase the oil and gas reserves of Calgary-based Norcen, which is already a major oil and gas producer, by about 50% and 35%, respectively, analysts estimated.
It also would add significantly to Norcen's exploration acreage and production. 

But the proposed purchase, which had been expected to close in July, was delayed by protracted negotiations with Revenue Canada, the country's federal tax department.
Executives of Norcen and Westmin, which has interests in oil, gas and mining, said the dispute stems from a proposal by Westmin to transfer about C$400 million of related tax pools to Norcen, as part of the transaction. 

Norcen planned to apply the tax pools against future taxable income, and the asset purchase price partly reflects the value of those tax pools, Norcen executives said. "If we can't roll down what we thought we could" in Westmin tax pools, the value of the Westmin assets "is not as great as we thought," said Edward Battle, Norcen's president and chief executive, in an interview. "That's the issue." 

An official at Revenue Canada's tax rulings department in Ottawa said he didn't have access to details of the dispute, and couldn't comment. 

Revenue Canada "has had a problem with the concept" and proposed structure under which Westmin planned to pass the tax advantages along to Norcen, Mr. Webster said.
Neither he nor Norcen officials offered specifics. 

A final ruling on the proposed transaction is expected at any time, Mr. Webster said, and Norcen said the purchase could close as early as Nov. 1, provided the tax ruling is favorable. 

Under Canadian tax regulations, according to Paul Palmer, Norcen's senior vice president and chief financial officer, Westmin's tax pools could be applied against all of Norcen's 1989 earnings as long as the transaction closes by Dec. 31.
He said the delay in closing would have "some impact" on Norcen's cash flow this year, but the effect on earnings would be negligible. 

Brascade Resources Inc., a holding company controlled by Toronto's Bronfman family, owns about 73% of Westmin and about 42% of Noranda Inc., a Toronto-based resource concern that in turn owns about 34.2% of Norcen. 

