.START 

The once-mighty American Stock Exchange, which in recent years has fallen far behind the two other major stock exchanges, named as chairman a lobbyist and former U.S. House Budget Committee head. 

James R. Jones, 50 years old, an influential figure in Washington for more than two decades, becomes the 15th chairman of the Amex.
He succeeds Arthur Levitt Jr., 58, an Amex fixture for 11 years who says he will devote his time to publishing. 

In bypassing Amex President Kenneth R. Leibler for Mr. Jones, the Amex seems determined to carry on Mr. Levitt's game plan to establish the exchange as a Washington power.
While its importance as a securities exchange has declined markedly since the 1970s, the Amex under Mr. Levitt had kept a high profile in Washington, lobbying for legislation that appeals to the "mid-range, growing" companies that Amex wants to attract and keep.
Mr. Jones, who has no experience on Wall Street, says he "fully subscribes" to such an emphasis for the exchange. 

The Amex's focus on Washington has been seen by some on Wall Street as an admission that the exchange will never again be the rival of the New York Stock Exchange that it was from Revolutionary War days until the 1970s. 

In fact, the relatively tiny exchange is sliding into obscurity. 

In terms of trading, the Big Board and the Nasdaq over-the-counter market on a typical day do more stock trading within the first hour than the Amex does all day.
Even the Midwest Stock Exchange surpassed the Amex in total volume last year -- 2.7 billion shares to 2.5 billion.
The Big Board's volume was 40 billion shares and Nasdaq's was 21.5 billion. 

The Amex currently has half the number of companies listed for trading as the New York Stock Exchange and a fifth of the Nasdaq market. 

The Amex has had some victories recently.
The Amex index, which measures the performance of its stocks, had a big (but little publicized) 17.5% gain in 1988 -- the greatest among any major U.S. market.
And the Amex stole more Nasdaq over-the-counter trading companies last year than before. 

Mr. Leibler, 40, said he will stay on as Amex president and work with Mr. Jones.
Mr. Leibler, who has run the Amex's day-to-day operations as president since January 1986, said there's "no overlap" between his and Mr. Jones's skills. 

Mr. Jones, an Amex board member since January 1987, has wielded influence in Washington for more than two decades, starting as a top White House aide to Lyndon Johnson while still in his 20s.
With his long service in Congress, including a stint as chairman of the budget committee, the former Oklahoma lawmaker is respected by many politicians.
He will take office as Amex chairman Nov. 10, six months after Mr. Levitt announced he would leave the exchange. 

At an Amex news conference, Mr. Jones said his lack of securities-industry experience isn't as important as his managerial skills.
A decade ago, he said, many people wondered whether "there was a future for the Amex." But he said he hopes to be "at least partially as successful" as Mr. Levitt has been in keeping the exchange going. 

Amex officials say talk of the exchange's lowly status is unfair, because it neglects the Amex's importance as the nation's second biggest options exchange, behind the Chicago Board Options Exchange. 

Mr. Jones visited Amex traders on the cramped trading floor in lower Manhattan after the news conference.
Traders said later that they don't expect Mr. Jones to be simply a Washington lobbyist. 

Stephen Schoenfeld, who is Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. 's head of Amex floor operations, said, "I'm hoping {Mr.
Jones} is there for the leadership we need in the '90s.
The chairman has to lend direction and also help to attract more listed companies." The Amex had 1,161 companies listed for trading in 1976; by last year, the number had dwindled to 896.
In contrast, the Big Board's number of companies remained at a steady 1,681, and the Nasdaq's roster ballooned to 4,451. 

The Amex's daily trading volume is relatively anemic, at an average 9.9 million shares a day in 1988; the Big Board traded an average of 161.5 million shares a day in the same year. "I think everyone would like to see an average of at least 30 million a day," and if so, "everyone would be very happy," said Mr. Schoenfeld. 

Mr. Jones ran for the Senate as a Democrat in 1986, but lost to incumbent Sen. Don Nickles.
Since leaving Congress, Mr. Jones has prospered as a Washington lobbyist representing such high-profile clients as Toshiba Corp. and J.P. Morgan Securities.
He successfully lobbied to limit U.S. sanctions against Toshiba after one of its subsidiaries came under fire for selling the Soviet Union highly sophisticated milling machines that enabled that nation to make advanced submarine propellers.
The sale coincided with a sharp drop in the ability of U.S. forces to find or track Soviet submarines. 

House Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta (D., Calif.), who served on the budget panel when Mr. Jones was chairman, called him "exceedingly bright and knowledgeable about both budget and economic issues." Mr. Panetta predicted Mr. Jones would bring to the Amex "the expertise of knowing how the Congress operates, at a time when the Congress is going to be paying a lot of attention to the stock markets." 

David Rogers in Washington contributed to this article. 

