.START 

Miller Brewing Co. has filed suit against a physicians group that sold T-shirts mocking its Miller Lite ad campaign in Texas. 

The suit, filed in federal court in Houston, sets up a clash between trademark claims by the company and an assertion of free speech rights by the doctors group, a nonprofit organization called Doctors Ought to Care. 

Miller's campaign featured actor Randy Quaid telling the public in a months-long series of ads that "We're having a party" in Texas, and to stay tuned for the details.
Touted as "The Biggest Party in History," Miller followed up by sponsoring public bashes over the Labor Day weekend in Houston, Dallas, San Antonio, and other Texas cities.
The parties, which included entertainment by well-known musical groups, raised money for the Texas Special Olympics. 

The campaign drew criticism from several anti-alcohol groups, but the legal clash focuses on T-shirts sold by the doctors group at the Houston party.
The front of the shirts carried the words "Killer Lite" and a logo that stated, "We're pushing a drug." The back of the shirts stated, "We're grabbing a potty," and depicted a man throwing up in a toilet. 

In a lawsuit filed Sept. 28 in U.S. District Court in Houston, Miller contends the T-shirts infringe on its "Lite" trademark "in a manner calculated to slander plaintiffs' business reputation and dilute its goodwill." The lawsuit asks for an injunction barring such infringement, for profits "unlawfully gained," for unspecified damages and for destruction of the defendant's products. 

But Dr. Alan Blum, a Houston physician who founded the doctors group in 1977, said the central issue is its free speech right to spoof advertising, not trademark law.
He said the physicians were objecting to the link between a beer company and a health charity, such as the Texas Special Olympics.
The lawsuit, he said, "is a malicious attack on us, and on the First Amendment." Miller earlier had gone to state court seeking to stop the T-shirt sales.
A state district judge denied its request for a temporary restraining order, saying he saw the sales as a form of protest under the First Amendment, not a trademark matter. 

