.START 

In an extraordinary attempt to save Ms. magazine from folding, its new owner plans to begin publishing the magazine without advertising beginning with the January 1990 issue. 

Dale Lang, Ms. 's new owner, says that instead of compromising the magazine's advocacy spirit to fit the tastes of advertisers, he will attempt to operate Ms. based only on circulation revenues. 

Mr. Lang became the fourth owner of Ms. in August when he agreed to acquire Matilda Publications Inc., publisher of Ms. and Sassy, a monthly magazine for teenage girls.
Mr. Lang is purchasing both magazines with the help of Citicorp Venture Capital Partners, one of Matilda's original financial backers.
Mr. Lang's new company, Lang Communications, will own 70% of Matilda, while Citicorp will own 30%. 

Mr. Lang, 57 year old, also publishes Working Woman and Working Mother magazines. 

Ms., a magazine born of the woman's liberation movement of the early 1970s, has never been profitable in its 17 years.
But Mr. Lang, who is expected to take control of the magazine today, says it is currently in "dire straits." The December issue, which has pulled in a scant seven advertising pages, probably will be canceled, Mr. Lang says. 

The publishing executive says he can operate Ms. profitably if the magazine can do away with expensive circulation drives and be allowed to find its natural circulation level, which he estimates could be in the 200,000 to 250,000 range. 

The strategy is a risky one.
Very few magazines, with the exception of Consumer Reports, do without ads and still attempt to reach a large audience.
And no industry observers remember a magazine going from being an advertising vehicle to a non-advertising vehicle.
Yet, Mr. Lang has some believers. 

"The biggest mistake Ms. made was trying to make it a vehicle for standard magazine advertisers," says Neal Vitale, vice president, McNamee Consulting Company, a New York magazine consultant. "He's being smart.
The people who really want to read Ms. will pay a lot of money for that point of view.
Now he can focus on making it a circulation driven magazine, with a point of view, and not be compromised by putting standard celebrities on the cover to sell it." 

Ms. fell into serious trouble when the magazine tried to build circulation by expensive methods such as using subscription agencies, making cut-rate subscription offers and engaging in costly direct mail campaigns.
The goal was to boost the circulation above the 500,000 level considered significant by advertisers. 

Circulation did reach about 550,000, but advertisers didn't respond, partly because of the magazine's editorial content.
According to Mr. Lang, several advertisers pulled their ad schedules after an August cover on the Supreme Court's abortion ruling.
The cover carried the headline, "It's War," in large, red letters. 

Despite the circulation gains, Mr. Lang notes that a recent study by Simmons Market Research Bureau shows that Ms. 's total reading audience has fallen slightly.
Moreover, readers' average household income is one of the lowest among women's magazines. 

Valerie Muller, vice president and media director of Pedone & Partners, says Ms. 's problem is that it is trying to survive at a time when advertisers' concerns dominate magazine publishing. "It's just not the right time to make a Ms. statement to advertisers.
Lang is smart enough to know it's still the editorial product that's important," Ms. Muller says. 

HBO to Polish Its Image 

Home Box Office Inc. is launching a $38 million image ad campaign that it is billing as the "largest and most comprehensive television advertising effort ever mounted in the cable industry." 

HBO, a unit of Time Warner Inc., will begin airing 30-second ads Oct. 16 on other cable channels and during heavily watched network programs and sports events.
The spots will run throughout 1990. 

John Billock, HBO's senior vice president, marketing, said the campaign "ushers in the next phase of cable's development from a business whose growth was first propelled by construction to a business that must increasingly rely on its marketing prowess to achieve expansion." 

Ad Notes. . . . 

ACQUISITION: Omnicom's DDB Needham Worldwide unit agreed to buy Elgin Syferd Inc., Seattle, a advertising and public relations firm with billings of about $38 million.
Terms weren't disclosed. 

BRUT MOVE: Faberge Inc., a unit of the Anglo-Dutch consumer goods giant, Unilever Group, moved its account for men's toiletries, including Brut cologne and aftershave, to Lintas:New York, a unit of Interpublic Group of Cos.
The account, whose budget wasn't disclosed, was previously with Bozell, Jacobs, Kenyon & Eckhardt Inc., New York. 

FRANKENBERRY LINK-UP: Sausage maker Jones Dairy Farm, Fort Atkinson, Wis., named Frankenberry, Laughlin & Constable Inc. of Milwaukee as its advertising and public relations agency of record.
The account, which was previously with Carmichael Lynch Inc., Minneapolis, is estimated at $2 million. 

NEW ACCOUNT: Oneita Industries Inc., Andrews, S.C., is handing over its $1.5 million to $2 million ad account to Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey & Strauss Inc., New York.
Oneita, a maker of knit apparel, is a unit of Instrument Systems Corp. of Jericho, N.Y.
The account was previously with Triton Advertising Inc., New York. 

WHO'S NEWS: Stanley D. Canter, 66, co-founder and president of the marketing consulting company, Canter, Achenbaum Associates Inc., said yesterday that he would retire from the firm at year end. 

