.START 

It was Christmas Eve, 1987, but at Western Union Corp. there was little cheer. 

The petition was drafted, employee mailgrams readied, and a press release written.
Western Union was about to file under Chapter 11 of the federal bankruptcy laws. 

At the eleventh hour, the venerable communications firm got a reprieve.
Balking bondholders finally accepted a complex refinancing plan that put New York investor Bennett S. LeBow, a client of Drexel Burnham Lambert, in control. "Life was breathed back into the patient," recalls one Western Union executive. 

For a while, anyway.
Less than two years later, the company whose name once meant American innovation is again gasping for air.
Mr. LeBow's plan of salvation, sponsored by Drexel, has come up short.
And for the fourth time in as many years, Western Union is begging creditors: Keep us alive a little bit longer. 

Western Union now has a negative net worth of $766 million.
Including pension liabilities, it has $1 billion of long-term debt -- but cash flow of only $70 million.
Its telex business is in a breathtaking decline, devastated by facsimile.
A company that some Wall Streeters thought a takeover candidate at $30 a share 5 1/2 years ago closed on the Big Board yesterday at $1. 

The bane of Western Union just now is a $500 million junk-bond offering that Drexel underwrote as part of the plan that gave control to Brooke Partners, which is 65% owned by Mr. LeBow and partner William Weksel.
Its interest is adjustable, and in June it leapt to 19 1/4%. 

"Look, the company has got to be restructured," says Mr. LeBow, sitting in the massive boardroom at his Manhattan-based management company, LeBow, Weksel & Co.
This summer the 51-year-old financier proposed swapping the bonds for notes, and rearranging things so the money-transfer business could be used as collateral for bank loans.
Then came the turmoil in the junk-bond market.
That "is going to make us rethink that transaction," says Mr. LeBow. "But we can't keep paying 19 1/4 interest." 

Western Union's chief financial officer, Stewart Paperin, is more emphatic.
If the company can't refinance the bonds and lower its interest payments, he says, "we'll be in nuclear meltdown." 

The Western Union story is about a company that played ostrich while technological and regulatory changes fundamentally altered its business.
Its current predicament suggests how even the sharpest financial minds -- those of Mr. LeBow and his Drexel partners -- can stumble in the face of a revolution in technology.
The question now is, can these turnaround/takeover specialists -- having seen Western Union from the inside -- revise their strategies, persuade their creditors, and ultimately get the company back on its feet? 

Western Union's troubles grew out of a parochial mind-set that dates back 113 years.
Then a high-tech giant sending messages by Morse code, the company turned down rights to the telephone, telling Alexander Graham Bell that sending voice over wire would never replace telegraph, particularly for business communication.
Mr. Bell instead sold his rights to the predecessor company of American Telephone & Telegraph Co. 

AT&T went on to become the biggest corporation in the world, before the 1984 Bell System break-up.
Western Union, through the mid-1970s, managed under protective regulation to carve out a profitable niche sending written messages by wire through its telex network and through another, similar business called TWX, acquired from AT&T in the mid-1970s. 

Then, management seemingly panicked.
Responding to competition stirred by new technology and deregulation of the telecommunications industry, Western Union embarked on a series of diversions.
But unable to decide where to place its bets, it tried everything: cellular-phone manufacturing, satellite launching, airplane phone service, electronic mail, long-distance telephone.
To pay for its gambles, the company took on debt, layering on 10 issues of bonds and nine of preferred stock by 1986. 

"We made some fundamental mistakes," says Theodore Kheel, the New York labor lawyer, who was a director until Mr. LeBow took over. "We went into a number of tangential acquisitions instead of thinking how to be a competitor in the communications business.
Then we fell too far behind the communications leaders and didn't have access to the funds to catch up." 

Since 1984, the company has never been far from crisis.
That year, banks pulled their credit lines, and the company had three different chairmen in six months.
Soon, it was trying to sell itself, hiring Drexel to help.
When that didn't work, it proposed a recapitalization, but preferred shareholders wouldn't have it.
While the banks held off for fear of forcing the company into bankruptcy proceedings, Drexel banker Paul Levy kept trying to find someone to put in some money. 

Gary Winnick, a former Drexel senior vice president, agreed to do so.
A plan was devised that would give him control.
But Mr. Winnick had trouble finding operating management.
Enter Mr. LeBow, then a little-known turnaround artist, who had earlier spurned Drexel's entreaties.
This time, where every other big deal maker saw a tar baby, Mr. LeBow thought he saw opportunity. 

He had been buying companies, such as cigarette maker Liggett Group Inc., that were in declining markets but could be combined with competitors to generate high cash flow.
Was telex such a business?
Both Mr. LeBow and an associate, former Bunker Ramo Corp. president Robert Amman, thought telex was ripe for consolidation.
Mr. LeBow already had an option to buy ITT Corp. 's telex business for about $144.5 million. 

"We felt we could buy two telex companies, put them together and make it a very profitable business," says Mr. Amman, now Western Union's president. "We would use the cash to build other businesses" that had greater growth prospects, such as money-transfer and electronic mail. 

Mr. LeBow, through borrowings of Brooke Partners, put up a minimum amount of cash -- $25 million -- for a 63% controlling equity stake that, once Western Union returns to profitability, gives him rights to 79.4 million newly issued common shares.
To satisfy Mr. Winnick and his partners, Mr. LeBow granted the Winnick group options on nine million of his Western Union shares for 25 cents a share -- which is about the same price Mr. LeBow paid for his stake in the company's common equity.
Western Union also paid the Winnick group $8.1 million in fees and expenses. 

Then came six arduous months of negotiating with bondholders, banks and preferred stockholders for repayment of debt at a discount and a swapping of securities.
One dissident stockholder launched a proxy fight, which was settled only when Mr. LeBow's group agreed to put him on the board.
To get 70% of the bondholders to exchange, Western Union agreed to pay them a one-time cash sweetener of $20 million. 

By the time the company had sweetened the pot for various constituencies, its annual carrying costs in interest and dividends had risen to $148 million, up $44 million from the original LeBow plan of May 1987. 

And more danger lay ahead.
The plan included a $500 million junk-bond offering to pay off the banks and buy ITT's business.
But to sell the bonds to its clients, Drexel insisted the terms provide that interest could be reset twice by investment bankers.
For its work in 1987, Drexel collected $25 million in fees and underwriting commissions. 

Mr. LeBow planned to oust current management once he got control, but, to gain the cooperation of Western Union's three top officers, he agreed to employment contracts totaling $850,000 in annual salaries.
All three have since left, but are still drawing their pay.
Robert Leventhal, the former chairman, is currently dean of the business school at the University of Washington in Seattle.
He is in the second year of a five-year, $400,000-a-year consulting contract. 

Mr. Amman and Mr. LeBow figured that costs saved by combining the telex businesses of Western Union and ITT would generate an extra $100 million in cash a year.
Unwanted assets, such as satellite and long-distance businesses, would be sold, cutting operating losses as well as overhead. 

But, just as the telephone had blindsided Western Union 100 years ago, facsimile machines blind-sided Mr. LeBow.
Customers who routinely used telex began converting to fax in droves as fax machine prices plunged and the number of them in use reached "critical mass." Telex revenue, which had been declining 6% a year, started dropping at a 35%-to-40% rate.
Western Union's total revenue of $875.9 million last year fell 14% from 1987 and was some $100 million less than originally anticipated. 

In addition, the telex debacle forced Western Union to write off $80 million in good will associated with the ITT telex purchase.
A new Western Union telex network built only nine years ago was junked, pushing total write-offs last year to over $1 billion. 

"In my career, I have never seen a market of this size decline at such rates," says Peter S. Anderson, who was hired as senior vice president of Western Union's business-services division seven months ago. "Everybody was surprised that the rate of decline kept increasing." (In April, Western Union told investors it expected telex revenue to plunge to $172 million in 1989 from $250 million last year, but now it calls the April projection "optimistic.") 

Thus Mr. LeBow hasn't been able to achieve the hoped-for cash-flow boost, despite replacing 75% of management, firing and retiring 2,800 employees, selling most of Western Union's telecommunications assets and cutting $134 million in annual operating costs.
Last November, the company put up its first distress signal: Directors omitted preferred dividend payments -- on securities issued just a year earlier. 

By June, the sorry state of the business caused interest on the junk bonds to be reset to 19 1/4% from 16 1/2%, increasing the company's annual interest payments by $13.8 million.
Terms required interest be reset to give them a market value of 101% of their principal amount.
After the reset, the bonds held at a price of 92 to 93, but they started plunging soon afterwards, weakening with the rest of the junk market this fall.
Yesterday they closed at 62 1/2. 

Mr. LeBow has continued tinkering with the package of notes he hopes to swap for the junk bonds.
But if it isn't attractive enough and bondholders won't exchange, Western Union will be forced to start repurchasing the bonds in $100 million chunks sometime next year.
So, "if this current exchange doesn't go through, clearly there will have to be a son-of-exchange offer," says Mr. Paperin. 

And now, the company says it is looking at alternatives to an exchange offer because of the turmoil in the junk-bond market and the long time the Securities and Exchange Commission has taken to review its proposed swap. 

Mr. LeBow and his group say Western Union isn't close to a bankruptcy filing.
At the moment, Brooke Partners' investment in Western Union's preferred shares and some junk bonds is worth less than it cost ($46 million), and Mr. LeBow concedes that "those were dumb investments." But he says he never expected a quick payout. 

"I don't think Western Union is distressed, though people disagree with that," Mr. LeBow declares. "Obviously we are disappointed about the decline in telex, but everything else, including the management team, is working well." 

The company expects to end the year with $70 million in cash, although net fixed charges of $95 million this year will exceed operating cash flow by $15 million to $20 million.
Mr. Anderson says he expects the decline in telex revenue to be made up by revenue from the electronic mail service, called EasyLink, and other business services by the third quarter of next year, with operating earnings in his division hitting bottom in this year's third quarter. 

Meantime, Mr. Amman has a new destiny for Western Union: financial services for the 25% of U.S. households that don't have checking accounts.
The company currently moves about $3 billion a year through its money-transfer network, mostly from poor and lower-middle-class neighborhoods.
Despite the financial distresses of the past five years, people still entrust the company with their cash, says Mr. Amman, although those money transfers aren't insured.
Western Union recently bought National Payments Network, which collects bills for utilities from people who pay in person. 

Western Union isn't the only one to think of these opportunities, of course.
It is up against AT&T, MCI Communications Corp. and US Sprint Communications Co. in electronic mail, and must compete with American Express in money transfer.
And Western Union in the past, under different management, has sketched itself a new destiny only to be outdone by sudden changes in technology and competition. 

Still, Mr. LeBow professes great faith in Western Union.
Turning it around, he says, will just take a bit longer, perhaps until 1993. "If telex had held to our original assumptions," says Mr. Amman, "the turnaround of this company would have been a slam dunk.
But the game only runs out when you run out of money." 

