.START 

James Andress, a top executive at SmithKline Beecham PLC, resigned unexpectedly in a sign of growing pains at the newly merged health-care giant here. 

Mr. Andress, who shared the No. 3 spot at SmithKline Beecham, is quitting his #325,000-a-year ($502,613) job to run a much smaller company outside the pharmaceutical industry.
Next month, he becomes president and chief operating officer of Information Resources Inc., Chicago-based marketing consultants with $150 million in annual sales. 

Mr. Andress gave up the presidency of U.S. drug maker Sterling Drug Inc. in 1988 to become heir apparent to then Beecham Group PLC Chairman Robert Bauman.
A year later, Beecham merged with Philadelphia's SmithKline Beckman Corp. 

John Chappell, a senior SmithKline executive, took over Mr. Andress's responsibility for the pharmaceutical business following completion of the unusual trans-Atlantic marriage. 

Mr. Andress said SmithKline Beecham will eliminate his post as chairman for health-care products and services because he finished integrating those businesses. "I guess my ego could be hurt," but it isn't, he said in a phone interview. "Were I to stay, there wouldn't be very much to do." 

At Information Resources Mr. Andress, 50 years old, will move into a spot left vacant by Gian Fulgoni, who moved up last January to become the company's chief executive officer. 

Drug-industry analysts were surprised and dismayed by his sudden departure.
Erling Refsum, a drug analyst at Nomura Research Institute in London, said, "It's part of a shakeout, obviously." 

Mr. Andress was highly regarded for his leadership of Beecham's pharmaceuticals business.
One ex-Beecham executive suggested Mr. Andress may be quitting because Mr. Chappell edged him out. 

But Mr. Andress, who helped arrange the SmithKline deal and has been a board member of the merged company, recalled that he didn't object to Mr. Chappell's appointment. "It seemed to make sense that John be in charge of integrating the much larger SmithKline {pharmaceuticals} business with the smaller Beecham business," he said. 

Mr. Andress added that personal reasons also influenced his return to Chicago, where his wife and three children live.
His family never moved when he left Abbott in 1984 to join Sterling Drug. 

Analysts nevertheless see the resignation as an indication of SmithKline Beecham's difficulties in quickly delivering the merger's promised "synergy." Many investors foresaw gains from joining sales forces and possibly $600 million in savings from pruning duplicative functions. 

But combining the companies' far-flung operations is turning out to be a delicate and time-consuming task -- even though wholesale staff cuts and plant closings have yet to begin.
Mr. Bauman, chief executive officer, has asked staff task forces and management consultants McKinsey Co. to devise restructuring plans by year end.
Meanwhile, "nobody knows what they are doing or for how long and why," a recently retired employee said.
And few combined marketing efforts have begun yet. 

There have been other resignations among lower-level managers, but Mr. Andress becomes only the second top Beecham executive to leave since the merger.
R. Paul Tatman, 55, will take early retirement this month, a spokeswoman said.
He had been deputy chairman of the pharmaceuticals business and, previously, a Beecham board member. 

