.START 

Top policy makers in the Bush administration have agreed to push legislation to shift jurisdiction over the Bell System breakup decree from a federal court to the Federal Communications Commission. 

A move to the FCC could eventually allow the regional Bell companies to enter such lucrative information services businesses as electronic yellow pages, stock quotes and sports information.
It also could also free the seven Bell companies to engage in manufacturing telephone equipment.
But the Bells, which provide monopoly local phone service, aren't likely to get permission anytime soon to enter the long-distance market. 

Since the court-supervised breakup of the Bell System Jan. 1, 1984, the seven companies have been lobbying hard for legislation to lift the restrictions on their businesses.
The decree bars them from entering the long-distance and manufacturing businesses and from providing the content of information services.
The Bells have argued that Judge Harold Greene, who oversees the decree, has been too restrictive and that the process of obtaining waivers moves much more slowly than the rapidly changing telecommunications marketplace. 

Administration officials have been meeting with lawmakers to build support for the effort, but getting Congress to focus on esoteric telecommunications issues will be difficult. "The House is okay on the shift to the FCC," a senior administration official said. "But it simply may not excite the Senate." The administration hopes to complete a legislative proposal by year end, the official said. 

The senior administration official said that at two recent meetings, the Economic Policy Council, which is headed by Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady and includes Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher and Budget Director Richard Darman, discussed strategies for pitching such legislation to Capitol Hill. 

The official said the administration hasn't decided whether to draft its own bill, which would shift jurisdiction from the decree court to the FCC, or to support a measure already introduced by Rep. Al Swift (D., Wash.) and Rep. Thomas J. Tauke (R., Iowa) eliminating specific restrictions on electronic publishing.
If jurisdiction is transferred, efforts to lift the restrictions could still take months.
Nevertheless, the FCC, with its emphasis on deregulation rather than curbing antitrust abuses, is considered a friendly forum for the regional Bells. 

What form the legislation may take and whether Congress will be ready to act on it next year, as hoped, is uncertain.
Even so, the administration's decision to set in motion the process of freeing the regional Bells from most consent-decree restrictions adds significant weight to their arguments that the consent decree hobbles them -- and their customers -- in the global race into the Information Age. 

Even without support from the Bush administration, the effort to free the Bells from Judge Greene's jurisdiction has met with strong resistance from politically powerful opponents: American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and others in the long-distance industry, small-equipment manufacturers and the American Newspaper Publishers Association. 

In a position paper presented to the Economic Policy Council, the Commerce Department noted some big advantages in deferring a decision.
Policy makers would have more time to study thorny legal questions and see what the appeals court here has to say about some important rulings from Judge Greene.
The paper also said a delay "keeps the administration out of a highly contentious domestic policy issue.
Avoids pursuing proposals that have little support in the Senate or that might ultimately have provisions the administration should not support." 

The Commerce Department, rather than the Justice Department, is taking the lead on the new administration push, the senior official said.
Justice's new antitrust chief, James Rill, apparently has ordered a review of the consent decree issues and the various positions within the telecommunications industry. 

The antitrust problems could be significant.
The core business of the seven regional Bell companies is providing monopoly local phone service, and the top policy makers have explored ways to safeguard against harmful monopolistic behavior. 

