.START 

The Americans With Disabilities bill now pending in Congress would have enormous consequences not only for its intended beneficiaries but also for our entire legal system.
As it happens, I've had experience in both areas. 

As law clerk to a federal judge, a lawyer in private practice, and finally a counsel to President Reagan, I've seen how the creation of new "rights" by both legislatures and judges has resulted in ever more expensive and expansive litigation.
I've seen how even defendants who ultimately prevail in a lawsuit can lose hundreds of thousands of dollars in legal fees as a case takes years to come to trial. 

Small wonder that our nation is awash in lawyers, and that all of us are burdened in hundreds of hidden ways by the costs and side effects of proliferating lawsuits.
So it should be with some trepidation that we consider a new federal law that would, by its own terms, create 43 million potential plaintiffs. 

According to the preamble of the disabilities bill, that's how many people would be entitled to sue not only their employers but also restaurants, private offices, hardware stores, bakeries, gas stations, or indeed almost any private establishment. (Of course, federal, state and local government agencies will also be subject to suits.) 

I can understand the motivation.
Shortly before I began practicing law, a Jeep that I was driving through a muddy rain forest in Hawaii flipped, landing on top of me and pinning me underneath.
My spine was shattered.
For weeks afterward, I lay in a hospital, paralyzed from the waist down. 

Life seems very different from the perspective of one who cannot walk, or even use a restroom normally. 

I was lucky enough to recover fully.
That brief taste of a lifetime handicap, however, made me appreciate those who have to overcome such obstacles in our society.
As a result, I'm especially keen on providing wheelchair ramps, lifts, signers for deaf people, and readers for the blind.
If that was what the disabilities bill were all about, I'd be leading the charge for its passage.
In fact, however, the legislation is one of the most poorly drafted pieces of legal work I have seen during more than a decade as a lawyer.
It's a model of vagueness.
Who is disabled?
Anyone with an impairment that "substantially limits one or more of the major life activities," whatever that means.
Congressional sponsors of the bill concede that, at a minimum, mental disorders, alcoholism and past drug abuse are all included. 

What is required of you to avoid being sued?
Well, you can't "fail to make reasonable modifications" in your "policies, practices, and procedures." And, of course, you can't "discriminate." The bill puts the burden of proof on you to justify any disparate treatment. 

Just what constitutes "discrimination" under the bill?
No one knows for sure, because the bill gives almost no guidance.
Believe it or not, the bill does say this: You can be sued if you provide -- to anyone who is later determined to be "disabled" -- a benefit that, while different, is greater than what you offer to non-disabled persons.
One can only imagine what the courts will decide when the creativity of thousands of plaintiffs' lawyers is applied to this section. 

The consequence of all of this legislative ambiguity is that virtually every plaintiff -- the unscrupulous as well as the deserving -- will be able to establish a cause of action that makes it past the procedural screens of demurrer and summary judgment.
Once secure in the long and slowly moving queue of cases headed for trial, a plaintiff will almost certainly be able to settle for a substantial sum.
Businesses and employers, lacking contingency-fee lawyers, will face the choice of paying, say, $40,000 to an individual at a relatively early stage in the proceedings, or instead paying the even higher lawyers' fees necessary to prepare their case for trial up to six years later. 

Even without this new windfall for plaintiffs' lawyers, the federal courts are already so clogged that few cases reach trial.
According to the Administrative Office of U.S. Courts, only 4.9% of the 238,140 cases that were ended during the 12-month period ended June 30, 1988, had reached trial.
In other words, the real world is far different than imagined by proponents of the disabilities bill.
In more than 95% of the cases, a judge would never determine that an individual defendant was reasonable or unjustified; instead, those businesses -- travel agents, libraries, schools, bowling alleys -- would simply have to ante up. 

Attorney General Dick Thornburgh has stressed that he is steadfastly opposed to creating any additional incentives for litigation.
Indeed, the administration succeeded in getting Senate drafters to limit suits for damages to the Justice Department, and not to private lawyers.
That's the right idea, but the bill still permits private civil suits for back pay, and plaintiffs' attorneys fees are recoverable.
Moreover, private litigants are authorized to sue for injunctive relief that potentially could cost a business or individual defendant far more than the damage to any single plaintiff, thus generating enormous settlement value.
That's why I'll seek to amend the bill to eliminate private suits, leaving the government to adopt clarifying regulations and enforce them in the courts. 

It would be unfortunate if, through poor legal craftsmanship, pursuit of such a noble cause should lead to turning civil society over to the near-total governance of lawyers and courtrooms. 

Rep. Cox (R., Calif.) is on both the Public Works and Transportation and the Government Operations Committee. 

(See related editorial: "...And More Dependent Disabled" -- WSJ Oct. 13, 1989) 

