.START 

President Bush faces pressure from the Democratic leadership in Congress and leading Republicans to relax his opposition to legislation renewing federal support for Medicaid abortions for poor women who are victims of rape and incest. 

House Speaker Thomas Foley and Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell jointly appealed to the president to drop his veto threat, and opponents to abortion signaled that concessions may be possible on the narrow issue. "I think the White House is in a helluva dilemma," said a House Republican, who has previously sided with the administration on the abortion question. "I sense they're in a wicked bind." 

Since 1981, Medicaid-covered abortions are allowed only when the mother's life is in danger.
But in a major reversal Wednesday, the House adopted a Senate provision that permits federal support in rape or incest cases which are "reported promptly to a law enforcement agency or public health service." Any compromise would require more carefully defining these reporting requirements to satisfy conservatives.
But among the most ardent anti-abortionists yesterday, there appeared to be a willingness to strike some accord and so blunt the issue. 

Many Democrats appear delighted with the discomfort caused to the president, but the party leadership held out little hope that it could override a veto, even as it chose to criticize Mr. Bush's position. "This is a plea to the president to reconsider," said Sen. Mitchell (D., Maine).
But his joint appearance with the speaker appeared to be part of an effort to harness what momentum the party can capture from the resurgent power of the pro-choice movement. "If Bush wants to alienate all the women, it's up to him," said House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman John Dingell (D., Mich.), and much the same message was underscored by Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Foley. "The president's position is wrong," said the leaders. "It is harsh -- terribly harsh -- on the poorest, most vulnerable American women.
The president would deny these women their right to free choice." 

As adopted this week, the Medicaid provision is incorporated in a massive $156.7 billion bill funding the departments of Labor, Education, and Health and Human Services.
The bill represents the heart of the federal commitment to social welfare programs.
As much as the rape and incest issue divided lawmakers, the underlying measure commands broad support.
Though a long shot, it's still possible the Appropriations Committee leadership will be able to win sufficient support on these grounds to override a veto, some observers believe. 

Mr. Foley flatly rejected any hope of picking up the necessary 70-75 votes for an override.
But the politics of the abortion issue already have changed this year beyond the expectations of most observers.
Within the New England delegation, for example, those supporting the anti-abortion position this week found themselves outnumbered 2-1.
And such traditional loyalists as Rep. Brian Donnelly (D., Mass.), who opposed the rape and incest exemption, said he would be likely to vote to override any veto because of the larger import of the education and health bill. 

Rep. Henry Hyde (R., Ill.), the most forceful advocate of the anti-abortion movement in the House, held open the possibility of a negotiated, "more acceptable" amendment to halt the fight.
And his friend, Minority Leader Robert Michel (R., Ill.) appeared uncomfortable with the prospect of a high-profile confrontation.
Asked if Mr. Bush would veto the bill, Mr. Michel shrugged and said, "That's the president's call." 

Although the administration has taken a hard line in letters to Congress, Mr. Bush's personal position on the issue has changed over the years.
He now opposes federal funding for abortions in cases of rape and incest, but he still recognizes these are special cases and, in fact, once backed federal aid for the poor women who are victims of these crimes. 

One of the ironies of the president's predicament is that he moved toward a stronger anti-abortion stand to win conservative backing for the GOP nomination.
But he now risks being isolated as too extreme in the changed atmosphere after the Supreme Court's landmark decision in July upholding Missouri's restrictions on abortion.
Looking at his three "home" states -- Maine, Connecticut and Texas -- a majority of the lawmakers there supported the exemption for rape and incest, and Rep. Nancy Johnson (R., Conn.) has taken the lead in circulating a letter among Republicans urging against a veto. 

Mr. Mitchell, over the past decade, has moved in the opposite direction of the president.
In recent years, he has adopted a more moderate position on abortion.
But as a first-term senator in 1981, the main Democrat joined conservative Sen. Jesse Helms (R., N.C.) in helping to strike the exemption for rape and incest cases. 

