.START 

Qantas Airways Ltd., Australia's government-owned international airline, said operating profit totaled 176.8 million Australian dollars (US$137.4 million) in the year ended June 30. 

That compares with A$172.8 million in the 15 months ended June 30, 1988, when the company changed its fiscal year. 

Total revenue was A$3.27 billion, compared with A$3.51 billion in the earlier period. 

James Leslie, chairman of Qantas, said the result "fell short" of planned earnings.
Tourism into Australia, after two years of sharp growth, was less than had been expected, particularly from Japan and New Zealand. 

That was partly offset by an increase in the number of Australians traveling abroad.
But the strength of the Australian dollar adversely affected profits. 

Mr. Leslie said late delivery of aircraft from Boeing Co. and uncertain market conditions caused by a protracted strike by Australia's domestic airline pilots will adversely affect earnings this fiscal year. 

Australia's opposition Liberal and National political parties, which governed the country in a coalition for most of the 40 years until 1983, pledged to cut the top personal-income-tax rate and sell 1.6 billion Australian dollars (US$1.24 billion) of government assets if they are re-elected to government. 

In an "Economic Action Plan," the two conservative parties said they aim to have the top personal-income-tax rate equal the corporate-tax rate of 39%; the top personal rate is currently 49%. 

The two parties said that in their first year of government they would raise A$1.6 billion by selling government businesses including Qantas Airways Ltd. and Medibank Private, which is part of the government's health-insurance system. 

The incumbent Labor Party government is expected to call a national election in the first half of 1990.
Recent opinion polls suggest the opposition parties would attract about the same number of votes as the current government. 

Panama's Gen. Manuel Noriega made millions of dollars by investing in a Mexican lab that allegedly produced counterfeit steroids, Mexican federal authorities said.
The Panamanian leader invested $800,000 two years ago in Milano Laboratories of Mexico and subsequently reinvested some of his returns, said Enrique Guillermo Salazar, commander of the federal judicial police in Tijuana.
The lab was closed in April by federal police.
At the time, U.S. authorities said it was the largest supplier of counterfeit steroids to a multimillion-dollar U.S. black market. 

South African Breweries Ltd., or SAB, the country's largest producer of beer, was hit by a strike at seven of its 11 breweries around the country.
The strike, involving about 5,500 employees, stems from a wage dispute between SAB and the Food and Allied Workers Union.
SAB has offered a 16% across-the-board wage increase which would bring the minimum wage up to 1,063 rand (about $388) per month, the spokesman said.
The union is demanding a 38% increase in the minimum wage, the SAB spokesman said. 

Italy is investigating U.S. allegations that Italy's Ing.
C. Olivetti & Co. violated Western export-control rules and sold the Soviet Union computer equipment used to manufacture a highly sophisticated jet fighter.
The U.S. case regarding Olivetti, which officials say is based on intelligence information, was brought up at a meeting earlier this week between President Bush and Italian President Francesco Cossiga. "The President did mention the concern about the Olivetti case.
And President Cossiga stressed that this was being pursued in . . . a highly cooperative manner," said Assistant Secretary of State Raymond Seitz. 

South Korea's Trade and Industry Ministry announced a $38.8 billion five-year plan to make South Korea one of the world's top 10 high-technology nations by the year 2000.
Korea's current ranking wasn't given.
The plan involves government aid to industry through outright grants, low-interest loans and tax incentives such as deductions.
Officials said the plan was prompted partly by the reluctance of some countries, such as Japan, to transfer high technology to Korea for fear of hurting their own business. 

Striking workers at Peugeot S.A.'s car plant at Mulhouse, in eastern France, voted to evacuate a press shop that they've been occupying, clearing the way for a negotiated settlement to a six-week-long labor dispute.
Peugeot management refused to open negotiations on strikers' grievances while the press shop was occupied.
The strikers' decision means that the two sides can now sit down and negotiate compromise proposals put forward by a government-appointed mediator. 

The European Community agreed in principle to limit its steel exports to the U.S. for a further 2 1/2 years. 

In return, the EC Commission said it obtained concessions from Washington that "constitute a credible step toward liberalization of steel trade" with the U.S. According to the commission, these concessions include an agreement by the U.S. to increase the EC's quota slightly, to 7% from 6.7% of the U.S. steel market. 

The U.S. maintains that subsidies handed out in the past to EC steelmakers continue to give them an unfair advantage when exporting to the U.S.
But the Europeans say that argument is a pretext for protectionism while U.S. steelmakers are posting profits in a buoyant market. 

The EC has made it clear that it won't agree to extend the quotas again after March 1992. 

The United Nations reported that members owed it more than $1.1 billion at the end of September in budget dues and assessments for peace-keeping operations.
The U.S. was the biggest debtor, owing more than $495 million towards the U.N.'s regular budgets and over $180 million for peace-keeping. . . . China said its labor and "re-education" camps were a "miracle on earth," where more than two million people were cured of their criminal ways in the past decade. 

