.START 

For the second time in less than two years, the two most senior American officials at Mazda Motor Corp. 's U.S. manufacturing plant have resigned.
This time the American managers were succeeded by Japanese officials. 

James F. Korowin, vice president of manufacturing and operations, and C. Robert Leadbetter, vice president of personnel, resigned "to pursue other issues," Mazda said.
Mazda announced the resignations late Wednesday, one day after results were announced for a vote of the plant's union-represented workers that changed the company's attendance policy. 

The resignations were the latest revelation of managerial troubles at Mazda's Flat Rock, Mich., operations, which use Japanese management techniques in the heart of U.S. auto-industry territory. 

In earlier reshufflings, Mr. Korowin's predecessor, Dennis Pawley, resigned in March 1988.
Currently an executive at Chrysler Corp., Mr. Pawley has criticized Mazda's Japanese executives for being inflexible.
Mr. Leadbetter's predecessor, David Merchant, resigned from the company last September. 

A Mazda spokesman said the company's top Japanese officers were "dismayed" with how Messrs.
Korowin and Leadbetter handled the negotiations that led to the vote on the attendance policy.
The spokesman added, however, that even though the Americans were succeeded by Japanese managers, Mazda remains committed to "providing qualified Americans in ever-increasing roles of responsibility," at the plant. 

In the vote earlier this week, workers approved a new attendance policy that triples annual bonuses for perfect attendance to $1,500, while limiting to four the number of absences for which workers will receive partial pay.
Previously workers could receive partial pay for any absences approved by their supervisor; workers criticized that policy for allowing supervisors too much discretion. 

The policy workers ultimately approved was a compromise plan developed after company officials and union members rejected a more liberal proposal that would have allowed workers to receive partial pay for 15 absences.
Messrs.
Korowin and Leadbetter were the company's chief negotiators in the talks that resulted in that proposal. 

Negotiations on changing the attendance policy were prompted by the union, but they came in exchange for a union concession to allow Mazda greater flexibility in assigning overtime to skilled tradesmen. 

Officials of United Auto Workers union Local 3000, which represents Flat Rock's 2,800 hourly workers, were disappointed with the resignations. "We felt we had developed a cooperative working relationship with those people," said Phillip Keeling, president of the local. 

The state of labor relations at the Mazda facility are crucial to the UAW's attempt to prove it can work cooperatively with Japanese management, especially since Japanese auto makers plan to continue expanding their U.S. facilities.
But the UAW also must prove to its members -- and to the nonunionized workers at Japanese-owned plants it hopes to recruit -- that it can win important benefits for its workers.
Impressions of ineffectual leadership among its membership has led the national union recently to take a more aggressive posture toward the domestic auto makers. 

Takeshi Itoh, formerly a senior adviser for operations, was named vice president manufacturing.
Mr. Itoh will handle the bulk of Mr. Korowin's former responsibilities and will report to Osamu Nobuto.
Mr. Nobuto, the top Mazda manufacturing official in the U.S., is more outspoken than other Japanese officials here; he recently criticized the UAW for failing to encourage better attendance among its members.
Absenteeism at the Mazda plant reportedly averages 8% to 10%, significantly higher than absences at other Japanese-managed U.S. plants. 

Mr. Leadbetter's duties will be assumed by Masahiro Uchida, the plant's executive vice president to whom Mr. Leadbetter had reported. 

Mr. Leadbetter, reached by telephone at his home yesterday, declined to say specifically why he left Mazda.
Currently looking for work, Mr. Leadbetter said his decision was "strictly personal," and that his relationship with Mazda was "positive and fulfilling." Mr. Korowin could not be reached for comment. 

The personnel changes also include the appointment of Ray Hedding, who was named general manager of operations and will become the highest ranking American official at Mazda here.
Mr. Hedding formerly was manager of Mazda's stamping operations in the facility. 

