.START 

When three top executives of Donald Trump's casino operation were killed in a helicopter crash Tuesday, he knew he needed someone trustworthy to help fill the void: his younger brother, Robert. 

Quieter and more even-tempered than his aggressive, media-conscious older brother, Robert Trump satisfies Trump Organization's immediate need to stabilize its Atlantic City, N.J., operations.
Wednesday, Mr. Trump was named to head the Trump Taj Mahal, soon to be one of the casinos there. 

Such stability is crucial to Donald Trump, who says he remains determined to keep his promise to open the Taj Mahal, which will be Atlantic City's largest casino, "on time, on budget" by the end of next April. 

Construction crews will have to be prodded, slot machines planted into the floor, middle managers and floor workers chosen and trained before the grand opening of the $1 billion complex.
Robert Trump is known as a consummate details man. 

In the months of negotiations between his brother and entertainer Merv Griffin for control of Resorts International Inc., the small points -- the number of Trump parking spaces Resorts would be allowed to use, for example -- were Robert Trump's forte. 

"He worked hard, and he did try to focus on all the many, many details of the deal," recalls Morris Orens, one of Mr. Griffin's lawyers during the discussions. 

Beyond any other considerations, 41-year-old Robert is a Trump.
The elder Mr. Trump says that the two have been "great friends" since boyhood and they don't argue with each other. 

But perhaps as important to Donald Trump is his brother's willingness to avoid the media spotlight.
Robert "prefers to be behind the scenes, he told me once," says Dennis Gorski, a former Trump Castle official who worked closely with both men. "He doesn't get the ink his brother gets, and he doesn't want it." 

Trump Organization said Robert rarely gives interviews.
He was unavailable for comment for this article.
Robert Trump is viewed as diplomatic and tactful.
Mr. Gorski describes him as playing an effective counterpoint to Donald's hard edge when dealing with Atlantic City leaders and state casino officials. 

Heading up the Trump delegation to the New Jersey Division of Gaming Enforcement when the Trump Castle casino was being built about six years ago, Robert Trump was a "delight to work with, very responsive, and very much oriented to the regulatory process," says Thomas O'Brien, director of the division at the time.
As a consequence, the casino received a license in weeks instead of the usual period of months. 

Although he is considered an effective administrator, the tall, sandy-haired Robert Trump is designated only an interim leader of the Taj Mahal operations. "It was a crisis and we had to do something," says a person close to Trump Organization. 

To make the Taj Mahal a success, Donald Trump needs someone with the grandstanding style and hard-charging traits of Mark Etess, the flamboyant 37-year-old president of the Taj Mahal, who died in the helicopter crash.
Mr. Etess had a love for the grand gesture, such as the Tyson-Spinks boxing match, which drew thousands to the Trump casinos last year, although it lasted only 90 seconds. 

So far Trump Organization has kept quiet about who that successor might be, and where he might come from.
Wall Street and industry competitors speculate that Mr. Trump will raid a rival casino operator, perhaps in Las Vegas. 

"We're looking both from within and without,"says Donald Trump. "Everyone wants to head up the Taj, because it's the ultimate property." 

