.START 

Researchers at the University of Minnesota found indications of genetic damage among workers who apply fumigants to control pests in the grain industry. 

Chromosome damage among the workers was linked to exposure to phosphine gas, the scientists said, which is released from pellets of aluminum phosphide or magnesium phosphide.
The pellets are used to control weevils and other insects in grain elevators, railroad cars and other facilities used to store or transport grain after harvest. 

While such genetic damage has been associated generally with an increased risk of cancer, no such link was established in this study, said its principal author, Vincent F. Garry, director of the environmental pathology laboratory at the University of Minnesota.
The study is published in today's issue of the journal Science. 

"There tends to be increased cancer of the {blood-forming} system in the grain industry, where these fumigants are commonly used," Dr. Garry said.
But scientists have yet to establish a link between chromosome damage and cancer or other health effects, he said. 

The study found that a group of 24 grain workers who apply pesticides had more than 3.5 times more chromosome aberrations than a control group that included non-farm industry workers as well as grain inspectors and others who might be occasionally exposed to pesticides.
The damage was highest among the nine workers exposed exclusively to phosphine, the study said. 

In addition, workers who spent more than 20 minutes applying the fumigant in an enclosed area suffered more chromosome damage than those who normally spent less than 15 minutes performing the task, the study said. 

The phosphide in the pellets may begin converting to phosphine in as little as five minutes after application, placing workers without respirators at risk of exposure.
The findings suggest workers should be better protected when using the pesticides, Dr. Garry said. 

Before 1986, fumigants combining carbon tetrachloride and carbon disulfide were commonly used in the grain industry, but they were banned by the Environmental Protection Agency after research linked their use to health hazards. 

Scientists at the EPA and the University of Texas also participated in the study. 

