.START 

For the past year, Philippine beer drinkers have inspired a running battle between two brewers.
Now a similar contest is heating up in soft drinks. 

An affiliate of PepsiCo Inc. of the U.S., as well as a local company, Cosmos Bottling Inc., are seeking to tear down some of the Coca-Cola signs that have dominated the Philippine landscape in recent years.
It's a high-stakes match: Despite its low per-capita income, the Philippines population guzzles $500 million of soft drinks a year, second in Asia only to Japan.
Some 360,000 outlets nationwide stock soft drinks, more than 70% of which are derived from cola products. 

"It's the most widely distributed, frequently consumed product in the country," says Paul Roberts, president of Pepsi Cola Products Philippines Inc., a new company, which bought the Philippines' Pepsi franchise in July, and is 18%-owned by PepsiCo.
The three soft-drink makers believe the market is worth fighting for, and they plan to pump hundreds of millions of dollars into marketing and expansion.
But the sudden spurt of activity in the industry reflects more than the country's taste for a fizzy drink, analysts say. 

The Philippines' three-year economic recovery has been fueled largely by consumer spending.
Many factories producing consumer goods are running at or near capacity.
Economists, bankers and businessmen expect an increasing number of these manufacturers, and supporting businesses, to expand. 

That seems especially true when it comes to what people eat and drink.
Pure Foods Corp. says it will pump one billion pesos (US$45.6 million) into its flour-milling, poultry and processed-meat facilities.
Its competitors, including RFM Corp., which led a group that bought Cosmos in June, report similar kinds of projects.
Coke's local franchise, Coca-Cola Bottlers Philippines Inc., is in the midst of a 2.5 billion-peso expansion.
Coca-Cola Philippines is owned 30% by Coca-Cola Co. of the U.S. and 70% by San Miguel. 

PepsiCo -- whose Philippine operation was pummeled for much of the 1980s by accounting scandals and financial miscues -- and Cosmos are both starting to attack that dominance.
They come armed with revamped management, ambitious marketing strategies and plans to invest what the two say could eventually total as much as $200 million. 

With so many industries targeting the freer-spending consumer, soft-drink makers are hoping that their huge number of outlets and long-established demand will give them an advantage.
Bottlers believe the market, which they measure in terms of bottles sold, rather than revenue, can grow as much as 15% a year. 

But they also have a few hurdles that others don't face. 

Industrywide sales this year have been stagnant.
Soft-drink prices increased with rising sugar costs, which jumped last year after a shortage in 1987 and subsequent hoarding.
The government recently imposed a 10% value-added tax on the commodity.
A series of devastating typhoons last year and a particularly wet 1989 disrupted production and rural distribution. 

Moreover, the industry itself presents a broad target for criticism from a growing nationalist lobby.
Soft drinks already have virtually destroyed the country's indigenous fruit-juice market.
In addition, the industry's marketing and advertising continue to reinforce the prevalent belief among Filipinos that Western products are superior to local ones. 

Even without these problems, PepsiCo's affiliate would face a a long road back to anything near the soft drink's former glory days.
In the late 1970s, when it was a wholly owned subsidiary of PepsiCo, the local Pepsi operation mounted a fierce marketing-and-distribution drive. 

Pepsi sales eclipsed Coke's.
For a time, the Philippines was one of the few countries where Coke wasn't dominant, according to industry officials. 

But the glory was short-lived.
Pepsi's aggressive campaign came unraveled in 1982, when the head office announced that the subsidiary had overstated profits from 1978 to 1981.
What had been billed as a profitable operation was suddenly saddled with huge losses. 

Then came the economic slump that followed the assassination in August 1983 of opposition leader Benigno Aquino, husband of Corazon Aquino, who became president 3 1/2 years ago.
In 1985, PepsiCo sold its operations, but the new owners couldn't reverse its sagging fortunes. 

While Coke took advantage of the upturn in the economy that came with the Aquino presidency in 1986, Pepsi was mired in lawsuits, government scrutiny and corporate strife.
The market share of Pepsi-Cola Bottling Co. of the Philippines Inc., which bottled Pepsi and 7-Up until the July change of ownership, toppled to 18% earlier this year from 63% in 1981, according to Mr. Roberts. 

