.START 

Trading turned cautious in financial markets as investors awaited fresh economic data scheduled for release today. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average declined 13.52, to 2759.84, down more than 1% during the past three days.
Treasury-bond prices rose less than one-eighth of a point, or $1.25 for each $1,000 face amount.
The dollar drifted lower against major currencies. 

Investors aren't interested in today's reports on producer prices and retail sales in September as much as the U.S. Federal Reserve's reaction -- if any -- to them.
To see what the Fed does they'll watch the federal-funds rate, which some analysts say the U.S. central bank will -- under the right circumstances -- lower to about 8 3/4% from around 9% currently.
The federal-funds rate is the rate banks charge each other for overnight loans of reserves, and is the rate most easily influenced by the Fed. 

A move to lower interest rates "remains contingent on evidence that domestic demand is slowing," said Susan Hering, an economist at Salomon Brothers Inc. Higher energy prices may have pushed producer prices up 1% last month, but analysts will zero in on the so-called core inflation rate, or wholesale prices except for food and energy, which are volatile.
Flat retail-sales growth and a core inflation rate below 5%, on an annualized basis, would be the right combination for the Fed to nudge rates lower, analysts said.
Yesterday, investors were anticipating such a move.
That is mainly why bonds rose a bit.
The dollar's decline also was acknowledgment of "the possibility that the Federal Reserve is nudging rates lower," said one trader. "That, coupled with dramatic rate increases overseas, is beginning to pressure the dollar." 

Stocks drew some support from falling interest rates.
But investors remained concerned about continuing disappointments in third-quarter earnings reports.
Profit-taking in takeover stocks weighed on stock prices, as did the 1.3% one-day drop in the Japanese stock market early yesterday. 

"You have the specter of a sell-off in Japan combined with the change in interest rates reminding people that global markets are linked," said New York Stock Exchange floor trader Arthur Cashin Jr. 

In major market activity: 

Stocks lost ground in moderate volume.
Approximately 160.1 million shares changed hands on the Big Board, where declining issues outnumbered gainers by 907 to 543. 

Bond prices rose slightly in very light trading.
The yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond fell to 8.03%. 

The dollar fell.
In late afternoon New York trading the dollar was quoted at 1.9083 marks and 144.17 yen, compared with 1.9166 marks and 144.57 yen late Wednesday. 

