.START 

BUSH FACES growing criticism that his actions don't live up to his words. 

Even supporters grouse about confusion over Panama and slow responses to events in Eastern Europe. "I'm frustrated there is something of a lack of resolve in foreign policy," says Indiana Republican Rep. Burton.
Conservatives grumble that Bush is too quick to avoid clashes at home and abroad. "Anytime he can negotiate a solution, he'll do it," says activist Howard Phillips. 

Lawmakers chafe that Bush doesn't back up proposals, such as on education. "The appeal of the president's positions will gradually erode as the gap between rhetoric and reality" grows, predicts Senate leader Mitchell.
Bush backed saving catastrophic-health care, but "the administration didn't lay its reputation on the line for this vote," gripes Ohio GOP Rep. Gradison. 

One bright spot for Bush: His reluctance to intervene in Panama should be supported by Latin American leaders at this month's summit in Costa Rica. 

EAST GERMAN TURMOIL poses a tricky foreign-policy test for the U.S. 

Senior national-security aides concede they were surprised at the mass exodus by East Germans.
West German officials, including visiting Defense Minister Stoltenberg, advise the U.S. of dangers no matter what happens.
East Berlin may violently suppress demonstrations while NATO stands by helplessly.
Or it may let people leave, swamping Bonn's ability to absorb them. 

Officials estimate that as many as 10% of East Germany's 18 million people could flee.
To discourage vast new emigration, Bonn is prepared to aid East Berlin if economic and political reforms are made.
But aiding East Germany makes U.S. officials uneasy. "We don't think of them the way we do Hungary or Poland," one U.S. official says. 

FED FEARS about its independence slow moves to cut interest rates. 

Fed officials resent administration pressure to ease rates in response to a slowing economy.
They worry, too, about congressional hearings later this month on legislation that would limit the central bank's independence. "They don't like anything that puts pressure on them from the outside," says a recent Fed visitor. 

Treasury orders for the Fed to intervene heavily in foreign-exchange markets further aggravate the situation.
The Fed tries to play down Chairman Greenspan's comments in Moscow this week denouncing efforts to control exchange rates.
But one administration official acknowledges that the Fed chief may have been sending a message: "Greenspan's a savvy guy." 

Greenspan also grows impatient with administration efforts to develop a serious attack on the budget deficit. 

COUP REBUFF?
Administration officials say they asked congressional intelligence committees earlier this year to go along with specific new authorization for U.S. participation in Panama coup planning, protecting officials against accusations they violated a ban on assassinations if Noriega were killed.
But lawmakers were cool to the idea, and the plan was dropped. 

FINAL IRONY: In legal battling against ABC-TV's Oct. 29 showing of "The Final Days," from the Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein book on President Nixon's last days in office, Nixon adopts what his lawyer calls "the Bernstein strategy." Bernstein pressed producers of the movie "Heartburn," based on a book by his former wife, to drop material damaging to him. 

ROSTY'S REFLECTIONS: Although Rep. Rostenkowski probably will join efforts to meet deficit-reduction targets, he ponders the benefits of letting automatic cuts occur instead.
An aide says the House Ways and Means chairman believes that such cuts may be "the only way that real deficit reduction will ever occur." 

SOVIET GLASNOST provides an opening for American Jewish groups.
B'nai B'rith, the U.S.-based world Jewish service group, opens chapters in Moscow, Leningrad, Riga and Vilnius -- with no interference from the Soviets.
The group even held an unprecedented dinner in a Leningrad hotel. 

GENERIC-DRUG FRAUDS widen, spurring moves for tighter regulation. 

Two more FDA officials are expected to be indicted this month for taking illegal gratuities from generic-drug makers.
Bolar Phamaceutical is being investigated for allegedly false drug applications.
The next target: companies that passed off brand-name drugs as their own generic version to win FDA approval.
Two companies have been referred for criminal investigation, and at least three more may be. 

Congress, responding to the scandal, plans legislation to strengthen the FDA's authority to remove unsafe or ineffective drugs from the market.
Another goal: double-checking the test results submitted by generic-drug makers.
House Commerce Committee Chairman Dingell even considers a complete rewrite of the 1938 Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act. 

The FDA now relies largely on companies to test products. "The honor system has got to go," asserts Rep. Ronald Wyden. 

MINOR MEMOS: Celebrity in the mist: Minnesota Rep. Sikorski leaves his seat at a hearing to get his clean-air bill autographed by an observer, actress Sigourney Weaver. . . . At a Leningrad speech by Commerce Department General Counsel Wendell Willkie II, Soviet lawyers stampede the lectern to get copies of the U.S. Constitution. . . Oregon Rep. DeFazio assails buy-outs of healthy airlines as "capital vampirism." 

