.START 

Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. said that Jan Leschly, president of Squibb, resigned.
He is the first top Squibb executive to leave following last week's completion of the merger between the two pharmaceutical companies. 

Mr. Leschly, a much-respected and fast-rising star at Squibb, had been expected to become chief executive officer in the next few years had Squibb not been acquired by Bristol-Myers.
Indeed, many industry observers have expected that Mr. Leschly might leave once it appeared that he wouldn't have a clear shot at the top spot of the newly combined company. 

Mr. Leschly said he was resigning because "the near-term personal goals that I had hoped to achieve at Squibb as an independent company are not realistic within the same time frame with Bristol-Myers Squibb." 

"I'm not at all surprised," said Patricia Lea, an analyst with Vector Securities. "He struck me as a guy who very much wants to run his own show." 

Mr. Leschly, 49 years old, was named president and chief operating officer at Squibb in early 1988.
A Danish national, Mr. Leschly joined Squibb in 1979 from Novo Industri AS, a Danish drug maker.
Company insiders have said that Mr. Leschly quickly impressed Richard Furlaud, who was Squibb's chairman and chief executive officer, and the two men are known to be good friends. 

"I am obviously sad," said Mr. Furlaud, who runs the companies' combined pharmaceutical businesses.
Mr. Furlaud, 66, has called Mr. Leschly an "inspired and energetic leader." 

Mr. Furlaud and others at Squibb credit Mr. Leschly, a handsome, athletic man who is personally charming but also very demanding, with building the management of Squibb's flourishing pharmaceutical operations. 

While Mr. Furlaud was widely expected to relinquish his top spot to Mr. Leschly soon, Richard Gelb, chairman and chief executive officer at Bristol-Myers Squibb, has told his board that he plans to stay in his post at least until 1993.
Moreover, several top executives from Bristol-Myers may have had a better chance than Mr. Leschly to succeed Mr. Gelb, who is 65. 

In an interview, Mr. Gelb said Mr. Leschly decided to resign on his own.
He said he had no one in mind to succeed him.
Under the combined company's new management organization, Edgar Haber and William Comer are in charge of the company's drug research and development operations, while Wayne Davidson runs the operation side of the pharmaceutical business.
Mr. Davidson is now considered the most likely to advance from the drug-making business to the company's top post. 

Mr. Leschly, whose shares of Squibb were worth about $26 million after the merger, said he had no plans at present, but "I hope to have an opportunity to do what I wanted to do at Squibb." 

