.START 

South Korean President Roh Tae Woo, who arrives in Washington next week, will seek to shift the focus of Korean-American relations from trade tensions to shared interests in Asian security and Korean democracy. 

Mr. Roh, Korea's first democratically elected president in nearly 40 years, will address a joint session of Congress and meet with President Bush.
In an interview, President Roh made clear that he will seek to persuade Americans that the relationship between Korea and the U.S. is far stronger than divisions over Korea's $8.6 billion trade surplus with the 

"What is important is shared ideals," he said. "Now we are in full process of democratization and I'd like to give this message to the American public." The president said he also will try to underscore the "tremendous results" the U.S. has enjoyed from its protection of Pacific Basin nations. 

Asked what those benefits are, Mr. Roh said, "Suppose Korea were communist and Japan threatened.
What would be the position of the U.S. as a leader of the free world?
Because of U.S. steadfastness, Americans can see favorable economic changes in even communist nations like China and the Soviet Union." 

However, as U.S. trade deficits with Japan and the newly industrialized nations of Asia have grown, so have doubts in the U.S. government, especially Congress, about the wisdom of continuing to bear the expense of a large military presence in Asia. 

High on the list of topics for discussion between the two presidents will be the U.S. troop presence in South Korea, where some 40,000 U.S. soldiers have been based since the end of the Korean War.
Mr. Roh said he sees no reason to reduce that troop strength. 

Indeed, Mr. Roh said tensions in Asia are rising, not falling. "The clock has been turned back in China," he said.
He added that the Soviet military presence in Asia isn't diminishing and neither is tension on the heavily armed Korean peninsula. 

U.S. and Korean officials emphasize that Mr. Roh's visit won't be a problem-solving session.
No announcements about trade disputes, Korea's co-production of a U.S. jet fighter, or U.S. bases in Seoul are expected.
The U.S. has agreed to remove the headquarters of the Eighth Army from downtown Seoul, but it has asked the Korean government to pay for the move. 

Mr. Roh will plead for patience on U.S.-Korean trade disputes.
Korea's trade surplus with the U.S. is expected to decline to around $5.4 billion, a 36% drop from 1988.
But U.S. trade officials still are frustrated by Korea's sluggishness in opening its market to U.S. goods and services, such as beef and agricultural products.
Korea has also been lax in enforcing trade agreements to open up some markets and in protecting intellectual property.
Bureaucratic inertia, as well as resistant farmers and businessmen are preventing much change. 

Mr. Roh and many other Koreans believe the U.S. takes out its anger at Japan's huge trade surplus on other Asian nations who aren't as economically powerful as Japan. "You gave Japan 30 years to adapt its basic economic structure," he said. "In our case, we've had a trade surplus for only three years and you want adjustment too quickly." Said a U.S. official, Mr. Roh "must convince the Congress their impulses are misguided." 

A Korean foreign ministry official said Presidents Roh and Bush won't be discussing allegations by several human-rights organizations that Korea is arresting dissidents for their political beliefs.
Korea has made significant progress toward democracy-free elections, an outspoken press and more rights for trade unions, for example.
But in recent months, the government has sharply cracked down on violent student dissidents, people making unofficial contact with North Korea and teachers trying to form a union.
It has also indicted Kim Dae Jung, leader of one of Korea's mainstream opposition parties, for an infraction of the National Security Law. 

Mr. Roh disputes the contention that Korea is going back to the "old ways" of the dictatorial regime under former President Chun Doo Hwan.
He flatly denied that anyone has been detained for their political beliefs.
He said those are "false stories spread by North Korean sympathizers." 

