.START 

Saatchi & Saatchi Co. announced a major management restructuring that appears to shift Maurice Saatchi, a co-founder of the company, away from day-to-day responsibilities. 

Meanwhile, Carl Spielvogel, a top Saatchi unit executive, said he has offered to lead a management buy-out of the troubled British advertising and consulting giant, but was rebuffed. 

Under the restructuring, Robert Louis-Dreyfus, 43 years old, a French entrepreneur who until last year headed the research concern IMS International Inc., will join Jan. 1 as chief executive officer, succeeding Mr. Saatchi.
Mr. Saatchi, 43, remains chairman and will continue to guide long-term strategies, while Mr. Dreyfus will concentrate first on repairing the company's poor financial state. 

Mr. Spielvogel, chairman and chief executive of Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates unit, said he is interested either in a management buy-out and restructuring of the entire firm, or a management buy-out of Backer Spielvogel alone.
Mr. Spielvogel said Prudential-Bache Securities, a Backer Spielvogel advertising client, is prepared to back him financially.
The executive said he didn't propose a specific price.
Analysts believe Saatchi would fetch upwards of $1.3 billion. 

Mr. Spielvogel confirmed he first approached Maurice Saatchi's brother, Charles, on May 24 and suggested a buy-out of either the entire firm, with managers of Saatchi's advertising units participating, or of the Backer Spielvogel unit.
Charles Saatchi hasn't been actively involved in day-to-day management for several years, but he remains a director and is widely believed to be the company's major strategist. 

At the time, Charles Saatchi declined.
Mr. Spielvogel replied that he wasn't interested in a hostile attempt. 

Mr. Spielvogel repeated his offer yesterday, he said, when Mr. Saatchi called to tell him about the management restructuring. "I said, `Charles, that's fine, and I hope everything works out well, and I would like to remind you of our earlier conversation.
That offer still holds true, '" Mr. Spielvogel said.
He said Mr. Saatchi again replied that he wasn't interested.
Mr. Saatchi couldn't be reached. 

Mr. Louis-Dreyfus will have to contend with a company in turmoil.
Saatchi's advertising business is performing poorly, its troubled consulting business is on the block, and its stock has been buffetted by takeover rumors.
Southeastern Asset Management, Saatchi's largest shareholder with a 10.24% stake, said earlier this week that it had been approached by some third parties interested in possible restructuring transactions.
Southeastern declined comment yesterday. 

Some analysts and Saatchi insiders were skeptical that Mr. Louis-Dreyfus would be able to call the shots at Saatchi, saying the brothers would likely wield control just as they always have.
Saatchi has brought in a series of outsiders to top positions, including Anthony Simonds-Gooding, who was chief executive of its communications business until he left in 1987.
But the outsiders haven't yet been able to crack Saatchi's clubby inner circle, or to have significant influence on company strategy.
And analysts believe the company has lacked direction since 1986, when Martin Sorrell, the top financial officer, left to build up rival WPP Group 

Nevertheless, in an interview, Mr. Louis-Dreyfus said, "I will be having the final say.
If I didn't think that was the case, I wouldn't have come to the company." And analysts said that if any outsider were able to succeed at Saatchi, it would be Mr. Louis-Dreyfus. 

Mr. Louis-Dreyfus, a member of one of the wealthiest families in France, joined IMS as chief operating officer in 1982 and later became president and chief executive.
When he joined the firm, its market capitalization was about $230 million; by last year, Dun & Bradstreet Corp. bought it for $1.7 billion.
He has also been involved with a family-owned company, Louis-Dreyfus et Cie., which is France's largest private firm and one of the world's largest grain-trading firms. 

Executives who know him say Mr. Louis-Dreyfus works non-stop, travels constantly and is at his best in turnaround situations.
Several compared him with Mr. Sorrell, who since leaving Saatchi has been successful building his own ad agency group by concentrating on strict financial management.
Indeed, Saatchi -- while Mr. Sorrell was there -- tried unsuccessfully to buy IMS several years ago. 

Analysts believe Mr. Louis-Dreyfus may have more say than other outsiders who have joined Saatchi, both because the company is troubled and because he is wealthy enough to leave if the brothers don't listen.
Mr. Louis-Dreyfus also comes to Saatchi complete with an ally: He is bringing with him Charles Scott, 40, who had been chief financial officer at IMS and will become Saatchi's group financial director.
Both will become members of Saatchi's board. 

Saatchi "has brought in somebody from the outside before; that's nothing.
The one difference is, {Mr.
Louis-Dreyfus} is bringing in an ally," noted Emma Hill, an analyst with Wertheim & Co. "But Saatchi has always struck me as a club, and I think the question is, can he become part of the club or change the club, or does he quit because he can't change it?" 

In the interview, Mr. Louis-Dreyfus said he hoped "the bulk" of Saatchi's consulting operations would be sold in the next six months, so that he can concentrate on Saatchi's core advertising businesses.
He said he would at first attempt to help sell the consulting operations, and then turn to cost control at the remainder of the company.
But he said he doesn't expect more layoffs. 

Mr. Louis-Dreyfus also will be charged with helping improve morale and repairing Saatchi's battered reputation among investors -- a process that may be starting already: Analysts in New York and London said Maurice Saatchi phoned them personally yesterday to tell them of the management change. 

Several industry executives said they expected Mr. Louis-Dreyfus's appointment to prompt the departure of the co-chief executives of Saatchi's ad business.
But Terry Bannister, who shares the chief executive title with Roy Warman, said neither man will leave. 

Mr. Louis-Dreyfus also shares with Saatchi grand visions of growing as big as possible as quickly as possible; he said his goal is to command "20% of the advertising business in every part the world." The executive added that he isn't concerned about the takeover speculation that has dogged the company of late. "I don't think I would have joined the company if I was afraid of a takeover," he said. 

