.START 

Alfred and Ana Ehlers blame the U.S. for Panama's underdeveloped political personality. 

They often catch themselves listening to American music, watching American television programs and searching supermarket shelves for canned goods with American labels. "If I see a can of food made in the U.S. and a can of food made in Panama," sneers Mrs. Ehlers, "I buy the U.S. can even if the quality is less and I pay a dollar more.
I hate you for that." 

Mr. Ehlers, a National Assembly opposition candidate in the May 1989 elections, went underground after dictator Manuel Noriega annulled the voting and started throwing politicians in jail.
While in hiding, he scoffed at fellow Panamanians' excitement that President Bush had dispatched 2,000 more troops to Panamanian shores, augmenting the 10,000 U.S. Southern Command forces already in place.
As with the canned food, he said, Panamanians believed too much in U.S. labeling. 

"The common people of Panama are waiting for the U.S. to give an answer to our problems," he complained. "It is our politics and our culture.
Send us MacGyver with his penknife.
Send us Mr. Solo and his men from U.N.C.L.E.
Or better yet, send us Rambo." But Mr. Ehlers knew that depending on the U.S. was more like waiting for Godot.
He complained at that time that the troops were sent to help President Bush politically, by showing Congress and the American people that he was tough. "They aren't here to help us," he said. 

In fact, Panamanians of all political persuasions consider U.S. intervention in Panama thus far to have been counterproductive on all counts.
Trade sanctions have hastened the decline of the region's once healthiest economy, thus weakening the private sector, which is at the heart of the Panamanian opposition.
Isolating Noriega and the defense forces from U.S. contacts has only brought Noriega closer to Cuba, Nicaragua and Colombian drug interests and reduced Washington's intelligence capabilities.
And the harsh rhetoric and feeble means that have come to characterize U.S. foreign policy have left even America's friends here grumbling foul as they stop at Tony Roma's for barbecued ribs or cruise through McDonald's "Autorapido" for a "McDLT." 

The past two years of crisis have also decimated most of the positive forces that once existed in the country's political and military elite.
The tentacles of military rule have spread along with corruption as Noriega has promoted cronies and exiled or neutralized opponents.
If someone were to get rid of Noriega now, U.S. intelligence officials fear that disorder would be a more likely result than democracy. 

On the day after paramilitary thugs attacked opposition presidential candidate Guillermo Endara and two of his running mates, the should-be president sat in his hospital room with a head that was sore from both the iron-rod blows and what he was watching on television: the arrival of new U.S. forces.
He could feel the wind leaving the opposition sails as Panamanians sat back in their easy chairs to await U.S. action. 

"We were hit by blows that were heard or seen around the world," reflects Mr. Endara. "I like my head better than headlines, but I guess this was worth it.
But the very next day U.S. troops were on every television channel.
Their camouflaged faces replaced our bloodied heads.
I felt cheated out.
And I knew the U.S. wouldn't do anything with these troops." 

But then came a new wave of hope.
President Bush ordered the U.S. Southern Command to begin a series of exercises that seemed designed to provoke Noriega into confrontation.
Troops in one maneuver cut off Noriega's offices at Fort Amador, and on another they blocked the causeway that leads to his bunker.
A third exercise practiced an airlift operation from the U.S. Embassy compound.
Each maneuver seemed part of pre-kidnap practice.
Surely, this wasn't just saber rattling, the Panamanians thought. 

Panamanians only fully realized last week that the sound and fury signified nothing.
Reduced U.S. interests in Panama didn't justify risking American lives to unseat Noriega.
The Pentagon had decided in the late 1970s -- when new Panama Canal treaties were signed -- that it could do without its military bases there.
And economically, the canal was also losing importance.
U.S. traders relied more each year on the cheaper and faster land bridge across the U.S. Noriega had become more of a domestic political problem -- a drug-dealing dictator -- than a national-security risk. 

But while America's need for Panama has declined, the Panamanian desire for U.S. assistance has only grown.
Panamanians of all social classes stop reporters on the street to ask why Washington hasn't saved them.
None that this reporter knows of criticized the concept of U.S. intervention. 

A Panamanian guard at the Miraflores Locks of the Panama Canal allowed this reporter into the control room.
He proudly showed off the 75-year-old equipment, and allowed his visitor to work the controls that opened the gates and controlled water levels and allowed ships the 51-mile pathway between the seas. "General Electric built it all," he said proudly. "We rarely have repairs.
It works like a dream." But then he frowned.
New management under Noriega in the year 2000 will take his job and give it to military cronies.
The canal operation will decay under inefficient management. "The Americans don't care about Panama anymore," he complained. 

U.S. officials properly shift much of the blame for Noriega's continued rule onto the Panamanians themselves.
CIA and Pentagon officials have argued that the U.S. shouldn't endanger its own soldiers to free Panama from Noriega when Panamanians aren't willing to take the same risks.
Panama hasn't ever matched the Philippines' people power, and Noriega certainly hasn't faced anything remotely similar to China's Tiananmen Square. 

But the charm of Panamanians is that they aren't warriors.
As modern-day Phoenicians, they are more adept at making a buck than making a revolution.
They have convinced themselves that Noriega is America's "Frankenstein," and thus the gringos must destroy him. 

And this Panamanian dependence on Washington -- this shirking of national responsibility -- is as understandable as it is counterproductive.
Little has happened in Panama's history that wasn't either determined or shaped by the U.S. People who didn't fight for their independence, their economic prosperity or even build their own canal haven't proved very adept at creating their own democracy. 

Panamanians still wait by the harbor and watch the horizon, looking for the proverbial U.S. fleet to sail in.
But many are starting to believe that Washington is a lost hope.
One opposition leader says the Panamanians' only chance now is a random assassin's bullet.
He hopes for it, he says, like a man waiting for his number to come up in the national lottery.
As for the Americans, he'd prefer they remain silent until they mean business. 

Mr. Kempe, a Journal reporter, is completing a book on Panama to be published by G.P. Putnam's Sons. 

