.START 

While the stock of archrival USX marches ahead under prodding from raider Carl Icahn, Bethlehem Steel watches its own shares droop. 

Bethlehem closed at 20 1/2 yesterday, down 28% from its February high of 28 1/2 and barely above its 12-month low of 19 3/4.
Investors have a dozen reasons not to buy shares in the nation's second-largest steelmaker.
But they also have one big reason to buy: The stock, at 5 times the past 12 months' earnings, appears stupendously cheap. 

Of course, it's cheap for a reason.
The steel industry, after two years in the sun, is starting to slump.
Shipments of steel for autos, appliances, machinery and construction are all soft; analysts figure they will be down 15% to 20% in the second half of 1989 compared with the first half. 

More than any other stock, Bethlehem rises or falls with the steel industry.
Other steelmakers have diversified into energy, drug distribution and service centers, but 90% of Bethlehem's revenue is tied to steel.
Furthermore, it sells much of its output on the spot market rather than through long-term contracts, so earnings are tossed around with prices. 

Sensing trouble, a lot of big-name money managers have been reducing their Bethlehem holdings.
Still, at least one smart long-term investor is betting big on Bethlehem. 

Donald Smith & Co., a patient accumulator of out-of-favor stocks, owns close to three million shares.
The firm ranks second out of 309 managers in performance over the three years ended Sept. 30, according to CDA Investment Technologies in Rockville, Md. (The rankings are estimates based on government filings and reflect only stockholdings, not bonds or cash.) 

"We don't get caught up in weekly or monthly moves," said Richard Greenberg, vice president at Donald Smith & Co. "It looks like Bessie's earnings will be weak for the next couple of quarters," he said, and the stock may weaken further in December because of tax selling or window dressing, in which portfolio managers arrange their portfolios to look good at year end.
But he says his firm will be "hesitantly adding to our positions" on such price weakness.
He would buy sooner if the price falls to 18 or below. 

Bethlehem has "probably made more improvements over the past three to four years than any other steel company," said Christopher Plummer, an analyst with WEFA Group.
He notes that Bethlehem was near bankruptcy in 1986 and made a significant recovery. 

But other analysts view Bethlehem's moves as too little, too late. "USX closed a lot of capacity, took a long strike and cut back on the work force," said John Jacobson, an analyst with AUS Consultants. "Bethlehem has done the same things, but not with the vengeance that other firms have." 

A big seller recently has been Peter Lynch, the famous helmsman of Fidelity Magellan fund, the nation's largest stock mutual fund and one of the most successful.
Since March, Magellan has unloaded 1.3 million shares.
It still owns 1.6 million. 

Mr. Lynch sees "tremendous earning power" at Bethlehem, and says it's "a much better company than it was three or five years ago.
The only catch is a lot of their businesses are starting to slow down." He has taken profits in the stock (which he bought for about 14) this year at prices well above 

"The company clearly can earn $7 to $8 a share" in a good year, Mr. Lynch said. "It's a very powerful company when their business is strong.
When that's going to happen, I don't know." 

Large money managers sold, on balance, nearly two million shares of Bethlehem in the second quarter, according to CDA. Bethlehem has 74.6 million shares outstanding. 

Lately Bethlehem has been hurt by a coal strike and by a damaged blast furnace at one of its mills.
Longer term, many analysts believe Bethlehem has higher labor costs than USX under its new contract.
It also has roughly $1.2 billion in pension benefits promised to workers but not yet funded -- a point that David Katz, chief investment officer for Value Matrix Management, cites as a key reason he hasn't bought the stock. 

For two years, Bethlehem benefited from a downward trend in the dollar, which made its exports cheaper abroad and made foreign steel more expensive here.
That trend seems over for now. "A rising dollar is deadly" for Bethlehem and its peers, says Charles A. Bradford, analyst with Merrill Lynch, who rates the stock a sell. 

The Wall Street consensus, according to Zacks Investment Research, is that Bethlehem will earn about $4.64 a share this year and $4.47 in 1990.
But Mr. Bradford thinks Bethlehem will be lucky if it makes $3 a share next year. 

Bethlehem Steel 

(NYSE; Symbol: BS) 

Business: Steel 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Sales: $5.49 billion 

Net Income: $403 million*; $5.32 a share 

Second quarter, June 30, 1989: 

Per-share earnings: 98 cents vs. $1.85 (fully diluted) 

Average daily trading volume: 311,734 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 74.6 million 

*Includes $113 million charge related to discontinuance of certain business. 

