.START 

Aristech Chemical Corp. said it received an $817.5 million, or $25-a-share, buy-out bid from an investment group led by Jon M. Huntsman. 

Mr. Huntsman, chairman of closely held Huntsman Chemical of Salt Lake City, owns about 8% of Aristech's 32.7 million common shares outstanding. 

In previous Securities and Exchange Commission filings, Mr. Huntsman said he would consider buying Aristech's polypropylene business.
The company has said repeatedly it wasn't interested in a sale. 

Thomas Marshall, chairman and chief executive officer of Aristech, said the proposal will be considered by the board, but declined further comment.
The board is scheduled to meet Tuesday. 

Mr. Huntsman was traveling and was unavailable for comment. 

Under the proposal, Huntsman Holdings Corp. 's newly formed subsidiary, Banstar Corp., would acquire Aristech.
Huntsman Chemical's polypropylene business would then be combined with Aristech.
Polypropylene is used to make products such as toys and furniture.
Mr. Huntsman's company is one of the largest producers of polystyrene, a plastic used in fast-food clamshells and other packaging and products. 

Aristech is a chemical concern that was spun off by USX Corp.
It had sales last year of $1.07 billion. 

Aristech closed yesterday at $17.375 a share, down 62.5 cents, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, where trading of the stock was halted pending news of the bid.
The stock hit a monthly high in March of $41.50 a share. 

Analysts speculated that Mr. Huntsman waited until now to make a bid because the stock price has dropped recently, allowing the investor to make a lower offer. "Companies in this industry are having some earnings difficulty," said Greg Drahuschak, vice president of Butcher Singer Research Inc. in Pittsburgh.
Mr. Drahuschak said he thought Aristech would reject the offer as being too low, especially in light of previous company statements rebuffing Mr. Huntsman. 

The investor was in Pittsburgh to deliver his offer to Mr. Marshall, but a company spokesman declined to comment on the meeting. 

One factor hurting Aristech and other polypropylene producers is the rapid growth in plant capacity by leading manufacturers.
Since 1986, U.S. capacity has risen 50% to about nine billion pounds from six billion pounds, according to industry estimates.
But demand hasn't been growing as quickly. 

In addition, capacity at European plants is expanding. "The forecasts through 1992 show it going further south," says one industry expert. 

