.START 

Sony Corp. has spent years pushing its exports to the U.S., but now it has a hot product it doesn't want anyone here to buy. 

"The Japan That Can Say No," a collection of essays by Sony Chairman Akio Morita and Shintaro Ishihara, a top politician in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, has been a best seller in Japan all year.
In it, Mr. Ishihara cites as a mentor a general who planned the attack on Pearl Harbor, and Mr. Morita urges Japan to eschew its Confucian heritage and say no to the U.S. more often on economic issues. 

Such a good read would seem a natural for the U.S. market.
But a Sony spokesman says Mr. Morita has "no plans" for a translation.
Even copies in Japanese are hard to get in the 

Nonetheless, hundreds of 74-page, typewritten, bootleg editions are circulating through Washington.
Readers credit a variety of translators, but so far only the CIA admits it's working on a translation -- "for restricted use." 

Distributors aren't as shy.
Rep. Mel Levine, a California Democrat, has given away at least 50 copies, and the American Electronics Association is running its copiers overtime.
Some lawmakers may even put it in the Congressional Record. 

Richard Elkus Jr., the head of Prometrix Inc., a semiconductor firm, was particularly interested in a scenario on page 3 about selling computer chips to the Soviets and not the U.S. to demonstrate Japan's economic power. "This would upset the entire military balance," Mr. Ishihara writes.
America, he adds, might invade. 

Mr. Elkus hoped something had been lost in translation, and he asked a Japanese friend to "put this in terms that make me feel better." His friend responded, Mr. Elkus says, that he couldn't. 

Readers say points in Mr. Morita's essays are often legitimate, while Mr. Ishihara's are incendiary.
Mr. Morita, meanwhile, complains that Americans are confusing his opinions with Mr. Ishihara's and says he wishes he'd never got involved. 

But Mr. Morita isn't backtracking on his criticism of the U.S.
In fact, he cites the bootleg translations as another example of unfair U.S. trade practices. "I believe that to be a violation of my intellectual property rights," he says through a spokesman. 

