.START 

Most major toy makers are expected to post improved third-quarter results, as they pack off the bulk of their products -- including new introductions -- to retailers in time for Christmas. 

But because Nintendo video games, which have siphoned billions of dollars from the toy industry, are still scoring nicely, third-quarter revenue for the most part won't increase significantly. 

Earnings, however, will continue to improve, thanks to some belt tightening by toy makers, amid a four-year stretch of lean sales. 

"The industry's healthier than last year; by and large this should be an upbeat third quarter," adds Sean McGowan, toy analyst for Gerard, Klauer, Mattison & Co. a brokerage and money management firm in New York.
But there are exceptions. 

Hasbro Inc., the nation's largest toy maker, is expected to report "flatish revenues," and per-share earnings of about 45 cents, estimates Gary Jacobson, analyst for Kidder, Peabody & Co.
In the year-earlier period, Hasbro earned $18.1 million, or 31 cents a share, on $368.4 million in revenue. 

The Pawtucket, R.I., manufacturer is counting on Record Breakers, a new line of high-performance model race cars now being rushed to market.
If the toy sells well, it could offset sluggish sales at its Milton Bradley unit, whose board games have taken a beating from video games, adds Stephen Eisenberg, analyst for Bear Stearns & Co. 

Backed by an advertising blitz, Record Breakers and competing products have the potential of stealing 5% to 10% of Tyco Toys Inc. 's electric toy business, which last year brought in $52 million in company sales, according to Richard E. Grey, Tyco's president and chief executive officer.
Mattel Inc., based in Hawthorne, Calif., is expected to report more bullish numbers than it did a year ago.
Helped by booming sales in its Barbie doll line, Hot Wheels racing cars and Disney toys for preschoolers, Mattel's per-share earnings should jump by better than 50% to about 70 cents, estimates Mr. McGowan.
For the quarter ended Oct. 1, 1988, Mattel reported a profit of $21.9 million, or 45 cents a share, on sales of $306.6 million.
Third-quarter sales should climb to about $380 million, Mr. McGowan adds. 

Likewise, Lewis Galoob Toys Inc., based in South San Francisco, is expected to report big improvements in sales and earnings. 

Galoob, whose miniature cars Micro Machines single-handedly thrust the company into the black last year, continues to thrive on the toy.
For its third quarter, the company should report per-share earnings of 70 cents to 75 cents on sales of $72 million, estimates John Taylor, toy analyst for L.H. Alton & Co., San Francisco.
In last year's third quarter, Galoob had net income of $4.7 million, or 51 cents a share, on sales of $50.1 million.
Much of Galoob's results will come on the strengths of Micro Machines and Bouncing Babies, a mini-doll that's being shipped to retailers as soon as it arrives at the docks, reports Mr. Taylor. 

Tyco Toys, aided by sales from Viewmaster-Ideal, which it recently acquired, is also expected to report tidy gains in earnings and sales.
The Mount Laurel, N.J., toy maker projects that its sales will be about $380 million this year, with $294 million coming from Tyco toys and the rest from Viewmaster products.
In the third quarter, Mr. McGowan puts Tyco sales at about $150 million, with about $50 million coming from its Viewmaster unit. 

While Dynoriders isn't doing as well as it did last year when it was introduced, Tyco dolls, including Oopsie Daisy, a $40 doll that gets back up on its own after falling, are selling briskly, the company reports.
Also boosting the company's revenues are Hot Licks, its electronic guitar made simple, and Hovercraft, a radio-controlled motor raft that kids can operate in swimming pools and lakes. 

Tonka Corp., based in Minnetonka, Minn., said recently that it expects to report a profit for the third quarter "in excess of" the $4.9 million, or 62 cents a share, it had in the year-earlier period.
Mr. Jacobson estimates Tonka should post per-share earnings of $1; revenue should be up slightly in the range of $275 million, from $267.5 million, he adds.
Earnings gains have come in part from the company's emphasis on products such as Ghostbusters, which carry higher profit margins, along with a de-emphasis of less profitable items like Sega video games, which it distributes in the U.S, adds Mr. Jacobson.
Last year Tonka shipped $160 million of video games; this year that will be down to about $50 million. 

Meanwhile, a few toy makers are undoubtedly struggling, among them Universal Matchbox Group Ltd. "The company is having some production problems and is behind plan on its shipments," adds Mr. Eisenberg. "It runs the risk of having a disappointing third and fourth quarter." Kenneth A. Bloom, vice president of finance and administration, says the company "suffered a brain drain at its engineering and production facilities in Hong Kong," in part because of China's political turmoil earlier this year.
The slowdown affects about a dozen of its new more expensive introductions, including its Connectables, a string of plastic vehicles that change identities with each new addition and Ring Raiders, military paraphernalia mounted on rings.
Consequently, Matchbox's third-quarter results "will be disappointing," Mr. Bloom acknowledges.
For the third quarter last year, Matchbox had net income of $5.8 million, or 59 cents a share, on $72.5 million in sales. 

"I wish I could say I'm really gung-ho on the toy business, but I'm not," remarks Bruce Van Kooten, analyst for Kirkpatrick, Pettis, Smith, Polian Inc. in Omaha, Neb. "The industry is struggling and retailers are being cautious.
Things could change in the fourth quarter but unless they do I'm not bullish." 

