.START 

"I love to shop.
I'm born to shop]" exclaims Nancy Townsend, an animated blonde who is dashing down Rodeo Drive with her sister on a Tuesday afternoon shopping spree. "We're going to shop until we drop]" 

Nevermind that Ms. Townsend has already spent $800 in the past few days on new clothes, including the peculiar T-shirt outfit she is wearing.
Small colorful dolls are dangling from the neckline -- swinging wildly as she heads for new shops. "It's different," she says giggling. "How many people walk around with dolls on their clothes?" 

Not too many.
But then again, not too many people are such enthusiastic shoppers these days.
The born-to-shop types flourished during much of the '80s, a decade of rampant consumerism.
Now the tide is turning.
The Wall Street Journal's "American Way of Buying" survey found that only 20% of people enjoy shopping for clothes "a lot" and that even fewer love window-shopping or browsing. 

So who are these diehards?
For the Journal consumer survey, Peter D. Hart Research Associates interviewed more than 2,000 adults concerning their feelings about shopping.
The poll found that happy shoppers are three times as likely to be women and are much more likely to live in California than the heartland.
They are more likely to be under 30 and to hold white-collar jobs.
Oddly, perhaps, the wealthy aren't any more likely to love shopping than other people. 

Critics of the born-to-shop types offer a simple explanation for the behavior: "I think people who love to shop don't have anything better to do," says Jay Schaeffer, an attorney rushing through Beverly Hills on his way to a business meeting. "My ex-wife was an ardent shopper.
She was spoiled." And a Beverly Hills woman offers another analysis as she runs across a street: "Shoppers are insecure.
It's a substitute for love." 

Of course, shoppers here and in local malls have their own explanations.
Joan Samara, a sales training executive, has just dropped $1,500 on a hat, a jacket, a skirt and a pair of shoes in one afternoon and is heading down Rodeo in search of another pair of shoes. "Shopping is my passion.
I have been shopping since I could talk or walk.
You could call me compulsive," says the middle-aged divorcee who has long red hair and is clad in a black jump suit and leopard-trimmed glasses. 

Ms. Samara says she dresses for men although there isn't a man in her life now. "You get a high from shopping," she says. "I get a real thrill out of buying something new.
I buy things on impulse, not because I really need them." She hesitates, then adds, "It becomes a sickness." 

Psychologists draw a distinction between compulsive shoppers who spend uncontrollably and those who simply love shopping. "You see compulsive shopping as a frequent symptom in certain forms of mental illness," says Jerrold Pollak, a psychologist in Providence, R.I. "Compulsive shoppers are buying things they don't need.
Purchasing items gives people a psychological sense of security.
It makes them feel powerful and in control." 

Some big-time shoppers just like to show off.
Miriam Tatzel, a professor of human development at Empire State College, State University of New York, says some people who love shopping tend to have active social lives and "need to display themselves.
They are gregarious people who have a strong sense of their egos and they are proud of themselves." Adds Ms. Tatzel, "Clothing reflects a sense of identity.
Knowing your place in the world makes it easier to buy clothing." 

By that measure, Susan Stone, a marketing executive for the National Equestrian Center in New Canaan, Conn., has one of the strongest egos around. "I love to shop.
I shop daily," says the trim brunette who is browsing along Rodeo Drive in a tailored gray dress on a visit to the West Coast. "Shopping is an exploration of your position in life." To that end, she spent more than $1,000 in a recent week buying rugs, art and wallpaper. 

She also keeps her large wardrobe updated. "I work in an office of 65 women.
I'm one of the best dressed.
That's who I am and that's how I want to present myself," Ms. Stone asserts. "I think I have high self-esteem.
God gave me a fair amount to work with and I enjoy working with what I have." 

There are men who love shopping, just not as many.
The Journal survey found that only 10% of the men polled enjoy shopping "a lot," compared with 30% of the women.
Most men said they aren't wild about browsing either. "It has been part of the female culture to view shopping as the place to go and as something to do," says Ms. Tatzel, the psychologist. "But that's changing.
More men are shopping." 

Some are shopping in a big way.
Max Paini, a commodities trader, just bought a $10,000 gold watch in Paris and is gazing at some more gold watches on Rodeo Drive. "I love watches," he says. "I love beautiful things.
I am always shopping." He also just paid $250 for a pair of burnt-orange crocodile shoes and then decided he didn't like the color.
Now the store won't take them back. 

Shopping can become a substitute for watching weekend football games with the guys.
Blaine Hall, a nattily dressed antique store owner, says, "I don't play golf.
Spending a few thousand dollars on a Saturday is recreation." That's why he has purchased some perfume and a few Guess watches on his way to have yet another watch adjusted. 

Surprisingly, many hardcore shoppers freely admit there isn't anything else they would rather be doing.
When asked what they would do if they weren't shopping, many look confused.
When asked what they would do if all the malls suddenly closed, many look alarmed.
This isn't a group that is yearning to read Tolstoy. 

"If I weren't here, I would have stayed home and watched TV," says Candy Dasher, a blonde office worker who is darting around Los Angeles's Sherman Oaks Galleria mall in a white miniskirt and a hot-pink top.
Ms. Dasher just paid $650 for several outfits, boots and three pairs of pumps. "I like to wear something new every day," she says. "I always end up at the mall." 

Even being on crutches can't inspire a true shopper to stay home.
Erin Harkess, 18, says she finds it "boring at home" and that's why she has hobbled into the Galleria on crutches after spraining an ankle. "I like to shop and look around.
It's a place to hang out when there's nothing else to do." So what if all the malls suddenly closed?
She is silent for a moment and then frowns. "Would that include Melrose?" she asks, referring to a popular shopping street in Los Angeles. 

Many avid shoppers say they learned the art of shopping from their mothers, so the breed isn't likely to disappear.
Jeri Fisher, a 13-year-old blonde in Van Nuys, Calif., shops every weekend and whenever she can during the week, usually with her mother. "Spending money is easy," says Miss Fisher. "My mother likes to shop and she shows me how to spend." 

(See related story: "Dropouts Cite Poor Service, Tight Schedules" -- WSJ Oct.13, 1989) 

