.START 

The Democrats on the Senate Finance Committee voted last week to block a cut in the capital-gains tax, arguing it's a "tax break for the wealthy." 

But watch what they do, not what they say. 

Under the direction of Sen. Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas), the panel also voted to open two giant loopholes in the estate tax, benefiting only the very wealthiest people.
If the provisions become law, tax experts say, they'll go a long way toward eliminating what little is left of the nation's only tax on inherited wealth. 

"I suspect the people lurking behind this thing in the Senate were wealthy Democrats," says Rep. Pete Stark (D., Calif.), an opponent of weakening the estate tax. "We shouldn't be in the business of writing special relief bills for people with hundreds of millions of dollars worth of assets." 

"It stinks," agrees Robert McIntyre, director of the labor-backed Citizens for Tax Justice. 

The two provisions would eventually provide close to a billion dollars of tax relief each year to families with huge estates. 

One would reopen a once-popular loophole, known as "estate freezes," that allowed wealthy individuals to bypass estate taxes by creating corporations, giving all the common stock to their children, and holding only preferred stock for themselves.
Over time, the value of the common stock would grow, enabling the company to gradually pass to the children without tax. 

The other provision, an extension of the so-called "Gallo amendment," sidesteps the "generation-skipping" tax by allowing wealthy individuals to give as much as $2 million to each grandchild without paying the tax. 

The Bush administration opposes both proposals.
Treasury officials estimate that the annual cost of these changes would surpass $500 million in 1994 and grow larger in subsequent years.
Eventually that would sharply reduce the revenue from the estate tax, which even now brings in only $9 billion a year. 

"The sense that I have is that Congress has been slowly letting the air out of the estate and gift tax," says Henry Aaron, a tax expert at the Brookings Institution. "It's such a soft and blobby tax already.
After this, there won't be much left in it." 

For his part, Sen. Bentsen defends both changes.
He claims that the 1987 law that closed the estate-freeze loophole was a mistake. "Many senators have expressed their concerns about the effect those rules have on family businesses, and I share their concerns." 

Likewise, he criticizes the generation-skipping tax, which he says, in combination with the gift tax, is "in effect a double tax on grandchildren." He adds, "I think that's wrong." 

Although he joined other Democrats in opposing the capital-gains tax cut, Sen. Bentsen rejects any suggestion that he's being inconsistent.
A man of considerable personal wealth, he studiously avoids the class-conscious rhetoric his colleagues use in calling capital gains a "tax break for the rich." 

"It's not my nature" to use such rhetoric, Sen. Bentsen says. "I think you ought to correct inequities wherever they occur, at whatever level." 

The estate tax's decline in recent years is clearly illustrated by a few simple numbers.
In 1976, only $60,000 of an estate was exempt from taxation; today, the exemption is 10 times that -- $600,000 -- and it's $1.2 million if half the estate goes to a surviving spouse.
As a result of higher exemptions and other loopholes, the number of estates covered by the tax has declined precipitously.
Only 40,000 estate-tax returns were filed in 1987, compared with 200,000 in 1977. 

The 1981 tax bill, in particular, took such a large bite out of the law, according to Arne Anderson of the Economic Policy Institute, that it "virtually eliminated estate taxes for all but a handful of the super wealthy." Loopholes were so widespread that tax experts began calling the estate tax a "stupidity tax," as the only people paying it seemed to be those who failed to plan in advance for their decease. 

One of the most popular loopholes was the estate freeze, which Congress effectively closed in 1987 by passing "Section 2036(c)." This section, which Sen. Bentsen would repeal, gave the Internal Revenue Service the power to treat common stock passed on to children as if it were part of the estate.
But this new provision also caused howls from many in family businesses who were trying to pass those businesses on to their children. 

Tax experts acknowledge that the 1987 law was clumsily fashioned.
And the Treasury has said it is willing to consider modifications.
But instead of trying to modify the measure, Sen. Bentsen and his colleagues on the Finance Committee have decided to repeal it outright. "I asked staff, do we have something now that we can do that we're convinced will satisfy the problem and get rid of the abuses?" Sen. Bentsen explains. "And they said, `We don't have anything that definitive yet. '" 

That means the estate-freeze loophole could quickly be back in vogue among the well-to-do. "I think section 2036(c) is excessively broad and much too vague," says Leo Schmolka, a professor at New York University Law School. "But the problem with straight repeal is it puts you right back on square one.
There is a legitimate area of concern." 

The generation-skipping tax was first adopted a decade ago, to try to stop wealthy families from circumventing the estate tax with giant trusts that passed the ownership of wealth from grandparents to grandchildren.
The new tax helped assure that taxes on giant estates were paid by every generation, not just every other generation. 

During the 1986 tax debate, however, Rep. Ed Jenkins (D., Ga.) sponsored a measure that allowed transfer of as much as $2 million to a grandchild without paying the special tax.
The provision, called the "Gallo amendment" after the wealthy California wine-making family that had advocated it, was set to expire this year.
But Sen. Bentsen's bill would make it permanent. "I can't see how you can justify penalizing someone because he leaves his estate to his grandchildren instead of his children," says Rep. Jenkins. 

If the two changes are adopted by the full Senate, they may be challenged in a conference with the House.
Some top House tax writers are likely to oppose the measures -- especially repeal of Section 2036(c). 

"We are not a country of nobility," says Rep. Stark, who built a fortune in the banking business before coming to Congress. "Personally, I'd love to pay for long-term health care for the elderly by really jacking up the inheritance tax." 

Revenues from estate taxes as a percentage of all federal tax revenues: 

Source: Economic Policy Institute 

