.START 

Machine-tool company earnings in the third quarter benefited from sharply higher shipments, but unusual costs related to restructurings at two large producers held down industry profit totals. 

Because of strong 1988 orders, U.S. machine-tool builders are operating plants at sharply higher levels this year.
U.S. machine-tool producers boosted shipments by 36% during the first two months of the third quarter from a year earlier, according to figures from the NMTBA -- The Association for Manufacturing Technology, an industry trade group. 

While new orders dropped sharply in the 1989 second quarter and continued to lag behind year-ago levels in the third period, the industry's backlog of unfilled orders remains high enough to permit strong shipments into the first half of 1990. 

However, Cincinnati Milacron Inc., the industry's largest producer, said it will report lower third-quarter profit because of production disruptions arising from a reorganization of its machine-tool operations.
The company earned $9.7 million, or 40 cents a share, in the year-earlier quarter, including an extraordinary gain of $3.3 million, or 14 cents a share, from tax-loss carry-forwards. 

Milacron, which also produces plastics machinery, robots and other industrial products, is in the midst of a changeover to "focus factories" that it began in early 1988.
Each plant will concentrate on development, production and marketing of one product line, such as turning machines or machining centers. 

Reorganizing production and moving product lines from one plant to another have resulted in shipment delays and higher costs, which depressed profit in the second period and continued to affect third-quarter net, company officials said.
Second-quarter net, including tax credits, dropped to $5.2 million, or 21 cents a share, from $8.3 million, or 34 cents a share, a year earlier.
Milacron originally expected to complete the reorganization by mid-1989, but now believes production problems will continue in the fourth quarter.
The reorganization will require more training at the plants than originally expected, officials said.
The company is introducing new manufacturing methods and several new products and is converting to metric measurement at the same time it is adopting the focus factory approach, which further complicates both engineering and production. 

Meanwhile, Milacron's plastics machinery business is having a record year, the company said.
New products and continued strength in the plastics industry are bolstering sales.
And the company has succeeded in reducing costs in many parts of the business.
Plastics machinery accounted for 28% of Milacron's sales for all of last year and 45% of operating profit before interest and corporate expense. 

Robots, a smaller business that the company doesn't break out separately, are only marginally profitable this year.
Sales to the auto industry have slowed as the Big Three auto makers reconsider their plant spending programs, and competition from Japan is intense, Milacron said. 

Cross & Trecker Corp., Bloomfield Hills, Mich., is undertaking a restructuring of its own, which involves the planned sale of three operating units and a joint-venture business, consolidation of two machine-tool units and a write-down of other assets. 

The company reported a loss of $32.5 million, or $2.62 a share, for its third quarter ended June 30, including non-recurring charges of $25 million, or $2.02 a share, mostly related to the restructuring.
In the year-earlier quarter, Cross & Trecker had a loss from operations of $4.2 million, or 34 cents a share. 

Because the company has filed a registration statement covering the planned sale of $50 million of convertible, exchangeable preferred stock, officials declined to make earnings forecasts. 

On the other hand, machine-tool companies that didn't have such unusual charges will report higher profit for the third period.
The third quarter ordinarily isn't a strong profit period for the industry.
Most machine-tool plants close for a week or two during July, and many key employees take additional vacation time during the summer, reducing shipments. 

"Our third-quarter profits were a little better than last year's third quarter, but it will be the weakest quarter of the year," said Robert J. Siewert, president and chief executive officer of Monarch Machine Tool Co., Sidney, Ohio.
In the 1988 third period, Monarch earned $208,992, or six cents a share, on revenue of $21.1 million. 

The strongest part of Monarch's business is its metal-coil processing equipment, which accounts for about 25% of sales, Mr. Siewert said.
That business is operating at capacity, and is "very profitable," he said. 

Orders have improved for the company's vertical machining centers, he said, but have been softer for Monarch's turning machines. 

Giddings & Lewis, Fond du Lac, Wis., which just went public in July after being owned by AMCA International Corp., Hanover, N.H., will report a particularly sharp third-quarter profit rise.
John E. McGinty, capital-goods analyst with First Boston, estimates third-quarter net at 40 cents to 45 cents a share, about double the 1988 quarter's net. 

The company has experienced strong orders during the last seven quarters, and has built a record order backlog, said William J. Fife Jr., chairman and chief executive officer.
Its plants are working overtime to meet the strong demand, and shipments for the first half were up more than 50% from a year earlier. 

Giddings & Lewis specializes in equipment to produce large metal parts, many of which are used on heavy machinery and aircraft.
Those industries often doesn't turn up until an economic recovery is well advanced, Mr. Fife said, explaining why Giddings & Lewis lags the business cycle. 

The machine-tool industry's profit outlook for 1990 depends on how aggressively auto makers order in the next six months.
The auto industry has postponed a number of major plant equipment programs while companies reappraise their future needs, which has whacked machine-tool order totals in the past six months. 

Machine-tool company officials said the U.S. auto makers will have to order equipment relatively soon to produce technologically-improved engines, transmissions and other key parts or they will lose more market share to Japanese-owned plants.
But those orders could be deferred for a few more quarters, or scaled back from original plans, if 1990-model auto sales prove to sluggish. 

