.START 

Congress is on the verge of passing a child-care bill that amounts to the largest expansion of government power in at least a decade.
The same people who brought us the HUD scandal and Chicago's public schools are now going to make life better for our children. 

The bill's progress is a study in the politics of entitlement.
An unopposable idea -- "child care" -- becomes the engine in a drive for public subsidy.
Democrats pile on as a way to please their various interest groups.
Republicans can't decide whether to fight or cut a deal.
Another social "ill" is thrown in the lap of bureaucrats to be solved. 

All of this is as old as the Great Society, except that this time opponents had a sound alternative -- an increase in the tax allowance for children, plus a cash "rebate" for those who earn too little to pay taxes.
The proposal would compensate, at least in part, for inflation's erosion of the value of the tax exemption for dependent children since 1948. 

George Bush campaigned on this principle, and his pollster Robert Teeter believes it's a winning issue with the public.
The idea is so good that smart liberals have hijacked it.
Rep. Tom Downey, the New York Democrat, made it the major portion of his own child-care proposal. 

In the politics of entitlement, however, tax relief is never enough.
It doesn't employ enough people, create new social experiments or intrude into community life.
The bills that have passed the House and Senate will do all of this, and more. 

By one count, the House bill creates seven new programs.
It imposes 183 new rules on states that want federal money.
As the Heritage Foundation's Robert Rector points out, it calls for creating 38,000 local day-care commissions -- all answering to state regulators, who in turn answer to the Department of Health and Human Services.
Somehow, these multitudes are supposed to do better by children than parents, relatives and neighbors. 

While liberal Democrats are leading this charge, Republicans are the main reason it may pass.
The White House started the retreat this summer by conceding to Sen. Bob Packwood (R., Ore.) the principle that mothers who work should be subsidized more than those who stay at home.
The White House also went mute -- the downside of George Bush's conciliatory approach to Congress. "They never raised the philosophical issues" -- aid to parents versus aid to bureaucracies -- "in a way that would put pressure on Congress," says Gary Bauer, president of the Family Research Council. 

Lobbyists, meanwhile, could spin out the demagoguery.
Mailings from the main child-care lobby, the Children's Defense Fund, put it this way: "Vote For Children." 

Their effort still might have failed in the House, however, if not for a supreme lobbying effort by the Democratic leadership.
Having lost four big votes in a row, it didn't want to lose a fifth. "My perception is we won the debate about policy, but lost the vote," says Rep. Tom Tauke, the Iowa Republican who's fought for tax credits for two years.
Sixteen Republicans, led by Rep. Christopher Shays of Connecticut, defected. 

The last new entitlement, the catastrophic-illness bill, at least contained the seeds of its own destruction: the progressive tax on the elderly.
This child-care bill contains the seeds of its own expansion. 

The bill's new "standards," like all such government rules, will shrink the supply of casual day-care providers.
Many will quit rather than endure 15 hours of training a year or get licenses.
At the same time, the bill creates and subsidizes a new professional class of provider.
These professionals, however well-intentioned, will become a permanent and articulate constituency for ever-greater subsidy -- which is of course precisely what the bill's sponsors want. 

The bill accomplishes another critical goal of every entitlement lobby: It intentionally, if not explicitly, includes the middle class.
Shrewd liberals understand that only a middle-class constituency can guarantee that an entitlement will become permanent.
So despite rhetoric aimed at "helping poor children," the House bill expands Head Start to include families earning the median-family income of about $32,000 a year. 

In a bizarre reversal of class warfare, the House and Senate bills even preserve the dependent-care tax credit.
This may be the most egregious subsidy in the entire tax code, since its benefits go to everyone but the poor.
Two alternatives defeated in the House would have eliminated this subsidy for couples earning more than $70,000, but the entitlement crowd wants something for Vogue readers, too.
When Republicans do this sort of thing it's called "welfare for the rich." 

Will George Bush now veto a day-care bill?
Few are betting on it.
He might if the bill were somehow stripped from the giant omnibus budget bill, which is why Democrats want to retain it as part of that package.
Cashiering the entire omnibus bill would probably mean killing any capital-gains cut, too.
To the gentrified Republicans who populate this White House, economic issues are the big political prize; social policy is largely a nuisance. 

Despite some White House saber-rattling about a veto, Rep. Downey is probably right to say that "a kinder, gentler George Bush isn't going to hand us the child-care issue by vetoing this bill." Just as another Republican, Richard Nixon, gave the nation OSHA and the lawyers' subsidy known as the Legal Services Corp., George Bush is on the verge of accepting in all but name a federal Department of Child Care. 

