.START 

For Winn Schwartau, these are frenetic days.
He has granted interviews almost daily for the past month.
This past Wednesday, he appeared on the "CBS Evening News." "I haven't seen a media event of this magnitude in my lifetime," Mr. Schwartau says. 

Data-destroying computer viruses, like the so-called Friday the 13th or Columbus Day virus that may start infesting computers today, are spreading.
Mr. Schwartau and a handful of other entrepreneurs claim to have the cure: software that prevents viruses from infecting a computer system and detects, identifies and removes viruses already there. 

Every vaccine -- and its vendor -- deserves extreme scrutiny, says Harold Highland, a professor emeritus at the State University of New York and editor in chief of the scholarly journal Computers & Security. "The virus threat is a low probability, high consequence threat," he says. "The chances of getting hit may be smaller than being hit by lightning, but when it strikes, it's a calamity." 

Every anti-virus product also warrants serious consideration, he says.
But, he warns, "in most cases, anti-viral products have been produced too quickly and have not been fully tested." Of the 20 companies selling vaccines that were reviewed in a book Mr. Highland recently completed, "At least a third of them have already gone belly-up," he says. 

Some of the vaccine makers' hype is stirring a controversy within the computer-security industry.
But the companies seem to be raking in money.
In the past three weeks, Mr. Schwartau says his company, American Computer Security Industries, Nashville, Tenn., has sold 50,000 copies of its anti-virus software. 

As the computer virus threat has grown, 50 companies, including his, have emerged to pitch anti-virus products to anxious computer users, says Robert Campbell, president of Advanced Information Management Inc., a Woodbridge, Va., computer-security consulting firm.
Following the publicity about the so-called Friday the 13th virus, Mr. Campbell adds, "we can expect a dozen or two more." 

But many computer industry consultants and vaccine vendors themselves say some zealous vaccine vendors are employing exploitative practices not unlike an unscrupulous insurance salesman after a hurricane or a personal-injury lawyer at a plane crash. 

There has been price-gouging: "I have heard of people charging absolutely exorbitant prices," Mr. Schwartau says. 

Michael Corby, a Massachusetts information management consultant, says the computer-security industry is so concerned about "unqualified people masquerading as experts" to cash in on the virus scare that it is planning a special program to certify the skills of professionals in the field.
The project's sponsors are the Data Processing Managers Association, Information Systems Security Association, Security Computer Institute and several federal agencies in the U.S. and Canada. 

"There's a lot of profiteering going on," Mr. Corby says. "A lot of individuals have seen an opportunity to create businesses that don't solve any questions about the security, reliability or integrity of computer data." 

Except for International Business Machines Corp., which is offering for $35 a copy software that fights just the viruses that may attack today, the emerging vaccine-vendor field is made up of small, little-known entrepreneurial outfits.
Some were created solely to sell anti-virus products.
Others were already operating as computer-security consultants or software-development firms and entered the field as a sideline.
Many of them are booming. 

Eric Hansen, vice president of software developer Digital Dispatch Inc., St. Paul, Minn., has sold 6,000 copies of Data Physician, its anti-virus software, during 1988 and 1989.
At $99 a copy for the version used by corporations, the product now accounts for one-third of the firm's total revenue.
At Pittsburgh's ASP Inc., which introduced its first anti-virus software in 1985, "We shipped out 80 copies (at $35 each) last week," says founder Fred Cohen, who presented the first computer virus to the research community in 1983. 

After adding Certus, a $189 anti-virus computer program, to its line of systems management software in early 1988, Foundation Ware Inc., Cleveland, has quadrupled sales every quarter, says founder Peter Tippett.
At McAfee Associates, a Santa Clara, Calif., software-development firm that offers more than a half-dozen anti-virus computer programs, president John McAfee says Viruscan, his most popular product, "was an instant success within a week of coming out with it." The bulk of Mr. McAfee's revenue now comes from large corporations that pay "several dollars per computer" to use his software at certain sites.
And, he adds, "We haven't spent a penny on advertising." 

Researchers began developing computer vaccines shortly after the first computer virus was discovered in 1983.
But experts say even the products sold by the most reputable vendors in this fledgling industry aren't certain to protect computers, because new kinds of viruses are appearing at such a rapid rate.
You wouldn't know it, however, listening to claims of some of the vendors themselves.
Mr. Cohen says, "I have the best" software because it "detects any virus, whether we know about it or not." With a little updating, so can Mr. Schwartau's, says Mr. Schwartau. "No other company can do that," he adds.
Unless you believe Mr. McAfee, who insists his software does as well, making it "without a doubt the world's largest selling anti-viral product." 

