.START 

The teeth in the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law are already crunching, but almost nobody is feeling the bite. 

With few exceptions, the law's across-the-board spending cuts, known as a "sequester" in budget jargon, have little practical effect. 

"We used to be able to say, `Sequester]' and everyone would run and hide in the cupboard," says Rep. Bill Frenzel (R., Minn.), top Republican on the House Budget Committee. "It doesn't seem so scary any more." 

The idea behind the law was that Congress would so fear the pain of the automatic spending cuts that it would find other, more finely tuned ways of trimming red ink.
In fact, automatic spending cuts were imposed provisionally Oct. 1, when fiscal 1990 began, because Congress hadn't finished work on bills to cut the projected 1990 deficit to $110 billion as required by the law.
Yet, no shrieks of pain were reported. 

The law says the cuts -- 4.3% for defense, 5.3% for the rest of government -- will become permanent Monday unless Congress surprises itself and finishes work on the 1990 budget before then.
But in the topsy-turvy world of federal budgeting, "permanent" is only as long as it takes Congress to get around to passing a new law undoing the damage. 

One reason why bureaucrats aren't panicking is that they expect Congress to restore the cut funds by early November.
Any government official worth his pencil sharpener can juggle the books for a month or two.
The Pentagon, for instance, is brushing up on techniques it used when a brief sequester was imposed in 1987, preparing to shift money from one pocket to another to cushion the impact. 

Similarly, the Education Department's budget office has told all staff "to severely restrict their expenses," but a department official admits that means nothing more than that staffers are to hold off on scheduling any new conferences or taking any extra trips.
He notes that nearly all the department's budget goes for grants that won't be awarded until next July. 

Moreover, the fine print in the little-understood Gramm-Rudman law exempts more than half of all federal spending -- including Social Security, food stamps, federal pensions and interest payments -- from the automatic cuts.
Salaries of the president, members of Congress and federal employees also are untouchable, although overall employment levels can be reduced.
By a quirk, the law doesn't protect congressional staffers. 

That leaves $16 billion of cuts to be distributed among programs that cost about $529 billion a year.
In the short run, the most pain from sequester will be borne by doctors and hospitals.
Under a special provision in the law, every payment mailed under the $111.6 billion Medicare program will be shaved 2% starting next week.
The Health Care Financing Administration last week was drafting a notice to blame Congress. 

The impact will be heaviest on hospitals, which on average collect 40% of their revenue from Medicare. "The principal problem it causes is not knowing what's going to happen," says Dennis Barry, president of the Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital in Greensboro, N.C.
The cuts also apply to skilled nursing facilities, hospices and some individuals being compensated for care at home. 

Elderly people who pay their doctors directly and then file for government reimbursements -- such payments total about $2.25 billion a year -- also will be clipped 2%.
As for the doctors themselves, the American Medical Association says most "don't know zip about sequestration and probably won't notice a 2% cut." 

College students already are being nicked, but probably don't realize it.
The Gramm-Rudman law forced origination fees on government-guaranteed student loans for undergraduates to increase Oct. 1 -- but by a maximum of only $12.50 a year.
And besides, most loans for the current school year were made before then. 

Dairy farmers also are being squeezed, as government milk subsidies are reduced.
The law says flatly that any automatic spending in subsidies to wool producers shall be eliminated.
But wool producers, it turns out, weren't in line for any automatic increase this year. 

Of course, if Congress never finishes work on the 1990 bills -- a very slim possibility -- some agencies would suffer, particularly the Pentagon.
As an illustration of what might happen, the Office of Management and Budget says the military might have to eliminate 160,000 active duty troops -- the combined manpower strength of an Army division, 25 ships and two Air Force wings. 

But the cuts, in many cases, are made from the levels set in appropriations bills that have cleared the House and Senate but haven't yet been signed into law.
It isn't widely known, but many civilian departments are getting increases in the neighborhood of 10%, according to calculations by John Cogan, a former deputy director of OMB.
As a result, even after sequester, they will get more money than they did last year. 

In what may be the ultimate irony, some farmers prefer the Gramm-Rudman spending cuts to the alternative.
The House Agriculture Committee estimates that a pending budget bill would cut spending on farm subsidies and loans $700 million, while sequester would trim them only $560 million. 

"Overall, we'd come out better under sequester," says House Agriculture Chairman Kika de la Garza (D., Texas). 

Bruce Ingersoll contributed to this article. 

