.START 

For much of the past three years, the National Endowment for Democracy, which Congress created to nurture political freedom around the world, has helped fight a Republican grudge match against the president of a democratic nation -- tiny Costa Rica. 

The funding of a group with strong ties to Costa Rica's main opposition party was continued until last July and produced strange bedfellows.
Another donor to the Costa Rican opposition: Panamanian strongman Manuel Noriega.
According to a deposition given to a Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee last June by Jose Blandon, a former Panamanian official, Gen. Noriega gave the opposition group's candidate $500,000 in 

While one wing of the National Endowment was funding the Costa Rican opposition, another was touting Costa Rica as a model of democratic stability.
Now, President Bush plans to visit Costa Rica later this month to help celebrate 100 years of Costa Rican democracy. 

Costa Rican President Oscar Arias was never the Reagan administration's favorite Latin American leader.
He refused to support the White House's war against leftist Nicaragua and won a Nobel Peace Prize for a plan that pulled the rug from under the U.S.-backed Contra effort. 

Documents that surfaced here this week show that at the same time that Mr. Arias was falling out of favor with the White House, the NED's Republican wing -- the endowment has parts from both major U.S. political parties -- began funding a political association with close ties to Mr. Arias' political opponents.
Since 1986, NED has spent $434,000 on several projects, including a magazine that criticized Mr. Arias's peace plan and said it sapped the virility of the nation. 

The executive director of the association, Rafael Calderon, ran against Mr. Arias in 1986 and is the opposition candidate in next February's election.
The decision to launch a program in Costa Rica was a strange one for the budget-strapped NED. Costa Rica's democratic roots run deeper than almost anywhere else in the Western Hemisphere. 

Last summer, as Congress got wind of the Costa Rican funding and began making quiet inquiries, NED reconsidered the situation and discontinued the project. "It has been re-oriented," says Keith Schuette, president of NED's Republican affiliate, the National Republican Institute for International Affairs. 

The NED was founded by Congress in 1984 to encourage democratic institutions around the world.
In addition to its Republican and Democratic wings, its has two other elements: the AFL-CIO's Free Trade Union Institute and the Center for International Private Enterprise, an affiliate of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 

Carl Gershman, president of the endowment, says that his board was aware of the Costa Rica project.
Indeed, he says, the GOP wing submitted detailed proposals.
He said the board gives each of the four branches autonomy to develop programs, "as long as they operate clearly within the framework of our law," a test he says was met by the GOP wing.
He adds that the Republican wing tends to "establish relations with institutions that associate with political parties," while the Democrats "have pursued a more multipartisan approach." 

Mr. Schuette insists that he was only trying to help Costa Rica, which he calls "the ham in the sandwich between the two worst neighbors in the hemisphere." Wedged on the Central American isthmus between Nicaragua and Panama, Costa Rica needs protection from those totalitarian nations, he argues. 

"Attempts are made to subvert their democracy," says Mr. Schuette, adding: "It's our position that no democratic system ought to be taken for granted in Latin America despite the length of its democratic history." 

Yesterday, the Costa Rican Embassy in Washington didn't have any immediate comment. 

Nobody is contending that the endowment broke the law.
But some critics say that it came close. "They may technically have been within the law, but I felt this clearly violated the spirit," said Rep. Stephen Solarz, a New York Democrat. "The whole purpose of NED is to facilitate the emergence of democracy where it doesn't exist and preserve it where it does exist.
In Costa Rica, neither of these applies." 

Nonetheless, the NED seems to have stepped into the thick of Costa Rican politics.
Documents supplied by a Costa Rican source show close ties between the Association for the Defense of Costa Rican Liberty and Democracy, which NED funded, and the opposition Social Christian Party.
According to these documents, the association was incorporated in 1984 by an attorney, Luis Fishman, a Social Christian congressman and top campaign adviser to Mr. Calderon.
The documents also list as top officials of the association several Social Christian officials and senior advisers to Mr. Calderon. 

NED funds also supported the magazine "Fragua," or Forge.
An editorial in the magazine's first issue, dated September 1986, attacked Mr. Arias's "political amateurism," and asserted that his peace plan for Central America was "impugning the national virility" of Costa Rica. 

Such activities don't appear to meet the standard set in the endowment's "statement of principles and objectives," which mandated that the organization "will not pick and choose among the democratic competitors in countries where such competition is possible." 

Mr. Schuette says that NED's GOP wing openly supports groups that are affiliated with political parties in several countries, including Bolivia, Argentina and Colombia.
He says that "we watch what's in" the publication in Costa Rica but "don't exercise editorial control." He adds that his group decided to withdraw from activities in Costa Rica last July because it didn't want to become embroiled in domestic politics, as Costa Rica's February election approaches. 

Even critics of NED's Costa Rica activities characterize them as an aberration from the endowment's usual good work.
They note that the small organization, whose fiscal 1989 budget is $15.8 million, is playing a valuable role in fostering democracy around the world.
Poland's Solidarity union received regular funding from NED before its breathtaking electoral victory earlier this year.
And the organization has played an important supporting role as Chile makes the transition to democracy from military dictatorship. 

"They've stopped {the Costa Rica project,} and I would write this off as part of the growing pains of an organization that is new in the American political system," concludes Rep. Solarz. 

