.START 

Recent stories have marveled at the continued zest in the aging U.S. expansion.
The bean counters in Washington keep looking back into the economic barrel and discovering they missed a few the first time through.
Strong employment and retail-sales figures have been pushing consensus forecasts upwards. 

Time to forget about a recession?
Absolutely not.
Beginning early this year, financial market prices have predicted that a mild recession would be likely around the beginning of 1990.
The recent faltering of some leading indicators is consistent with that prospect. 

Recessions, even mild ones, usually unleash protectionist sentiment.
As sector after sector feels the pinch of economic contraction, finger pointing at potential villains will start.
An attractive scapegoat this time will be the foreign-exchange value of the dollar, which has risen 16% since its low about a year and a half ago. 

If history is a guide, the reported profits of U.S. corporations will take the recessionary hit on the chin, making them a convenient pretext for protectionist policies.
Commentators will begin to suggest that the higher value of the dollar has made U.S. firms less "competitive" and less profitable.
Their proposed cure: Let the dollar's value fall once again.
There is a great danger that policy makers will agree with them. 

Empirically, there is some apparent justification for the protectionists' allegation over corporate profits and the dollar.
Relating the change in the reported earnings of companies in the Standard & Poor's index, earnings over the past 16 years to the previous year's change in the dollar's value reveals a definite inverse pattern. 

More precision and insight can be gained from splitting the 16 years into two categories: the 7 years the dollar rose and the 9 years it fell.
A comparison of these two groups confirms that after the dollar strengthens, reported profits grow more slowly than following a weakened dollar.
Allowing for a two year delay, there was for every one percent rise in the dollar, a cumulative earnings shortfall of about 1%. 

But this inverse dollar-profits relationship is at odds with another fact: The rising dollar simultaneously signalled good times for the stock market.
For the same 16-year period, allowing for a two year delay, each 1% rise in the dollar corresponds to an extra 1% cumulative stock-price appreciation. 

Hence a paradox.
A rising dollar is bearish for earnings, but bullish for the market. 

The key to unlocking this mystery is inflation.
Similar analysis of the link between the dollar's value and U.S. inflation illustrates quite clearly that a rising currency is associated with lower inflation.
Enter the accounting system, which is not inflation neutral, creating at least two possibilities for fictitious profits and losses.
One possibility involves inventories, the other depreciation.
Both arise because of an inflation-induced discrepancy between historic and replacement costs. 

The more inflation, the faster fictitious profits pile up.
A weak dollar, by exacerbating inflation, appears to bolster the growth of profits.
Conversely, as the dollar rises and inflation slows, fictitious profits, and hence reported profits, grow at a slower pace. 

The good news is that the Commerce Department provides adjustments that can minimize this illusory, inflation-induced distortion.
The bad news is that most Wall Street sources do not.
Eliminating the gap for the Standard & Poor's figures requires crudely adjusting them using the Commerce Department's data.
The resulting measure approximates S&P earnings on what is sometimes called a "quality adjusted" basis. 

This change in accounting method enables the paradox to be resolved.
Repeating the calculation, a 1% higher value of the dollar corresponds to a 1% extra increase in quality-adjusted profits.
In other words, while the quantity of reported profits may grow more slowly, their quality increases by more than enough to offset the damage.
A strong dollar is a bullish signal for both the stock market and adjusted profits.
By implication the adjusted price-earnings ratio hardly moves. 

Hence two investor warning-signals: First, in periods of a fluctuating dollar, reported profits may be a misleading signal.
The stock market is pricing quality-adjusted profits.
Second, as profits drop next year, efforts to undermine the dollar would be counter-productive. 

Mr. Miles is an executive with H.C. Wainwright & Co., Economics, in Boston. 

Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York is talking about at least delaying a half-percent cut in the state's top marginal income-tax rate planned for next year.
At a recent forum he said that few know what the going rate is anyway, so what difference would a cut make on behavior? 

In order to assist Journal readers in their comparative shopping career locations, we list here the top combined state and local income-tax rates for residents of the 50 largest U.S. cities in the 1986 Census estimate.
One should remember that the effective rates are usually lower (after these taxes are deducted on federal returns) and that other levies, such as sales taxes, may alter the relative picture. 

