.START 

The Food and Drug Administration is investigating the safety of Upjohn Co's. prescription drug Halcion, the most widely prescribed sleeping agent in the world. 

The FDA said an advisory committee that monitors drugs such as Halcion will meet later this week to discuss reports that Halcion users suffer a disproportionately high number of negative side effects, including hallucinations and heightened aggressiveness.
The committee could recommend any of a number of actions, including taking the drug off the market or changing the recommended dosage.
But an FDA spokeswoman said it was too early to tell what moves the agency would make. 

Perhaps the most sensational case involving suspected Halcion side effects is that of a 58-year-old Utah woman who shot and killed her 83-year-old mother after having taken Halcion.
Two doctors testified that Halcion contributed to the woman's violent behavior, and a judge dismissed murder charges against her.
Upjohn contends that the woman was taking other medicine at the time, and that Halcion wasn't to blame for the incident.
A company spokeswoman added yesterday that Upjohn's studies have found that Halcion users are no more likely to encounter unwanted side effects than users of any other drug of the same family. 

But the Kalamazoo, Mich., pharmaceuticals maker is already seeing a slide in Halcion sales apparently caused by reports of unwanted side effects, analysts said yesterday.
As a result, Upjohn's world-wide sales of Halcion are expected to fall to about $235 million this year from about $260 million in 1988, analysts said. 

Upjohn stock closed at $36.375, unchanged, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday. 

Halcion is Upjohn's second-biggest sales item, and is one of a class of popular drugs, called benzodiazepines, prescribed to treat a variety of conditions, including sleeplessness, depression and anxiety.
Some of the other benzodiazepines are Librium, Valium, and Xanax. 

Upjohn has already discontinued production of the strongest dosage of Halcion pills, in keeping with the world-wide trend to prescribe the lowest effective drug dose, the company spokeswoman said. 

Upjohn also may have a cushion if sales of Halcion are reduced.
The same FDA advisory committee that is investigating problems with Halcion is also considering whether to allow Upjohn to expand the market for its leading revenue producer, Xanax.
The FDA is weighing whether to permit the use of Xanax as a treatment for panic disorders.
Currently, Xanax is approved for relief of milder anxiety problems.
In 1988, Upjohn sold an estimated $395 million of Xanax, analysts said. 

