.START 

A year ago this week Gen. Saw Maung, in his words, "saved Burma" when he ordered the army to tear back the reins of power from millions of peaceful student-led demonstrators.
His bitter pill was sugar-coated with a promise of "free and fair" elections. 

"I will lay flowers on the road for the next government," the general promised in January.
Even he, however, confirmed that the coup had been a blood bath, estimating there were 500 deaths "during the lootings and the destruction of factories and workshops." Western sources put the toll at 3,000 people dead. 

True to Burmese officialdom's robust tradition of procrastination, Gen. Saw Maung's junta, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), set three preconditions for elections: the restoration of law and order; the restoration of communications; and the re-establishment of material well-being.
From the military's viewpoint, all three preconditions have been met.
But despite Gen. Saw Maung's promises, the climate of fear persists and the prospect of fair elections seems remote.
Burma's predominantly Buddhist population of 40 million has been cowed into sullen submission. 

-- Law by martial decree is dispensed summarily through military tribunals. 

-- Thousands of dissidents are believed to have been interrogated or incarcerated in recent weeks.
Foremost among them is Aung San Suu Kyi, 44, daughter of assassinated pre-independence hero Gen. Aung San.
Aung San Suu Kyi headed the now-dismembered National League for Democracy; she and NLD Chairman Tin U have been under house arrest since July. 

-- Troops are checking the city's sewers for hidden arms seized from police stations last year. 

-- Surveillance taps are back in place on the decrepit telecommunications network.
In early July, the foreign media were banned indefinitely following unspecified "adverse" reports. 

-- More than 5,000 students and dissidents remain stranded in insurgent areas, principally in Karen state adjoining Thailand. 

-- First-hand accounts from Rangoon, later corroborated by escapees at the Thai border, indicate that as many as 2,000 individuals were rounded up off the streets of Rangoon last year and herded into City Hall for press-ganged portering against Karen rebels.
Alleged maltreatment of porters includes starvation and use as human mine detectors in mine fields. 

-- A brain drain among Burma's educated elite appears to be accelerating.
Certainly up until July, passports were dispensed easily over or under the counter at an unprecedented rate as part of an undeclared official policy of exporting dissident elements.
The medical profession is believed to have been hit harder than most.
Some doctors opted to leave after being punished with upcountry postings for caring for the wounded and dying last year. 

Some proof of the drain can be found in Thai Airways International's Rangoon traffic figures for the period from October to July.
The airline flies an Airbus 300-B4 three times a week to Rangoon -- about two-thirds of Burma's available international air seats.
Passengers flying the Rangoon-Bangkok sector exceeded those flying Bangkok-Rangoon by 3,417 -- almost 25%.
The airline's figures also show a major rise in the outflow from January to May, followed by a huge surge in July when it appears more than 1,000 people quit the country. 

The exodus of Burma's best and brightest, either internally or to foreign countries, can only exacerbate the nation's economic decline. "We have become a beggar nation," a senior official of the opposition Union National Democracy Party said in late June.
Under the aegis of the "Burmese way to socialism," the country has managed to sink to the United Nations' humiliating least-developed-nation status, despite its rich natural and human resources. 

The outlook remains bleak.
Inflation, triggered mainly by unsupportable public-sector pay increases and chronic shortages (officially blamed on profiteering in the barely nascent private sector), has left the majority of Burmese as poor and as hungry as at any time since Gen. Ne Win, 79, seized power in early 1962.
Rice and other basics have, however, been stockpiled to feed the 200,000-strong army and maintain civil-service allowances. 

Although multinational oil companies are nibbling the bait of exploration possibilities, foreign investment continues to be deterred by the government's refusal to even partially devalue the grossly overvalued kyat.
Dollars sell on the black market for more than eight times the official rate. 

Burma also exercised its right of veto on a World Bank report prepared earlier in the year that failed to gloss over glaring systemic deficiencies.
Other sources of foreign aid were cut off or reduced following last year's crackdown. 

Politically, the outlook is uncertain, but there is not much room for optimism.
Gen. Ne Win retired unexpectedly in July 1988 from the chairmanship of his monolithic Burma Socialist Program Party (BSPP), but he remains the most powerful man in the country due to the loyalty, or fear, he commands in the army.
He barely has been mentioned in the state media since Aung San Suu Kyi's incarceration, which was precipitated primarily by her attacks on him, by name, during peaceful mass NLD rallies in Rangoon this summer. 

A high profile is instead being given to the SLORC secretary, Brig.
Gen. Khin Nyunt, 49, who heads the recently beefed-up Directorate of Defense Services Intelligence.
Its duties include policing the military for signs of dissent. 

The opposition Union National Democracy Party is led by Brig.
Gen. Aung Gyi, 71, whom Gen. Ne Win ousted from his Revolutionary Council in the early 1960s.
Gen. Aung Gyi's open letters detailing Burma's economic decline -- but never faulting Gen. Ne Win himself -- helped to precipitate last year's disturbances.
But his evident willingness to appease the military has won him little popular support.
Some observers doubt that Gen. Ne Win would ever accept him as the logical alternative Gen. Aung Gyi clearly considers himself to be. 

With the NLD leadership safely out of the way in prison, respected former Prime Minister U Nu, 82, too old to play a major role, and Gen. Aung Gyi tainted in the eyes of much of the electorate, the National Unity Party, which replaced Gen. Ne Win's idiosyncratic BSPP, is clearly building strength. 

In July, Gen. Aung Gyi said that he had begged Gen. Ne Win to accept the need for fundamental reform. "This is the most important decision you have to give: whether you like to die as Stalin -- tarnished like Stalin -- or you want to be the Gorbachev of Burma," he recalled.
Nothing in Gen. Ne Win's past performance makes the prospect of liberal reform likely. 

The balloting promised for May 1990 will probably occur, but given the state of the country socially, politically and economically, the flowers of "free and fair" elections appear to be withering along Gen. Saw Maung's Road to Democracy. 

Mr. Faulder is managing correspondent of Bureau Bangkok, an independent newsgathering organization. 

