.START 

Maryann Keller, a financial analyst who tracks the automobile business, is a well-known, one-woman cottage industry.
She works for the New York investment firm of Furman, Selz, Mager, Dietz & Birney Inc.
She writes for trade publications, speaks at industry conferences and advises auto executives. 

Now Ms. Keller has written "Rude Awakening: The Rise, Fall, and Struggle for Recovery of General Motors" (William Morrow, 275 pages, $19.95).
The book is concise and accurate, but also a disappointment.
There are no new revelations to reward the reader slogging devotedly through pages of auto-obscuria describing "transfer-pricing effects of the component divisions" and "platform groups." 

GM's recent woes amount to one of the more colossal industrial stumbles in history.
The giant's market share has plunged 10 points in five years.
As the company rushed into high technology, some of its robots ran amok, and others wouldn't run at all. 

So excessively did GM Chairman Roger B. Smith gasconade the new Saturn subsidiary -- a project using innovative methods to make a small car in the U.S.that it can't possibly meet expectations by the time he drives the first Saturn off the assembly line next year.
His acquisition of Electronic Data Systems Corp. produced the celebrated slugfest with billionaire H. Ross Perot.
More recently, Mr. Smith managed to acquire Hughes Aircraft Co., a major defense contractor -- just as the defense -- spending cycle was peaking. 

Too much of "Rude Awakening" consists of broad and familiar themes (GM is a stifling bureaucracy; technology should be a means but not an end), backed up by strings of quotes.
Some of the talk comes from Jay Chai, an executive at the Japanese trading company, C. Itoh & Co., who served as a key go-between in the California joint venture between GM and Toyota.
The articulate Mr. Chai happens to be Ms. Keller's husband, although she doesn't tell the reader that. 

A fresher approach might have been to recount GM's struggle through the eyes of strategically placed managers and workers caught up in the maelstrom.
Ms. Keller does this in a few places, notably the mini-saga of Brian Haun, a central office staffer at the assembly plant in Van Nuys, Calif.
He tells graphic tales of labor-management clashes. 

Less successful is her description of how Robert Stempel, now GM's president, fought off hostile superiors to decentralize the Buick-Oldsmobile-Cadillac group that he ran after GM's 1984 reorganization.
This battle of the "Org Chart" might have been enlivened by reconstructing the tense meetings at which Mr. Stempel wore down his bosses.
Instead, Ms. Keller merely quotes Mr. Stempel's underlings. 

Ms. Keller concludes that Mr. Smith, who retires next June, "had many of the right ideas, but he seemed unable to implement them in a cohesive way." She sizes up the chances of the six executives contending for GM's top two jobs next year, but doesn't address the question of whether GM needs an outsider as its next chairman.
Because the company's problems, as described in "Rude Awakening," run so deep, Ms. Keller's thoughts might have been intriguing. 

Two industry analysts who seem to believe that GM needs an outsider are Elmer W. Johnson and Ira M. Millstein, both high-powered corporate lawyers.
Mr. Johnson was a GM executive until he quit in 1988 after five years of frustration.
Mr. Millstein is outside counsel to a committee of GM's board. 

Each man co-authors parts of "The U.S. Business Corporation: An Institution in Transition" (Ballinger, 249 pages, $34.95), a collection of essays on corporate governance edited by John R. Meyer of Harvard University and James M. Gustafson of Emory University.
The book will never make the best-seller list, but it is thoughtprovoking, especially on the subject of GM. 

Mr. Millstein's message: Outside directors must stop being captives to management. "In their permissive and passive stances," he writes in a chapter co-authored with Mr. Meyer, "most boards are likely (1) not to appraise the performance of CEOs critically enough; (2) to overestimate the ability of managers to manage different kinds of businesses well; (3) to allow managers to build enterprises that may be too large and diversified for anyone to manage well; and (4) to wait too long to respond to ongoing political, social and economic change." 

Both authors propose that corporate boards be chaired by an outside director who prepares "his or her own agenda for the meeting, in close consultation with the CEO, management and fellow directors." Might GM's woes have been eased had the company's outside directors followed their own lawyer's advice? 

In a separate chapter, Messrs.
Johnson and Gustafson quote from a moving letter written in July 1987 by a GM hourly worker, to a high-school classmate who is a GM manager: 

"Knowing that I never had a chance to be anything within the company," the worker wrote, "the next obvious move was for me to become active in the local union, and I did.
I now had a cause . . . to screw the sons of bitches in management that had been too good to recognize me as another human being. . . . I picked on bad management people and good management people.
It made no difference." 

The worker then described his conversion to the cause of cooperation after realizing the animosities were taking GM right down the tubes: "We have to truly change if we are to survive.
We have to care about the consumer.
We have to care about the stockholders.
We have to care about the people we represent.
But most important, management people and workers have to care about each other . . ." 

It is ironic to think that for GM, which lurched from one grand strategy to another for most of this decade, basic human relations might take the company back on the path to prosperity. 

Mr. Ingrassia is The Journal's bureau chief in Detroit. 

