.START 

If an airline told you that it met its schedule 80% of the time, lost only a minute fraction of all bags, and had a fatality rate 1/14th that of cars, would you feel better about boarding it? 

Probably not. 

Airlines may like to tout their performance records, but their customers aren't buying it.
When The Wall Street Journal "American Way of Buying" survey gave 2,054 people a list of 22 industries and asked which ones they had the least confidence in, 43% named airlines -- far more than any other industry.
And a third of those polled said their esteem for airlines had fallen "dramatically" in the past five years, a period plagued by rocky airline mergers, labor unrest and mounting complaints about service. 

Some airlines say the public simply expects too much; they want perfect safety and four-star service, all for prices that would hardly keep Greyhound rolling.
But many of the people questioned in the poll -- and even some industry executives themselves -- say the airlines contribute to their own problems.
They run ads for dirt cheap fares that aren't available on most flights.
They make service guarantees they don't always keep.
And they post schedules that disguise flight delays. 

"Maybe we create too many false expectations," concedes Tom Volz, senior marketing vice president at Braniff Inc. "We tell people that flying us will be as exciting as your senior prom or honeymoon.
Obviously, that's not the case." 

What's more, airlines have a nagging way of making people feel powerless, probably more than any other industry.
In these frantic days, when so many people seem to be juggling career and family, the airlines have a near-unmatched ability to wreak havoc on the best-laid plans. 

Just think of it.
Airlines hold you captive for hours -- in maddening ticket counter lines, in smoke-filled airports, and in planes that seem permanently parked on runways.
With one canceled flight, inevitably blamed on "air traffic control," they can ruin dream vacations.
On routes where competition is scarce, they can charge what they want -- and do.
And most important, of course, there is their power over life and limb. "It's like being in a hospital," says Kirby Upjohn, an associate professor of communications at Boston University and one of those polled for the Journal by Peter D. Hart Research Associates. "You surrender control of your life for a period of time and pretty much do what they tell you." 

Most of these powers have been in airlines' hands for decades.
But in the days of regulation, air travel was so elitist that the masses probably couldn't have cared less about the industry.
In 1971, fewer than half of all Americans had even stepped on a plane.
But today, three-quarters of them have flown at least once, and 30% of these travelers fly three times a year.
Airlines have been thrust into the public forum, where every fare increase, every mishap and every merger is publicly scrutinized. 

Nowhere is that scrutiny more intense than with airline safety.
The industry says this should hardly be at issue; in the past 10 years, one fatal accident has occurred for every two million flights, and that's half as frequent as the previous 10 years. "When you look at the record, I just can't understand why the public would be concerned," says Don Monteath, senior vice president for operations at America West Airlines, Phoenix, Ariz. "Those people who {complain} about our maintenance, I'd like to inspect their cars." 

But maintenance is very much on travelers' minds, given events in the past few years.
Several major airlines have been fined heavily for violating government rules on maintenance.
An Aloha Airlines Boeing 737 literally ripped apart over the Pacific Ocean.
And last February, nine people were swept out of a United Airlines plane after the cargo doors blew off. 

What's more, many of the people surveyed point out that television coverage is increasingly bringing the horrors of these and other incidents into their living rooms.
TV camera crews can arrive fast enough to interview survivors still strapped to stretchers, or catch disabled jumbo jets as they burst into flames on the runway. 

Just such coverage scared John Brill and his wife.
Both veteran fliers, they had planned to fly from New York to Boston next month.
Instead, they're taking the train. "She saw that crash on the TV and said 'Forget it, '" says Mr. Brill, referring to the United crash in Iowa last July that killed 112. "You didn't used to see these frightening things on the evening news.
It's worse than watching some disaster movie." 

If travelers aren't worrying that their next flight may be their last, they're hollering about service.
Again, the industry and some government officials say the airlines may be getting a bum rap.
In July, 197,300 flights, or 76.9% of the total 256,567, arrived within 15 minutes of schedule and only 0.7% of airline passengers reported mishandled bags. "The public perception hasn't caught up with the level of quality of service the airlines are providing," says Hoyte Decker, head of consumer affairs for the Transportation Department. 

But airlines largely create this public perception.
When real estate magnate Donald Trump started the Trump Shuttle last June, he ran full-page ads promising to be on time -- to the very second.
Much to his embarrassment, some of the early flights took off late. 

And every airline is falsely creating a rosy picture about on-time performance.
The industry's air traffic and ground delays were up 14% in the first seven months of this year from the year-earlier period.
But airlines add time to their schedules, which makes their on-time numbers look better even though passengers are forced to arrive that much earlier. 

Travelers also complain about service so much because a single airline snafu can create such lasting impressions.
Ms. Upjohn, the associate professor and one of the survey's respondents, is still bitter about an eight-hour delay last March; it spoiled her plans to surprise her sister on her birthday. "I got no compensation, and there wasn't much I could do," she says.
Kevin Raimer, meanwhile, spent 5 1/2 hours at Newark airport the day before Thanksgiving last year -- only to be told his flight was canceled.
Now he drives instead. 

"People get much more emotionally involved when we make a mistake," says Mr. Volz of Braniff. "At cocktail parties, I always hear a lot of airline horror stories.
But I never hear about a dry cleaner losing a shirt." 

The industry's pricing tactics don't inspire much confidence, either.
Despite constant complaints by consumers, airlines still advertise cheap fares that carry numerous restrictions buried in the fine print and are available only for a tiny percentage of seats. 

They also rarely offer volume discounts.
In most industries, the more you use a product or service the less you pay; in the airline business, "you gouge your biggest customers," says Al Ries, a marketing strategist and chairman of Trout & Ries in Greenwich, Conn. 

That trend has been reinforced by the wave of airline mergers that created virtual monopolies on many routes.
At a recent convention, Robert Crandall, chairman of AMR Corp., parent of American Airlines, was asked why the carrier didn't offer deals to big customers. "Because it would be dumb," he said, according to the trade biweekly Business Travel News. "The reality is that you will go to Detroit because you have to go to Detroit whether the fare is $175, $275 or $375." 

Marketing experts say the airlines' best solution may simply be more honesty -- in their ads, in their scheduling practices, in their service guarantees. "Consumers will accept all kinds of inconvenience if they are talked to straight," says Leo Greenland, of the New York ad agency Smith/Greenland Inc. 

Some experts also say the industry should break its taboo of not mentioning safety in advertising, because the subject is in the news so much anyway.
Whatever the approach, marketing executives say the airlines have a long way to go to raise confidence levels. "There are very few people who brag about their last airplane trip," says Gary Stibel, a market researcher for the New England Consulting Group. "It's more like a trip to the dentist." 

