.START 

Kim Seung Kon and his wife flit back and forth among the displays of wine, wild pine mushrooms and Swiss chocolates at the glitzy Lotte World Department store here.
The gift they want to buy Mr. Kim's business associates for the traditional Harvest Moon Festival must convey proper respect. 

So they pass by the wine, mushrooms and chocolates for something truly special: a presentation box of nine Spam cans. "It may be a bit heavy to deliver," says the 58-year-old executive for a major lighting maker, "but it is an impressive gift." 

Spam?
Those canned loaves of "chopped pork shoulder meat with ham meat added and salt, water, sugar, sodium nitrite," fully cooked and ready to eat?
The same luncheon product that most Americans associate with grade-school lunch-box sandwiches, Army life and an old Monty Python comedy routine? 

The very stuff. 

In a country where more grocery shelf space is devoted to canned luncheon meats than to soy sauce, Spam is not only one of the most popular imported American products (ranking right up there with Coca-Cola and Kentucky Fried Chicken), it's also considered one of the classiest. 

Many Spam fans here fry it with kimchi, a peppery fermented cabbage dish, or roll it up with rice and seaweed for a Spam sushi known as kimpap.
Nothing fishy about that, says Richard Crane, director of international marketing and sales for Geo.
A. Hormel & Co., the Austin, Minn., company that makes the product. "Koreans," he points out, "love Spam." 

Indeed, after the U.S. and the U.K., South Korea is the largest market for canned luncheon meat, and it is the world's fastest-growing market for it.
Thus, competition among producers is fierce. 

The authorized maker of Spam in South Korea, blessed with a license from Hormel, is Cheil Sugar, a major food producer.
But Spam faces intense competition from local Spam knockoffs, including one cooked up by Cheil itself, as well as a brand made by the Japanese-South Korean conglomerate Lotte, brazenly called LoSpam. (South Korea still isn't very big on protecting trademarks.) 

In 1987, when South Korea dropped its barriers to imported canned pork products, European makers swarmed in with such cut-price brands as Plumrose, Dak and Tulip.
Now that the invaders have grabbed more than half the market, the South Korean government has launched an investigation into alleged "dumping" of Danish government-subsidized canned pork. 

Then there is "gray-market" Spam, brought in from American supermarket warehouses by the shipload without the permission of Hormel.
The people who do this, says Hormel's Mr. Crane, "see it as an easy way to make a dollar.
I could make a million myself.
It's an easy sale." He adds that entrepreneurs, mostly Korean-Americans, often call him asking to buy Spam by the shipping container. "We tell them we can't do that," he says. "They say, 'I won't tell anyone. ' And when I still refuse, they say, 'Does your boss know you are turning me down? ' " 

The market is further saturated by black-market Spam flowing out of the Army bases.
Although no one knows how much is diverted, the Army is sure there is a problem because its stores sell about 447,000 pounds a year to some 60,000 authorized patrons -- which means that these customers, few of whom will even admit to eating Spam, annually fork down an average of 7.5 pounds each.
In a survey conducted two years ago, Cheil estimated that 80% of the Spam on Army bases was finding its way to the black market. 

South Koreans' love affair with Spam started, of course, in the early 1950s during the Korean War, when American troops slogging up and down the peninsula began sharing it with the locals.
Spam has been a staple in the PX ever since, cheering the U.S. troops that are still kept here. 

South Koreans, known to consider dog meat a delicacy, now eat Spam not because they are poor, but because they are no longer poor.
Cheil Sugar has positioned Spam, which retails for 2100 won, or about $3.12, a can, as an upscale product, playing on America's trend-setting image.
The luncheon meat is part of a boom in American consumer products that includes Anne Klein fashions, Baskin-Robbins ice cream and McDonald's hamburgers. 

"In Korea, Spam is consumed by the rich because of its image as a foreign brand," says Ha Dae Jung, manager of processed meat products for Cheil. "Koreans know Spam is representative of U.S. products." 

That's why Chun Hyun Joon, a burly construction company manager, has bought 11 gift sets of Spam.
He explains that such a gift will easily appease upset residents near a construction site. "And," he notes, "kids love it." 

All the attention could prove to be too much of a good thing, however.
Cheil created much of the demand with a huge advertising campaign in 1987 after it signed the Hormel agreement, which expires in 1992. (Cheil, a unit of the giant Samsung Group, had been after Hormel since 1978.) The company spent 30% of sales -- an estimated $1.3 million -- for ads on television, in women's magazines and in subway cars.
Mr. Ha says he expected to sell about 150 tons of Spam the first year; he sold 500 tons.
And in 1988, volume doubled.
But by that time the Europeans and the gray marketers had discovered South Korea.
And 1989, Mr. Ha says, has been "very bad." 

Risking Spam's high-class image and cutting into profit margins, Cheil recently dropped the price of Spam to its current level from 2,650 won, or about $3.95, because of price pressure from European luncheon-meat makers, which charge about 1,000 won for a 12-ounce can.
Advertising, too, has been scaled back. 

Still, Spam buying has been brisk during this autumn gift-giving season, a time that in the past two years has accounted for almost half of Cheil's Spam sales.
And why not?
Who could resist treating that favorite housewife to a gift set of Spam conveniently packaged with canisters of sugar and monosodium glutamate?
Or bringing a smile to an office mate's face with some Spam in a blue vinyl briefcase? 

