.START 

Stocks, Treasury bonds and the dollar ended virtually unchanged after idling through the day with little movement. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average edged down less than a point to close at 2687.31 in another day of sluggish trading.
But the Dow Jones Transportation Average gained eight points on the strength of more airline takeover speculation. 

Most long-term bond prices were about flat.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond, for example, fell just 1/32 of a point.
That's about a 30-cent drop for each $1,000 face amount.
There was a little flurry of excitement in the currency markets when the Federal Reserve intervened against the dollar, but the currency rebounded to end slightly stronger against the West German mark and a shade weaker against the yen. 

Traders and investors found little inspiration in yesterday's economic reports.
The August consumer price index was flat, suggesting that inflation at the retail level isn't getting out of hand.
But housing starts, which fell an unexpected 5% in August, raised the specter of an economy that is weakening.
Still, neither the prospects of stable prices nor a weaker economy had any significant effect on financial markets.
Such news ordinarily would be expected to give bond prices a boost. 

With little price movement to provide guidance, analysts debated the meaning of sluggish trading volume.
Optimists argued that the light trading volume signaled that investors remain confident.
But pessimists countered that investors aren't being tempted to jump into the markets at current price levels. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices were barely lower in thin trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 141.6 million shares.
Advancing issues on the Big Board outnumbered losers, 739 to 

Bond prices were about unchanged.
The yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue stood at 8.09%. 

The dollar was narrowly mixed.
In late New York trading the currency was quoted at 1.9545 marks and 145.85 yen, compared with 1.9520 marks and 145.88 yen Monday. 

