.START 

The Exxon oil spill in Alaska's Prince William Sound was a terrible waste.
An area of enormous natural beauty was polluted, large numbers of animals were killed and hundreds of millions of dollars have been spent on the cleanup, not to mention the loss of 11 million gallons of petroleum.
Yet the greatest destruction of wealth associated with Alaskan oil has gone unnoticed.
As a direct result of the actions of the Alaskan state government, a significant portion of the net value of Alaska's petroleum reserves has been wasted just as surely as if it were being deliberately spilled into Prince William Sound. 

Holding government accountable for its actions is difficult under the best of conditions.
Relatively small groups organized around narrowly focused interests find advantage in lobbying government for programs that serve those interests.
The general taxpaying public that pays for those programs is such a large group that organizing effective resistance to special interests spending is difficult.
The result is a clear bias in the political process that magnifies the benefits of government actions and obscures the costs. 

In most states, however, taxpayers are aware of their tax burdens, and they do not have to organize to send politicians a message at the polls that there are limits to the taxes that will be condoned.
This general resistance from the taxpaying public to overt tax increases imposes a modicum of accountability on the spending of most state legislatures. 

In Alaska, however, taxpayers have little motivation to resist the transfer of private wealth into common property state revenues.
Since the discovery of oil on Alaska's North Slope in the late 1960s, more than 80% of the state's tax revenue has come from taxes on oil.
These taxes are paid almost entirely by consumers and investors who do not live in Alaska. 

So when faced with constituent pressures to increase spending, politicians in Juneau have seen little reason to resist.
Why risk exasperating those who can vote you out of office when they can be accommodated by increasing the taxes on those who cannot? 

Since 1968 the Alaskan Legislature has increased taxes on oil 12 times.
Even though Alaska had by far the highest taxes in the nation on oil production, the 1989 state legislature in Juneau increased the state taxes on Prudhoe Bay production by 25%, and by almost 60% on production out of the nearby Kuparuk oil field.
The Alaskan state government is capturing more than 50% of the net return generated by the recovery of North Slope oil, which is 70% more than the share received by the oil industry. 

These oil revenues are fueling state spending at unprecedented rates.
Alaska is far out in front of the rest of the nation in per-capita state spending.
In 1986 per-capita state spending in Alaska was $7,309 -- 2 1/2 times more than that of its nearest rival, Wyoming, and nearly five times the national average.
The higher cost of living in Alaska can account for only a relatively small share of these differences. 

There is no way the Alaskan state government can spend the tremendous oil revenues on programs that make sense economically.
But given the huge pool of oil revenues at their disposal, politicians in Juneau are well aware that spending vast amounts on wasteful programs makes sense politically.
Not surprisingly, the Alaska government is literally spilling oil wealth throughout the state on one economic black hole after another.
Consider some examples: 

-- A state-owned meat plant acquired for $3.5 million in 1986 has been losing money ever since. 

-- A state-owned dairy, which lost $887,000 in 1987 even with the help of a 7% local bidder's preference, raises the amount that the Anchorage School District pays for milk by $25,000 a year. 

-- A $300,000 grant to the Bering Strait School District for "adventure-based education" was used, among other things, to send students on a European tour.
While the $88,414 travel cost was expensive, it was less than the $106,034 spent on "consultant fees" paid to education travel "specialists" who arranged the trip and accompanied the students. 

-- The state spent $5.8 million on a barley terminal that was never finished.
Had the $8.2 million facility been completed, it could have processed all of the barley produced in Alaska during its peak 1986 harvest in fewer than 4.5 hours. 

-- A $70 million performing arts center in Anchorage will lose more than $1 million a year even under the rosiest of revenue projections, independent auditors say. 

-- Billions of dollars were lent to Alaskan businesses and individuals, including a loan for the development of a dog-powered washing machine.
As of the end of 1987 more than $233 million of these loans were in default and an additional $1 billion were delinquent. 

If there is a difference between the consequences of decisions on the transportation of petroleum by oil industry executives and decisions on the use of petroleum wealth by Alaskan politicians, it comes from the fact the former are far more subject to the constraints of public opinion.
Almost everyone is aware of the waste resulting from oil spills, and this public awareness serves as a powerful incentive for the oil industry to make careful use of our oceans and waterways.
Almost no one is aware of the far greater waste resulting from the political exploitation of Alaska's oil wealth.
Because this oil spill is going unnoticed by the media, and therefore by the public, the politicians responsible for it continue their wasteful ways with impunity. 

Mr. Lee is an economics professor at the University of Georgia, Athens.
This is based on an article, co-written by Stephen L. Jackstadt, to appear in the Freeman. 

