.START 

Three weeks after the 1987 global stock-market collapse, Alan Bond bought Vincent van Gogh's "Irises" for $54 million.
The Australian entrepreneur, who rode out the crash on the cash flow from his beer assets, says he identifies with artists like van Gogh because they "showed great inner strength in persisting with their vision." 

Mr. Bond could use plenty of inner strength these days.
His corporate canvas, which includes brewing, media, resources and property interests, is in tatters.
Australia's regulators have launched an inquiry into his business activities.
And yesterday, Mr. Bond's flagship Bond Corp. Holdings Ltd. announced a series of maneuvers to raise cash and reduce debt by shedding units, including half of his Australian brewery empire. 

Losing control of Bond Corp. would put Mr. Bond in the same boat as arch-rival Robert Holmes a Court, whose companies were ravaged in the crash, and George Herscu, the property and retail magnate whose creditors pulled the plug on his Hooker Corp. in July.
The three men's predicament resembles that of Australia's economy: They grew too fast and racked up debts beyond their ability to pay. 

"It's a get-rich-quick economy," says Mark Johnson, a Sydney investment banker. "People have been very oriented to speculation and rapid rises in (asset) values." Adds a U.S. lender in Australia: "These entrepreneurs do a whole career's worth in three to five years because they know when times are good they'd better make it -- 'cause when times are bad, they're really bad." 

The rise of Australia's high-flying entrepreneurs is a saga of greed and overambition; of eager bankers peddling expensive credit to insatiable borrowers in a newly unshackled financial system; and of corporate empires built on rising asset values, often lax and sometimes questionable accounting, and a hot stock market full of hungry investors. 

"The common thread is they had a narrow equity base, too much debt, too many assets and not enough cash flow," says Viktor Shvets of the Sydney brokerage firm Capel Court Powell Ltd. "It's certainly the story of Hooker. . . . It certainly was the story of Holmes a Court, and it is currently the story of Alan Bond." 

Although many of Australia's high rollers took the same risky route, bankers and others say that because of conservative management and mature business operations, other big-borrowing companies aren't raising concern.
For instance, they aren't worried about Elders IXL Ltd., the huge brewing, financial-services, agribusiness and resources concern.
Nor are they concerned about Rupert Murdoch's farflung media empire.
And they say companies controlled by Sir Ronald Brierley, a New Zealander who operates mainly from Australia, are still safe bets. 

All of these entrepreneurs flourished in an era of "supply-driven lending" that followed deregulation of Australia's financial system in 1983, says Iain Thompson, general manager of corporate banking at Westpac Banking Corp.
But with Australia now committed to keeping interest rates high, that era is over. 

The alarm bells are sounding for the economy as well.
In late August, Moody's Investors Service Inc. lowered Australia's credit rating to double-A-2 from double-A1, citing a perceived "small but significant increase in the likelihood that Australian borrowers could, at some future date, experience difficulty" in servicing their debt.
Australia owes foreign creditors 137 billion Australian dollars (US$106.3 billion), up from A$67.5 billion in 1985.
The bulk of the foreign debt is owed by companies controlled by businessmen such as Mr. Bond and Mr. Murdoch. 

Australia's relatively high inflation rate, averaging 7.6% annually for the five years through 1988, encouraged investors to buy assets, some economists say.
They borrowed to do it.
Foreign investment banks became more aggressive, the government granted commercial-bank licenses to 16 foreign banks, and domestic banks moved to defend their respective market shares. 

Australia loosened credit after the October 1987 crash, fueling an import surge and ballooning the deficit in trade in goods and services.
That swelled the foreign-debt burden, so the government raised domestic interest rates to slow demand.
Short-term rates have climbed to about 18% from about 11% in March 1988.
Domestic interest rates are likely to stay high, causing economists and others to warn of more corporate failure. 

For a time, it may have seemed to Mr. Holmes a Court that he couldn't fail.
Born in Johannesburg, South Africa, he settled in Perth, earned a law degree and began to build Bell Group Ltd., an empire predicated on rising asset values in transportation, media, entertainment and building supplies.
Striking terror in board rooms around the world, he amassed a stake of nearly US$1 billion in the U.S. oil company Texaco Inc., and at home nearly took over Broken Hill Proprietary Co., a mining concern that is Australia's largest company.
By 1987, his estimated fortune of A$1.4 billion made him Australia's richest man. 

The equities crash changed all that.
Merrill Lynch & Co. withdrew as lead manager of a A$1 billion bond issue Mr. Holmes a Court's Bell Resources Ltd. would have used to reduce its interest bill.
Most of the Bell companies' assets were in other listed concerns that produced dividends but didn't give Mr. Holmes a Court access to their cash flow. 

As the value of his investments plunged, investors dumped the Bell companies' stock and Mr. Holmes a Court dumped assets, including the Texaco stake and most of his BHP holdings.
Six months after the crash, he sold half of his controlling stake in Bell Group to an arm of the Western Australian government for A$2.50 a share and the rest to Bond Corp. 

That may have marked Mr. Bond's downfall.
Andrew Brown, an analyst at brokerage Baring Securities (Australia) Ltd., says Mr. Bond "reached too far" and paid too much for Bell Group.
Baring Securities estimates its current value at about 74 Australian cents a share. "If he hadn't acquired Bell Group, he probably wouldn't be teetering on the brink," Mr. Brown says.
Mr. Bond didn't respond to requests for an interview. 

Mr. Bond's Bell purchase ran afoul of Australia's corporate regulators.
He was forced to settle by making a general offer for Bell Group at A$2.70 a share and acquired 70% of the company.
He set about stripping it to reduce debts, but he couldn't resist acquiring more assets along the way, including a 20.4% stake in Lonrho PLC, the London-based conglomerate controlled by R.W. "Tiny" Rowland.
Mr. Bond's move late last year appeared to presage a takeover attempt. 

After the burden he assumed with Bell Group, that was his second big mistake.
Last week, Mr. Bond sold the Lonrho stake at a loss of about US$77.3 million. 

Mr. Bond told an Australian TV reporter in May he "underestimated the venom of Tiny Rowland," who waged a campaign focusing on Bond Corp. 's debt, much of which is owed to banks outside Australia.
The Lonrho attacks made Bond Corp. 's lenders balk at providing credit lines, including a US$220 million undrawn facility that Mr. Bond inherited from Bell Resources.
Bond Corp. 's stock has been hammered to as low as 27 Australian cents from around A$2 late last year. 

Mr. Bond is betting his biggest bank lenders will stick with him.
It's a bet Hooker Corp. 's George Herscu lost.
Mr. Herscu, a Romanian refugee turned property developer in Melbourne, grabbed control of conservatively run Hooker Corp. in 1985.
He took out loans and spent US$1 billion, in part, on up-market American retailers, including Bonwit Teller. 

As Hooker's borrowings grew, so did bankers' unease.
Like many Australian companies, particularly ones controlled by entrepreneurs, Hooker was "extremely reluctant to give information to us," says one Australian banker.
Many Hooker loans weren't secured by assets.
Yet the banks kept credit lines open. "The idea was he might make it," one banker says, but "high interest rates changed a lot." 

In late July, Hooker's bankers forced Mr. Herscu to turn the company, with A$1.6 billion in bank debt, over to a court-appointed liquidator.
Mr. Herscu, through an aide, declined to be interviewed. 

