.START 

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration turned and bared its teeth at a consumer watchdog group. 

In a remarkable two-page letter, the career employees in the agency's Office of Defects Investigation took to task the Center for Auto Safety, a consumer group founded by Ralph Nader, for "unfairly and inaccurately" criticizing the agency.
The letter to Clarence Ditlow, director of the consumer group, was sent without the prompting or the approval of the agency's political appointees, officials said. 

The letter was a response to a Sept. 3 news release in which the Center for Auto Safety accused the agency of bowing to pressure from the auto industry and closing 25 defect investigations involving 37 million cars over the past eight years. "Nothing could be further from the truth," the agency workers responded. "Each of the investigations you cited has a well documented basis for closure." 

In a broader sense, the letter was a signal that the defects-office staff is tired of the incessant pounding from the consumer group. "After many years of quietly ignoring your many attacks on the safety defects program," the letter said, "the career, nonpolitical staff . . . wants to go on record that we believe your organization frequently goes beyond legitimate disagreement with the program and may, in fact, be seriously undermining it." 

If public confidence in the agency erodes, the letter said, consumers will be less likely to provide the agency with important safety information. 

So far this year, about 3.5 million vehicles have been recalled by the industry, and about 80% of the recalls have occurred because of agency pressure, the letter said.
Mr. Ditlow said he hadn't yet seen the letter, but that he stood by his previous statements that the agency is a captive of the auto industry and hasn't fulfilled its responsibilities. "I'm not questioning the people within the Office of Defects Investigations," he said. "I'm saying the agency as a whole isn't doing its job." 

