.START 

In March, little Serex Inc. arranged its first group health-insurance plan, covering six workers. 

Five months later the Englewood, N.J., maker of medical-test kits switched to a cheaper policy with the same insurer, saving $6,000 a year.
Besides costing more, the first policy failed to deliver all its promised advantages because doctors affiliated with the plan were too hard to find, Serex says. 

Judith Fitzpatrick-Davis, Serex's president, says she needs a health plan to attract and keep workers.
But she still isn't happy paying premiums as high as $3,500 a year for an employee earning $21,000. "We'd be paying a lot less if we were a big company," she says.
Benefits specialists say she is probably right. 

As benefits become more expensive, small companies like Serex are growing more aggressive in slashing costs or getting more for their money.
A decade ago, specialists say, most employers would sign up for a group policy, quietly pay the premiums and ignore the subject.
Now, companies are scrutinizing their coverage and making frequent changes.
The chief executive officer rather than a personnel aide often makes the decisions. 

"I can't tell you how much energy I've put into this problem," says Mrs. Fitzpatrick-Davis, who with an assistant spent nearly two months studying medical plans. 

Most of the scrutiny focuses on health-insurance plans, the fringe benefit for which costs have been soaring fastest.
But some small companies are taking measures to curb the cost of retirement plans and other benefits too. 

The cost trimming, though resented by workers, is paying off for many companies.
Last year, Refined Sugars Inc., of Yonkers, N.Y., reduced health-insurance coverage for about 160 salaried workers, saving about $125,000 a year.
The minimum deductible was doubled, for example, to $200.
To achieve further savings of an estimated $300,000 annually, the company switched insurance carriers this year.
The new plan has limits -- on reimbursement for psychiatric care, for instance -- that weren't contained in the old plan. "The first time was the Band-Aid," says Donald W. Brainard, director of human resources for Refined Sugars, a Canadian-owned company, of the wave of cuts. "The second time was the major surgery." 

Even more extreme was NPD Group Inc. 's decision, about four years ago, to drop its major-medical insurer.
While keeping Blue Cross hospital coverage, the Port Washington, N.Y., market-research company became self-insured for the major-medical program, which covers about 350 employees, and for a new dental program. "In the first couple of years of self-funding, we clearly saved a couple of hundred thousand dollars," says Lanny Catz, senior vice president of NPD. 

He adds, however, that claims have soared since then, so NPD is no longer certain it is coming out ahead.
Indeed, consultants warn companies of fewer than a couple of hundred employees about the high cost of administering their own programs. 

The conflicting needs of keeping costs down and employee morale up is putting a lot of companies in a bind. "To keep people, you have to offer them especially good health-care packages," says Bruce Blank, chief executive officer of Paragon Sporting Goods Co., a small New York specialty retailer. "But health-care costs are going wild.
It's a major dilemma." 

Indeed, labor shortages increasingly are forcing small employers to match the fringe benefits of large ones. "We're in the mode of adding employee benefits," says Michael Boudreau, financial vice president of Voicetek Corp., Chelmsford, Mass.
The maker of voice computers, which has about 60 employees, has added a dental plan and converted an inactive profit-sharing plan into an active 401(k) retirement plan, named after a section of the Internal Revenue Service tax code.
He adds: "It's a matter of giving people more reason to want to work here." 

But such benefits can crunch budgets.
Dennis M. Sullivan, vice president of the benefits-services unit of insurance broker Alexander & Alexander Inc., New York, says: "The cost of benefits can be a major piece of overall operating expenses for a small company." 

Thus, companies say they're forced into a balancing act.
Says Mr. Brainard of Refined Sugars, "You're really walking a fine line between being able to attract good people and being able to run a profitable business without giving away the store." 

Many companies are working to master the balancing act.
Linvure Co., a Somerville, Mass., maker of flexible packaging, says it has just overhauled benefits for 26 salaried workers without raising benefit costs from about $150,000 a year.
James Macare, financial vice president, says Linvure added a dental plan, long-term disability coverage and 401(k) plan; employees share the costs of an expanded health program. "What we gained is employees' perception that they have a much more comprehensive package of benefits," Mr. Macare says. 

When health coverage is simply cut, employees often gripe loudly.
Many companies are slashing anyway.
Among other measures, they frequently increase deductibles, or require workers to pay a bigger share of the medical bill.
Many concerns require second medical opinions prior to major surgery or hospitalization, or otherwise monitor claims. 

Most important, say benefits specialists, so-called managed-care programs, in which the insurers have more influence over which doctors and hospitals are used, are becoming widespread.
Instead of just paying bills after the fact, insurers negotiate rates in advance. "The open-checkbook days are going away," says John W. Word III, president of Word & Brown Inc., an Orange, Calif., insurance marketer. 

Besides health costs, some small companies are taking aim at pension costs.
According to the Employee Benefit Research Institute in Washington, D.C., 26% of small employers had retirement plans in 1985.
The figure is dwarfed by the 65% with health plans, but pensions still offer plenty of scope for tinkering. 

Consultants say some small companies are terminating defined-benefit pension plans that promise to pay specified benefits in the future.
They are turning to defined-contribution plans, in which the current funding rather than the future benefit is specified.
The company's obligation ends when it makes the contribution rather than when the employee dies. 

In addition, more new plans are "nonqualified" under the tax law -- meaning that employers have more flexibility in meting out benefits. "Many companies are spending less money on lower-paid employees and directing more money to the top people they want to favor," says Andrew Freedman, employee-benefits specialist for Hoffman Raich Fine CPA Group, East Meadow, N.Y. 

In the increasingly popular 401(k) plans, employees can shelter thousands of dollars in annual income from taxes.
Some employers supplement employee savings, but others don't. "Some companies want to give a retirement benefit, but they want it to cost little or nothing," says David Gerstenblatt, chairman of Pension Service Consultants Inc., Needham, Mass.
Indeed, he says some companies have terminated active pension plans in favor of 401(k) plans.
Such companies must guarantee to pay any benefits accrued under the pension plans prior to termination, but can save substantially in the future. 

