.START 

The Federal Aviation Administration, in a widely anticipated directive, called for ultrasonic inspections of the type of General Electric Co. engine whose failure led to the crash of a United Airlines DC-10 in Sioux City, Iowa, last July. 

The official announcement of the testing procedures -- an "emergency regulation" to determine whether the fan disk on the CF66 engine contains any metallurgical imperfections -- came as DC-10 maker McDonnell Douglas Corp., the FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board testified before a Senate panel on the airworthiness of the tri-jet. 

In reiterating a stance the FAA has taken since the Sioux City accident that killed 112 people, Administrator James Busey told lawmakers: "I believe it is important that I assure the public that the FAA considers the DC-10 to be a safe aircraft.
I would stress that we have no safety information which would cause us to consider grounding the aircraft, as some have asked." 

In the July crash, the plane's aft engine exploded, spitting out metal and severing lines on all three of the jet's fluid-filled hydraulic, or control, systems.
Investigators suspect the engine broke up after its 270-pound titanium fan disk -- still missing among the bean and corn crop in Iowa -- failed.
The disk holds the fan blades in place. 

Late last week, McDonnell Douglas recommended to DC-10 operators that they install a shut-off valve on the No. 3 hydraulic system so that if all the lines were ever ruptured again, enough fluid would be retained for the pilot to maintain control and bring the craft to a safe landing.
The FAA is expected to make those changes mandatory soon. 

The FAA said previously that the engine tests, which involve putting the three-foot-wide disks into a water chamber and bombarding them with ultrasonic waves, would cost the airlines a total of $10 million or more.
But yesterday, a GE spokesman said the Fairfield, Conn., electrical products concern would assume the costs for the inspections, though he couldn't say what the dollar amount would be. 

The tests, to be conducted by GE, are limited to a certain type of CF6-6 engine rotor disk, those made with the so-called "double vacuum" melt process.
The first 55 engines must be examined by Nov. 21, and the remaining 165 inspections should be completed by Feb. 4. 

In trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, GE closed at $57 a share, down 62.5 cents. 

At the hearing before the Commerce subcommittee on aviation, Dale Warren, a vice president for McDonnell Douglas's Long Beach, Calif., commercial aircraft unit, explained that it was normal for aerospace companies to learn from accidents. "It is and always has been our practice to continually improve our aircraft as long as they remain in production, and throughout their operating lives," he said. 

But Sen. Wendell Ford (D., Ky.) said he'll be keeping a particularly close eye on the DC-10. "They all gave the impression that it's safe," the subcommittee chairman said. "But I'm not sure it is.
I've still got a knot in the pit of my stomach." 

