.START 

The U.S. has changed one of the basic tenets of its negotiating position in the strategic arms reduction talks as a way to "get the ball rolling" with the Soviet Union, according to Secretary of State James Baker. 

In a news briefing yesterday, Mr. Baker said he looked forward to movement in the Soviet position on START at his meeting this weekend with the Soviet Union's foreign minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, in Jackson Hole, Wyo.
Mr. Shevardnadze, he said, is expected to bring a letter from Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev with new arms-control proposals. 

Mr. Baker explained that the U.S. has instructed its negotiators to stop insisting on a ban on mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles, a bargaining position it has held since the early days of the Reagan administration. 

Many analysts believe the U.S. change had become inevitable.
Since the early 1980s, the Soviet Union has produced two types of mobile missiles -- the SS-25 and the SS-24 -- while their U.S. counterparts -- the Peacekeeper and Midgetman missiles -- are still in development. 

Sen. Albert Gore (D., Tenn.), one of the Senate's leading experts on START, called Mr. Baker's move "a valuable step," one that "has long been expected because the earlier proposal for a ban was always considered irrational, even within the administration." 

To prod Congress to hasten the development, Mr. Baker said the change was contingent upon continued funding for the two missile programs.
At the moment, negotiators for the House and Senate are at loggerheads over the Defense Department's authorization bill -- the House version of which kills funds for the single-warhead Midgetman and severely cuts money for the mobile version of the Peacekeeper, which carries 10 warheads. 

The change, according to Secretary Baker, will require negotiators to work out limits and complex verification measures for the mobile missiles, which are designed to move around in remote areas during a crisis, making them difficult to target. 

"This gets us off of an unbelievable position in negotiations," explains Michael Krepon, a strategic weapons analyst for the Henry L. Stimson Center, a Washington research firm. "But we've got a ways to go here, to put it mildly." 

Mr. Krepon said he hopes the U.S. will include the Soviet mobile weapons in verification experiments it has suggested to test ways certain types of weapons can be accounted for.
One way experts have considered is to require the mobile ICBMs be marked with identifying tags as they move through certain defined geographic "gateways" into areas of deployment. 

In his briefing, Secretary Baker also noted "the severe challenges and pressures which the Soviets face." He said the goal of U.S. policy should be to "find points of mutual advantage, gains that help them, but that also, at the same time, serve our interests." Mr. Baker said that progress in resolving regional conflicts, reaching arms-control agreements and Western aid to Poland and Hungary would make a "constructive contribution to perestroika," or Soviet economic restructuring. 

Reacting to criticism from Democrats that the administration has been too timid in its reaction to the changes under way in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, Mr. Baker said: "When the president of the United States is rocking along with a 70% approval rating on his handling of foreign policy, and I were the leader of the opposition party, I might have something similar to say." 

Robert S. Greenberger contributed to this article. 

