.START 

{An Occasional Look at Investing Fundamentals} 

When it comes to building an investment portfolio, there's a crucial distinction between true diversification and simply holding a hodgepodge of securities. 

An investor could hold dozens of small-company stocks, for instance, and still be ravaged by the special perils that affect this volatile sector.
Even if the holdings comprised many small-company mutual funds, which themselves are diversified, the investor's portfolio would still be vulnerable. 

The real secret of portfolio diversification, investment professionals say, is to mix investments that don't move in tandem -- then regularly readjust the mix to maintain its original proportions. 

The basic objective is always to have at least some investments that do well, to offset others that are lagging. "Whenever you have two assets or strategies {whose patterns of returns} are less than 100% correlated, you'll always win by combining them in a portfolio," says Russell Fogler of Aronson & Fogler, a Philadelphia money-management firm. 

But diversification isn't just a one-time exercise that investors can do and then forget.
Because the investments that perform best in a given period will be a growing part of the portfolio, while those that do poorly will represent a declining share, the original mix of investments will be thrown off balance.
Thus, it's essential for investors to review their portfolios periodically -- to "rebalance at intervals to bring the mix back" to its original proportions, says Mr. Fogler. 

To illustrate his point, Mr. Fogler takes two theoretical investments: one that gains 100% in the first year and falls 50% in the second year, and another that falls 50% in the first year and rebounds 100% the second.
At the end of the two years, he says, an undiversified portfolio that held just one or the other investment would have a cumulative return of zero.
The investor in such a portfolio, meanwhile, would probably have an ulcer from seeing the investment jump around so much. 

If, however, the two investments were combined 50-50 in a single diversified portfolio, and that portfolio was rebalanced once a year to bring the mix back to 50-50, the return would be 25% a year.
That translates into a 56.25% cumulative return over the two years, and many fewer sleepless nights for the investor.
Without rebalancing, the return for the diversified portfolio would be zero over the same two-year stretch. 

In effect, diversification insures that at least part of the portfolio will always be in the right place at the right time.
Consequently, it makes money for investors through a series of base hits, rather than home runs -- a feature that could seem disappointing to some individuals who crave more action. 

At a given time, the hottest investments will always make this approach seem like "de-worse-ification in terms of total returns," says Owen Quattlebaum, a manager at Brown Brothers Harriman & Co.
To most individuals, "the idea that you invest in something because it's going to do poorly when something else does well is not intuitively appealing." 

But experience shows that the odds of outguessing the markets with enough regularity to beat a diversified portfolio are extremely poor -- no matter how alluring such a game may seem. "That's the reason why the fate of most people {who attempt it} is to buy high and sell low," losing money as a result, says Mr. Quattlebaum. 

By disciplining investors to regularly buy into investments that have performed poorly, diversification raises the odds of "buying low and selling high over time" -- rather the other way around, says Mr. Fogler. "It's really a dollar-cost averaging strategy." 

Of course, the cost of selling appreciated assets and switching the profits into depressed ones can be very expensive for individual investors, who are subject to capital-gains taxes and high transaction fees.
For that reason, individuals should "rebalance with cash flow" from dividends, interest and new savings, says Michael Lipper, head of Lipper Analytical Services. "It's only later in life that cash flow isn't sufficient to change the mix." 

How does a person find investments that don't move in tandem? 

On a narrow level, the investor should simply look for individual stocks that perform differently -- for instance, growth stocks, which do best in a boom, and utility issues, which are a classic defensive play.
Diversification also argues in favor of combining broad stock-investing strategies -- by investing in a variety of growth-, value- and income-oriented mutual funds, for example. 

More broadly, diversification calls for spreading the portfolio among different types of assets, including not only stocks but also bonds, real estate, international investments and so-called cash equivalents, like Treasury bills and money-market funds. 

U.S. stocks and bonds tend to track one another about half the time, because they respond similarly to many of the same U.S. economic influences.
But the other half of the time when they don't track, they complement one another in a portfolio.
Stocks offer growth potential and a hedge against inflation, which bonds don't.
Bonds, unlike stocks, offer good gains if recession drives down interest rates; they also provide higher current income and more stable returns. 

In the same vein, foreign stocks and bonds further round out a portfolio because they are not highly correlated to U.S. economic risk and the dollar.
They also allow investors to take advantage of profit opportunities world-wide. 

"U.S. stocks are only about a third of the world total, while U.S. bonds represent about half the world total," says Mr. Lipper. "That's not to suggest you should put two-thirds of your assets overseas," but it gives an idea of magnitude of opportunity an investor would pass by in ignoring such investments, he says. 

To gauge the relative correlation between different investments, most professionals rely on historical patterns.
However, the pros advise caution in using such measures, because those return relationships "are not constant through time," says Mr. Lipper.
In other words, there's no guarantee the same relationships will hold in the future. 

Gary Brinson, head of First Chicago Investment Advisors, a Chicago asset-allocation firm, has tried to get around that problem by gauging not only how different investments have tracked in the past, but also how they are likely to do in the future.
The results are shown in the table accompanying this article. 

His analysis tries to adjust for the effect of big changes -- such as the Federal Reserve's freeing of interest rates in 1979 or the big spike in inflation in the last decade -- on the relative behavior of different assets. "Anything that might have been captured in the data that isn't necessarily normal going forward" is adjusted for the likelihood it will recur in the future, he says. 

over the long term.
Anything below 9 inches indicates good diversification potential.
Negative numbers indicate returns should move inversely, while 0 indicates there's no particular pattern.
For example, returns on U.S. stocks and those on non-U.S. stocks are more closely tied (with a rating of 6) than returns on U.S. stocks and cash investments (with a rating of -1), which should move in opposite directions. 

