.START 

The America's Cup rightfully belongs to the San Diego Yacht Club, a New York state appeals court ruled.
The court reversed a lower court decision that the San Diego club unfairly won the prize in 1988. 

In a 4-1 decision, the appeals court found that the San Diego club properly fulfilled its obligations under the rules of the yacht race when it defeated the Mercury Bay Boating Club of New Zealand.
Earlier this year, a lower court ruled that the San Diego club violated the spirit of the 132-year-old international competition by using a catamaran to defeat the New Zealand club's 90-foot monohull.
Mercury Bay claimed that the rules required the defender use a boat similar in size to that of the challenger. 

But the appeals court said the contest places no such restrictions of the defender of the trophy. "The Deed of Gift {which established the rules of the contest} is silent as to the type of boat to be used by the defender. . . . In finding that the vessels must be 'somewhat evenly matched, ' the {lower} court promulgated a rule that is neither expressed in, nor inferable from, the language of the Deed of Gift," the appeals court said in its decision. 

A lawyer for Mercury Bay said the ruling makes it virtually impossible for any challenger to ever take the cup.
Because the rules require the challenger to announce in advance the dimensions of its vessel, the defender can always enter a boat that by its dimensions alone is likely to win, said the lawyer, George N. Tompkins Jr.
He said that in the past, the challenger and defender mutually agreed to certain limitations on the size and type of vessels. 

"If this decision stands, the America's Cup might as well be renamed the San Diego Cup because that's where it will always stay," said Mr. Tompkins.
He said Mercury Bay plans to appeal the decision to the New York Court of Appeals in Albany, the state's highest court. 

The San Diego club's attorney, Harold R. Tyler Jr., of Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, said he was especially pleased that the appeals panel indicated it is inappropriate for disputes over sporting events to be resolved in court.
He said Mercury Bay could have protested San Diego's use of the catamaran before an international committee of yachting officials.
He also challenged whether San Diego's choice of boats was inherently unfair: "It would have been very unfair to the catamaran if wind and sea conditions had been a bit different last year." 

In a dissenting opinion, Judge Bentley Kassal said, "The 1988 America's Cup races were manifestly unfair in every sense." He said the tradition of the America's Cup "has long dictated that participants maintain a sense of fair play and engage in honest rivalry.
These principles were violated when the San Diego Yacht Club entered a catamaran, thereby pitting a multihulled vessel against a monohull for the first time in the 130 years of America's Cup competition." 

MARCUS SCHLOSS & Co. raises double-jeopardy issue in motion to dismiss guilty verdict. 

The Wall Street securities firm is challenging the government's right to assess criminal penalties on the heels of civil penalties involving the same allegedly illicit conduct. 

In a post-trial motion filed in New York federal court, lawyers for Marcus Schloss -- which was convicted in July of conspiracy and securities fraud -- are using a double-jeopardy argument in an effort to overturn a jury's guilty verdict on one count of securities fraud. 

Double jeopardy is a Fifth Amendment protection against being tried twice for the same offense.
Last May, the U.S. Supreme Court said the protection applied not only to criminal proceedings, and that it prohibited especially severe civil penalties against an individual already penalized criminally for the same offense. 

Marcus Schloss's attorneys at the New York law firm of Sullivan & Cromwell say the clause should also apply to cases in which the defendant is assessed for civil penalties prior to criminal prosecution. 

In February 1988, Marcus Schloss agreed to a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which filed a civil suit involving the same transactions the government later outlined in its indictment.
The firm agreed to pay $136,900 in disgorgement of alleged illegal profits and a double civil penalty of $273,800. 

Nearly $30,000 of the settlement total involved the firm's March 1986 purchase of stock in American Brands Inc., the government said.
Because of the verdict the firm faces a maximum penalty of $500,000 on the count involving that transaction. 

In response to the motion, federal prosecutor Carl Loewenson Jr. wrote that the Supreme Court's ruling last May was limited "to the situation in which the criminal prosecution precedes a civil action that seeks to exact further sanctions for the same conduct." 

The prosecutor stressed that if civil penalties precluded criminal penalties for the same offense, then an SEC settlement could in effect be a purchase of immunity against prosecution. 

In a reply filed yesterday, defense lawyer Marvin Schwartz argued that the double-jeopardy clause was intended to protect against the government's attempts to seek a second punishment simply because it may not have been satisfied with the first. 

JUDGE ORDERS RELEASE of documents concerning exclusion of a Colombian journalist from U.S. 

U.S. District Judge John Walker of New York ruled that the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, the State Department and the Immigration and Naturalization Service failed to provide an adequate explanation when they refused to allow Patricia Lara Salive, a prominent Colombian journalist, into the U.S. 

The Lawyers Committee for Human Rights sought the documents under the Freedom of Information Act, which requires federal agencies to release public records upon request unless the material is exempted for national security or other reasons. 

The Lawyers Committee, a public interest law firm in New York, received several hundred pages of documents from the agencies.
Other documents were released with deletions or withheld entirely for national security or other reasons.
The committee filed suit in May 1987 seeking the withheld information. 

In his ruling late last week, Judge Walker ordered the government to submit some -- but not all -- of the documents so he could review them privately. 

Ms. Lara was detained by agents because she was named on the INS's "Lookout List," a listing of people barred from the U.S. on suspicion of communist or subversive beliefs.
Judge Walker required the INS to identify all excluded individuals on the Lookout List by occupation, country and reason for exemption. 

Assistant U.S. Attorney Chad Vignola said the government hadn't decided whether to appeal the release of that information. 

Arthur C. Helton, a director of the Lawyers Committee, said Judge Walker's ruling marked the first time the INS would have to disclose extensive information about people on the Lookout List. 

"This decision will be helpful in understanding the nature and scope of the problem," Mr. Helton said. "We don't even know the exact numbers of people on the list." 

THACHER PROFITT of New York affiliates with a Texas law firm. 

The federal legislation aimed at resolving the savings and loan crisis is also a matchmaker.
The potential windfall in thrift-related work has prompted the affiliation of the 140-lawyer firm of Thacher, Profitt & Wood with 18-lawyer Whittenburg, Whittenburg & Schachter, which has offices in Amarillo and Dallas. 

Whittenburg represented the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. in its suit against the Dallas law firm of Jenkins & Gilchrist over the firm's advice to three failed thrifts.
Jenkins & Gilchrist agreed to settle the suit and other claims for $20 million in July. 

Thacher Profitt, which has a substantial banking and real-estate practice, sees its affiliation with Whittenburg as its entre into thrift-resolution work, says Phillip Broughton, chairman of the executive committee at Thacher Profitt. 

The firms will share offices and some clients.
An eventual merger is "certainly a possibility," says Whittenburg partner George Whittenburg. 

A POST-TRIAL GAG ORDER ON JURORS IS CHALLENGED by a Texas newspaper.
The unusual gag order was issued from the bench by U.S. District Judge Sam Cummings of Lubbock, who presided over a six-month bank-fraud trial that ended last week with a hung jury.
After declaring a mistrial, Judge Cummings told the jurors they couldn't speak to anyone about the case and ordered them to report anyone who approached them about it.
Lawyers for the Dallas Morning News have asked the Fifth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals to direct Judge Cummings to lift the gag order. "The order in this case clearly chills the media in their attempts to gather news," the paper's lawyers wrote. "The jurors, too, have First Amendment rights that the trial court's order unnecessarily abridges." 

