.START 

American Airlines unveiled sizable fare increases that would take effect across the country next week if competitors match the move. 

The action follows a month of persistent efforts in the airline industry to raise prices on tickets bought by vacation and business travelers.
Late yesterday, most other carriers said they were studying the proposed increase. 

American, a unit of AMR Corp., of Dallas, has often led industry price increases, and other carriers have appeared hungry to raise fares on discount tickets. 

The proposed increases by American also come amid concern on the part of AMR executives that the carrier will report weaker earnings growth for the third and fourth quarters as well as next year. 

Unless other carriers file similar plans to raise fares, however, American probably would have to withdraw its proposal in order to remain competitive. 

In the action, scheduled to go into effect Sept. 29, American proposes to raise prices on round-trip tickets requiring 14 days' advance purchase by about $10 to $20, industry pricing officials said.
Most of the increases appear to be $20. 

On such tickets requiring seven days' notice, American is planning to raise the price by about $30 to $60. 

American also is proposing to increase the penalty for changes made on the seven-day advance-purchase fares.
Currently, ticket holders pay a penalty equal to 25% of the ticket price when they change their flight plans. 

American is proposing to raise the penalty to 50% of the ticket price.
This would probably make the fare less attractive to business travelers who change their schedules often. 

Increases also are proposed for markets where discounted tickets can be bought as little as two days before departure. 

American may be trying to push through the price increase at a difficult time, however, as airline traffic has been soft lately. "The timing's off.
The traffic doesn't seem strong enough," said David Balfour, vice president of marketing at McCord Group, a Chicago travel-management company. 

According to some industry estimates, airline yields, or revenue for each passenger mile, have risen an average of about 15% during the past year.
Because yield levels are one of the best measures of how much fares have changed, this means tickets have risen about the same percentage, on average. 

Some industry analysts figure that if prices were to rise further, as American proposes, traffic would be likely to weaken further.
American, however, expects the price boosts to offset traffic declines. 

As an example of American's proposed increases, the lowest round-trip fare available between Washington and Dallas with seven days' advance purchase would rise to $358 from $298.
The least expensive 14-day advance-purchase fare would go to $278 from $258. 

