.START 

Lorimar Television's new TV game show, "Trump Card," has another ace up its sleeve besides the involvement of developer Donald Trump.
In an unusual twist, the new show will allow viewers to play at home and win money and prizes. 

The show, whose announcement was delayed two weeks by last-minute approvals and contractual details, was unveiled yesterday.
Mr. Trump said the game show will be taped at Trump Castle Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City, N.J., where guests will have a chance to appear in the studio audience.
Mr. Trump said he may appear on the show occasionally, if asked, and will help promote it in other ways. 

The developer said he has "a good, substantial stake" in the show but that his share of profits will go entirely to charity.
Mr. Trump's profit will be a return on his investment in the program, which Lorimar wouldn't disclose.
Lorimar will be a unit of Time Warner Inc. when the company completes its acquisition of Lorimar's parent, Warner Communications Inc. 

Although Lorimar has a good track record in syndication and has 11 prime-time network series, it is impossible to predict the Trump show's chance of success.
It will be going head-to-head with King World Productions Inc. 's "Jeopardy" and "Wheel of Fortune," which easily beat most competing shows in the "prime access" slot just before prime time. 

David E. Salzman, president of Lorimar, described the game as "bingo-like" and said it is modeled after a hit British game show, whose creators pitched it to Lorimar.
He said the game features three players answering "challenging questions" and aiming to fill in a numbered, three-row game card.
A bonus round involves filling in a five-row card either across or diagonally.
Neither the prizes nor the hosts have been determined.
The show's debut is set for fall 1990, assuming enough TV stations sign up. 

The home-audience participation aspect will start only in test markets the first year, said Mr. Salzman, but once the concept has been perfected, more than 50 million game cards will be distributed nationally for play each weekday. (The British version doesn't involve home-audience participation.) Viewers won't have the chance to have their answers to game questions judged but will win if numbers on their cards correspond to those on the show. 

