.START 

Part of a Series} 

Here's some advice for boosting your industry's public image: Forget takeovers, ask for more government regulation and be nice to your competitors. 

Not a pleasant prescription, but those are some of the conclusions that emerge when consumers are asked to rate the industries in which they have the most -- and least -- confidence.
At the top of the list: the pharmaceutical, food and appliance industries.
At the bottom: the airline, insurance, investment, and oil and gas industries.
And in the middle: banks and auto makers, with many consumers placing trust in those two industries and many others expressing little faith. 

The ratings, part of The Wall Street Journal's "American Way of Buying" survey, are based on a June poll by Peter D. Hart Research Associates.
The pollster asked 2,064 consumers to choose from a list of 22 industries the three or four in which they have the most and least confidence. 

No one can fully explain why people feel the way they do about the different industries.
But consumers' personal experiences and the news media's coverage of events such as airplane crashes and this year's Alaskan oil spill certainly color impressions of an industry.
And specialists on managing corporate images say an industry's personality is shaped by a variety of other factors. 

For instance, they say, when competitors tear each other apart in comparative advertising, it tends to hurt the reputation of the whole industry.
Industries regulated by the government, such as food, are often more trusted than unregulated ones, the image experts say.
And industries, such as appliances, that boast many well-established, popular brands tend to be viewed more favorably. 

What's more, nasty takeover battles may have tarnished some industries' images.
James Schroer, a vice president at the management consulting firm of Booz, Allen & Hamilton, contends that consumers distrust industries when they believe managers are preoccupied with takeovers and other financial matters rather than with improving products and services and marketing them for reasonable prices. 

Here's a rundown of how the various industries fared and some possible explanations. 

AUTOMOBILES: Image consultants say the dichotomy -- more than one out of four people polled expressed the most confidence in the auto industry, while nearly one in five had the least confidence in it -- probably reflects enthusiasm for foreign cars and continuing dissatisfaction with American vehicles. 

But some consumers have started to believe that competition between domestic and foreign car makers has improved the overall quality of cars.
Daniel Sawicki, a 36-year-old real-estate manager from Westfield, N.J., and a survey respondent, owns a Volvo and a BMW.
But he often rents American models and says, "It's getting to the point where I would buy an American car.
I think they're beginning to compete effectively with the foreign industry." 

BANKS: These institutions inspired the confidence of nearly one in three respondents in the survey, but drew a negative response from almost one in four.
Those viewing banks favorably may have been thinking about the higher interest rates banks started paying on deposits after deregulation, image consultants suggest, while those with a low opinion may have been reacting to the savings and loan crisis. 

DRUGS: This industry might not have fared quite so well if the survey had been conducted after the generic drug scandal came to light.
But drug companies generally give off good vibes because many people associate them with the pleasant activity of healing, says Clive Chajet, chairman of image consultant Lippincott & Margulies Inc. 

Drug makers also seem to be basking still in the warm afterglow of Johnson & Johnson's handling of Tylenol-tampering incidents in the 1980s.
The company responded swiftly, recalling its products and replacing them with painkillers in triple-sealed tamper-resistant packages in the early '80s.
Later, in response to a second tampering scare, the company dropped its capsule business altogether. 

Many consumers viewed these actions as an indication that the company -- and by extension, the industry -- cares about them. "A great deal rests on the way individual companies respond" to disasters, Mr. Chajet says. 

FOOD: These companies did well, the image experts suggest, because consumers sense that they slowly but surely are responding to growing concerns about nutrition.
In recent years, food companies have included more nutritional information on package labels and have developed such products as caffeine-free soft drinks and oat bran cereals. 

APPLIANCES: This industry seems to benefit from its practice of providing warranties. "It doesn't really mean that consumers are confident in the industry," says Leo J. Shapiro, a Chicago consultant who tracks consumer buying trends. "They're just confident that there is recourse, if something goes wrong." 

INSURANCE: Unpleasant personal experiences and the complexity of the business tend to give the insurance industry a bad name.
Consumers gripe a lot about skyrocketing car and health insurance premiums and difficulties in collecting on claims. 

Part of the industry's image problem also may have to do with the very nature of its business. "Insurance has a bad image because you do business with them when something unpleasant, if not tragic, happens," says Mr. Chajet of Lippincott & Margulies. 

OIL AND GAS: For many consumers, visions of oil-covered otters and dead birds in Alaska in the wake of the Exxon Valdez disaster apparently tipped the scales against this industry. "Planet Earth is just a real major factor," says Mona Doyle, a consumer researcher in Philadelphia. 

Some consumers also expressed a more basic distrust of energy companies. "Anytime a little something goes wrong, automatically the gas prices are jumping up right away," complains Connie Bates, a survey respondent from Farmington Hills, Mich. "Why should we have to pay for the cleanups and all that stuff?" 

INVESTMENTS: "People who are perceived as trying to sell you something without having your best interests at heart are always going to come up on the negative side," says Mr. Schroer of Booz, Allen & Hamilton.
Stockbrokers fit that definition in Mr. Schroer's view.
And nearly one in four consumers in the Journal survey gave them thumbs down. 

The brokerage and investment field, of course, has also been tarnished by the insider-trading scandals and by the 1987 stock market crash, which underscored the inherent risk of investing in securities. 

FAST FOOD: These chains drew a strong negative response from almost one in five consumers in the survey, despite the popularity of fast food and the industry's well-known players. 

But Burger King, now a unit of Grand Metropolitan PLC of Britain, and Wendy's International Inc. have spent years running ads that knock the competition, and some experts believe that sort of antagonistic advertising hurts an industry's image.
Some consumers also may distrust the fast-food industry because of their concerns about nutrition. "People call them the greasies," Ms. Doyle, the consumer researcher, says of fast food. "Greasies are bad." 

In the Journal survey, consumers were so blase about some industries -- among them, shoes, furniture, cosmetics, hotels, restaurants and entertainment -- that few people gave them a high or low confidence rating.
One possible explanation for this indifference: When things go wrong with these industries' operations, they usually don't endanger people's lives, deprive consumers of their life savings or foul the environment. 

But Stewart Owen, research director at image consultant Landor Associates, proposes another common thread: a dearth of brand names that are well-known by both sexes. "If you said automobiles, people could reel off a whole range of (brands)," Mr. Owen says. "But if you said shoes, it would be very fragmented." 

Percentage of respondents saying that they had the most or the least confidence in each industry; respondents were allowed to pick up to four industries. 

