.START 

September has been an emotional month for that modest but growing tribe of La-la-landers who do not flee down the freeways at the sound of a high C, even when it comes from Maria Ewing, who is singing "Tosca" here in a stylish new production. 

Alternating with an ambitious but confusing version of the Kurt Weill/Bertolt Brecht "Mahagonny," staged by Jonathan Miller, "Tosca" is just one of several events the Music Center is presenting in its 25th anniversary season.
Home to the opera, the Los Angeles Philharmonic and the Taper theater group, as well as Western "pied-a-terre" for the Joffrey Ballet, the Center plans to celebrate its milestone next week with a glittery awards program. 

But while this is a lofty moment for Angelenos, another cultural monolith is disappearing into thin air.
Next Wednesday, we will be saying goodbye to L.A.'s only commercial classical music station, as KFAC-FM changes its format to rock under a new ownership. 

Letter writers and talk-show callers, in a cathartic but futile tirade, have vilified one of the selling partners, who happened to be the daughter-in-law of the late violinist Jascha Heifetz.
It was Mr. Heifetz whose solo performance inaugurated the Music Center in 1964, an irony that has not escaped the press. 

No gloom, though, intruded on the Music Center Opera's glitzy, $600-a-person opening night gala, which attracted people whose names aren't generally associated with opera.
They included the fallen former Drexel Burnham Lambert financier Michael Milken (whose family foundation recently donated $320,000), and the generously proportioned oil man and investor Marvin Davis, who said "what really made it work" for him were the supertitles. 

On stage, what made "Tosca" work was a willingness to take risks with this familiar opera.
John Gunter designed geometric sets that were unusually spare and disquieting and worked well with the restrained interpretation by Ms. Ewing, a sometime mezzo, here singing her first Tosca.
She was directed by Ian Judge, replacing Sir Peter Hall, who presumably is not so devoted to the singer's career now that they are no longer a couple. 

The role of the prima donna who murders a lecherous police chief to save her lover's life and finally hurls herself from Rome's Castel Sant'Angelo has been sung by many of this century's great sopranos, from Maria Caniglia to Maria Callas and, more recently, Hildegard Behrens. 

Ms. Ewing's considerably smaller vocal gifts include neither the range nor the power of, say, Callas.
But what the Detroit native lacked in vocal grandeur, she made up with an acting style that was often compelling in its limited way.
She telegraphed panic with a frozen look, fear with a suddenly raised eyebrow, treachery with a thinly veiled sneer. 

In "Tosca," Ms. Ewing was greatly helped by having the action set at the turn of this century, at least a hundred years later than Puccini intended.
The updating, complete with slinky costumes, accentuated her pleasantly non-diva-like figure.
Though he sang energetically, tenor Neil Shicoff seemed unconvincing as the object of so much passion.
He could have used some of the charisma of Justino Diaz, who played Scarpia.
The company's artistic consultant, Placido Domingo -- a well-known Mario -- led the Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra, at times too vigorously. 

Although its plot, too, depends in part on sexual energy, there wasn't a spark in sight in the English-language version of "The Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny," the apocalyptic anti-opera set in a mythical 1920-ish American city of sin. 

Written during the waning days of Germany's Weimar Republic, "Mahagonny" is a nightmare of capitalism and personal freedom run amok in America, which its authors hadn't yet visited.
The amoral Mrs. Begbick and her band of law-breaking opportunists establish Mahoganny, a town of fantasy where they plan to bilk the bored but well-heeled. 

As staged by Jonathan Miller -- who directed the company's hauntingly beautiful "Tristan und Isolde" designed by David Hockney two seasons ago -- the opera was transported from its usual German cabaret-like setting to one representing the early days of Hollywood.
Not that you would know this from the ugly stark unit set that moved around a bit from time to time, featuring one fake palm and a cast that didn't change costumes.
Why was the lighting in sepia tones instead of black and white, reminiscent of old movies?
As an attempt to link decadent, dying Weimar with L.A. pool culture it was an astonishing failure from a talented director. 

With the exception of the energetic Marvellee Cariaga as Mrs. Begbick and Jonathan Mack as Jack, who gorges himself to death on raw meat, the cast delivered its lines without emotion or energy.
Especially disappointing was Anna Steiger as Jenny, the sweet Southern girl turned lady of the evening.
It was hard to see why lumberjack Jimmy, played by Gary Bachlund, would fall for this plump and stolid-looking daughter of Rod Steiger and Claire Bloom.
Maybe the lightweight Ms. Ewing could give her some dieting tips. 

Ms. Read, a former Journal reporter, is a free-lance writer in Los Angeles. 

