.START 

Ferranti International Signal PLC's chairman said he is discussing a possible merger or alliance with two suitors as one way to resolve the financial crisis at Britain's third-biggest defense electronics contractor. 

In an interview last night, Sir Derek Alun-Jones said, "We have a few discussions going" with one British and one continental European suitor.
He declined to name the potential allies, but said a partnership with either of them "makes a good deal of business sense." Either company, he said, might inject needed capital into Ferranti in exchange for a shareholding whose size has yet to be determined. 

Sir Derek's comments suggest a resolution of Ferranti's 10-day-old crisis may be near.
On Sept. 11, the company stunned investors and defense officials -- who regard Ferranti as a linchpin supplier of Britain's electronic warfare arsenal -- with a stock-trading suspension and news that its financial accounts may have overstated profits and assets.
Since then, Ferranti has said it is examining possible accounting fraud at a Lancaster, Pa., company, International Signal & Control Group PLC, with which Ferranti merged last year. 

International Signal's accounts, Sir Derek said, "reflected a profit record that was undoubtedly untrue and a level of assets that weren't there." Because Ferranti subsequently consolidated those inflated figures in its own financial statements, he said, "We are going to end up with a hole in our net worth" as great as #150 million ($235.6 million) to #200 million.
That's about half the company's reported net worth of #370.8 million as of last March 31. 

James Guerin, the former head of International Signal, issued his first public comments since the scandal erupted last week.
He didn't respond to Ferranti's allegations of fraud, but attacked what he called "inflammatory and blatantly incorrect" news reports about activities at his former company. 

Sir Derek emphasized that the difference in net worth is on paper only and doesn't represent any immediate drain on the company's cash flow.
He said it doesn't appear any cash was drained out of the company through embezzlement or illegal kickbacks.
Still, he acknowledged, the company is in talks with its bankers to ensure they don't cut back Ferranti's credit lines as a result of the reduced net worth. 

The talks toward a merger or partnership, he said, are one possible avenue for Ferranti to restore its net worth and appease the bankers.
Another option, he said, is to raise cash by selling Ferranti assets.
But London financial analysts believe Ferranti has little choice but to arrange a speedy merger. "They don't seem to be in a strong {bargaining} position," said London-based analyst Michael Armitage of Morgan Stanley International.
Ferranti shareholders "seem to be screaming for blood." 

The list of potential merger candidates is long.
Front-runners, London analysts believe, include British Aerospace PLC, the nation's largest defense contractor, and the U.K.'s Dowty Group PLC, a rapidly growing defense-electronics supplier.
Abroad, candidates favored by analysts includee France's Thomson SA and West Germany's Daimler-Benz AG.
But Thomson, controlled by the French government, would have difficulty shepherding so risky a deal as a Ferranti merger through tightfisted French Finance Ministry officials.
And Daimler-Benz has previously denied any talks with Ferranti. 

Ferranti's problems are further complicated by the fact that there is a sudden glut of British defense businesses up for sale this year.
Thorn-EMI PLC and Racal Electronics PLC are also seeking buyers for their defense-electronics businesses.
With these units competing for buyers' attention, any potential Ferranti partner would be able to drive a hard bargain with the British company. 

