.START 

Brazil has so far failed to make a $1.6 billion interest payment that was due to banks Monday, bankers and Brazilian officials said. 

Some Brazilian officials still expect an 11th-hour agreement with the International Monetary Fund that would probably unlock substantial funds pledged to Brazil.
This would boost Brazil's ability to make interest payments. 

Even if there is no short-term IMF agreement, though, Brazil still may choose to make some of the interest payment now overdue to banks. 

That's because Brazil is eager to extend a Sept. 30 deadline for drawing the last $600 million portion of a $5.2 billion bank loan agreed on last year.
To get such an extension Brazil needs acceptance by 95% of its bank creditors.
Clearly, these institutions are more likely to grant such an extension if Brazil is seen to be current on its present obligations, or at least trying to be current on them. 

Brazil's foreign debt currently totals about $110 billion. 

Brazilian officials have warned in recent weeks that they won't run their foreign-exchange reserves below "reasonable levels" to make interest payments to banks.
Since Brazil failed to reach inflation and government deficit targets it agreed with the IMF, about $3 billion of credits from the World Bank, commercial banks, the Inter-American Development Bank and commercial banks have been blocked. 

Meantime, the U.S. Treasury said it renewed a $100 million short-term loan to Bolivia.
The Treasury said the loan provides support for Bolivia's financial position as its government continues a program of comprehensive structural reform. 

Separately, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady in a report to Congress required under the 1988 trade act yesterday again rejected proposals for setting up a government-managed "debt facility," or fund, in an attempt to solve the payments problems of developing countries.
Such a facility is unnecessary, he told Congress, stressing that it would disrupt and delay cuts in debt and interest payments under the present strengthened debt strategy. 

