.START 

Carolco Pictures Inc. said the company and certain of its officers plan to purchase additional shares of its 48%-owned Live Entertainment Inc., in the wake of the murders last month of Live's chairman and chief executive officer, Jose Menendez, and his wife, Kitty. 

The announcement by Carolco, which contained no specifics about how many Live Entertainment shares would be purchased or when, seemed designed to bolster the company's stock price, which has plummeted from a recent high of $25 a share to around $15 a share since the murders. 

But Wall Street greeted Carolco's announcement yesterday with only lukewarm enthusiasm.
In national over-the-counter trading, Live Entertainment shares edged up 50 cents to close at $15.50.
In Big Board trading, Carolco shares climbed 12.5 cents to close at $9.75 a share. 

Carolco, which finances, produces and leases motion pictures, said that among the officers who would be purchasing shares of Live in the open market is Peter Hoffman, Carolco's president and chief executive and acting chairman and CEO of Live Entertainment, a Van Nuys, Calif., distributor and retailer of video and audio software. 

"Carolco believes that the stock of Live Entertainment is greatly undervalued at this time," said Mario Kassar, co-chairman of Carolco.
Mr. Kassar has been negotiating to buy a 36% stake in Carolco from co-chairman Andrew Vajna, but those negotiations have been modified as a result of the drop in share prices. 

Officials at Carolco and Live Entertainment weren't available to elaborate on yesterday's announcement. 

Since Mr. and Mrs. Menendez were found shot to death in their Beverly Hills mansion on Aug. 20, questions have been raised about possible links between the murders and organized crime.
Live Entertainment bought two companies from individuals identified by law enforcement officials as having alleged ties to organized crime.
Live Entertainment has maintained that the killings weren't related to organized crime, and the company has hired a law firm to investigate whether there was any link between Live's operations and the murders. 

