.START 

Congress isn't likely to finish its fiscal 1990 deficit-reduction plan in time to avoid automatic across-the-board budget cuts next month, administration officials and lawmakers say. 

But the spending cuts, mandated by the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law, probably won't have much effect on the day-to-day workings of the federal government. 

As it did in a similar circumstance in 1987, Congress is likely to restore the cuts, called a "sequestration," when it finally completes work on the budget in late October or November.
Fiscal 1990 begins Oct. 1. 

"Some kind of temporary sequestration is becoming more and more likely," said Minnesota Rep. Bill Frenzel, the ranking Republican of the House Budget Committee.
Senate Budget Committee Chairman James Sasser (D., Tenn.) rated the likelihood of the cuts at "better than 50-50. . . . We need to take some herculean efforts to avoid it." Bush administration officials say the same thing privately. 

The complex Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law requires that the president issue an order to trim spending across-the-board, half from defense and half from domestic programs, if the White House budget office determines on Oct. 16 that enacted legislation would produce a 1990 deficit of more than $110 billion.
The law forbids the budget office from counting pending legislation no matter how likely it is to pass. 

Because of the controversy over cutting the tax rate on capital gains, Congress isn't expected to meet the deadline.
The spending bills working their way through Congress don't present much of a problem in terms of the Gramm-Rudman law.
But an important measure, approved yesterday by the House Budget Committee on a voice vote, raising revenue and restructuring the catastrophic health plan is unlikely to win final passage by Oct. 16. 

Without that legislation, the budget office estimated last month, the projected deficit could be as much as $13 billion to $14 billion beyond the $110 billion trigger. 

The showdown in the House on the revenue bill is likely next week, and the measure's many contentious parts could create a strong coalition against it. "There are a lot of possible currents crossing into that bill," said House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt of Missouri. 

The Senate Finance Committee isn't likely to begin work on its version until after the House acts.
The Senate isn't even planning to be in session the week leading to the Oct. 16 deadline. 

In 1987, the administration and Congress failed to reach a budget compromise in time to avoid the Gramm-Rudman automatic spending cuts.
The White House budget office advised agencies to move funds among various accounts and otherwise avoid disruptions until Congress implemented the agreement.
Congress then restored the cuts when it finally passed budget legislation. 

Administration officials indicate that the White House budget office probably will manage spending to avoid any drama -- such as laying off workers or withholding benefits -- as long as Congress is moving toward a reduction in the tax on capital gains. 

The $16.7 billion deficit-reduction legislation that the House Budget Committee sent to the full House is an amalgam of measures raising taxes and federal fees that were previously approved by nine other House panels.
It includes the Ways and Means Committee's $6.8 billion package of revenue-raisers, including $2.9 billion from the first year of the proposed cut in the capital-gains rate. 

Other tax provisions include closing a loophole in the tax law covering employee stock ownership plans that has been used by investment bankers in corporate takeovers, ending a tax subsidy that encouraged banks to lend to developing nations and raising almost $1 billion by canceling a planned cut in airport and airway taxes. 

Among the measure's other provisions are: 

-- $299 million in Nuclear Regulatory Commission fees that would be paid by nuclear power plant operators. 

-- $128 million from a $20-per-passenger fee that would be levied on operators of cruise and offshore casino ships. 

-- $53 million in Securities and Exchange Commission registration and transaction fees. 

-- $40 million in user fees at the Federal Communications Commission. -- $31 million from a $1-per-acre fee on federal offshore oil and gas drilling leases. 

The measure includes several unrelated provisions as well, including one that would write the fairness doctrine into law.
The longstanding rule, which the FCC abolished in 1987, required broadcasters airing controversial material to give opponents free air time to respond.
Another would place controls on the availability of pornographic telephone services in accordance with a Supreme Court ruling earlier this year. 

