.START 

Resorts International Inc., the casino company owned by Merv Griffin, unveiled a restructuring plan aimed at keeping the company out of bankruptcy-law proceedings. 

Angry bondholders at the Atlantic City, N.J., meeting immediately attacked the proposal and predicted it would fail. "There's a high likelihood this will end up in Chapter 11," said William Jacobs, first vice president at Prudential-Bache Capital Funding. 

The proposal calls for Resorts, based in Atlantic City, to swap its $925 million in secured and unsecured bonds for new secured subordinated debentures, cash and stock.
It would allow Mr. Griffin some time to sell off assets and shore up operations, but also requires the approval of 90% of the bondholders. 

Resorts, which announced a moratorium on bond payments Aug. 28, is one of several recent leveraged buy-outs financed by junk bonds that is crumbling under a crushing debt load.
David P. Hanlon, Resorts' president, blamed some of the company's problems on former owners but said Resorts' value is "diminished" without current management. 

"In the absence of a consensual restructuring, this company is headed toward insolvency," Jay Higgins, vice chairman of Salomon Bros., said in an interview. "Bankruptcy could be catastrophic, so we're asking everyone to take a hit." 

But many junior and senior bondholders, who have split into two factions, argued that the plan doesn't treat all parties fairly.
They noted that Mr. Griffin would retain 75% of Resorts' equity, and contended that that their risk is substantially higher. 

Some also criticized Mr. Hanlon's $1.5 million 1989 salary, and accused management of not making the same sacrifices as the debtholders.
Mr. Griffin, who was negotiating a game-show pilot, didn't attend the meeting. 

Mr. Griffin bought the company for $365 million last November after a takeover battle with New York developer Donald Trump.
The businessman and entertainer apparently won't inject any more cash beyond his initial $50 million investment. 

When he bought Resorts, Mr. Griffin issued, through Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., $325 million of senior debt secured by Resorts' properties in Atlantic City and the Bahamas.
The restructuring plan proposes that the debt be swapped for the following: 

-- For 13 7/8% mortgage notes due 1998: New 10% Series B notes, with payment-in-kind option allowing the company to issue more debt in lieu of cash interest payments for the first three years. 

-- For 13 1/2% senior secured reset notes: New 10% Series A notes, with payment-in-kind option allowing the company to issue more debt in lieu of cash for three years.
Resorts would have the option of buying back both issues, beginning Dec. 1, 1990, for 75% of principal amount, in essence automatically discounting the bonds. 

Resorts also has $600 million of unsecured junior debt outstanding at interest rates ranging from 10% to 16 5/8%.
The company proposed that the issues be swapped for: 

-- Ten-year debentures equal to 70% of the bonds' original principal minus the original bonds' discount, yielding 7% for the first three years and 8% thereafter.
Under a payment-in-kind option, Resorts could issue bonds in lieu of cash payments for five years. 

-- Equity securities equal to 25% of Resorts' fully diluted common stock and 10% of the bonds' old principal, or $60 million. 

Company officials conceded privately that the restructuring plan is only an opening gambit, as Resorts faces other major hurdles, such as bondholder lawsuits.
Mr. Griffin must appear before New Jersey casino regulators next Monday for licensing, and Resorts' current casino license is scheduled for renewal in February. 

Anthony Parrillo, head of the state's Division of Gaming Enforcement, said Resorts will have to present a contingency plan to ensure the company's financial stability during any restructuring. 

For the first half of 1989, Resorts reported a net loss of $46.6 million on revenue of $223.6 million.
Resorts' flagship casino here has lost market share throughout the peak summer months, the local market's strongest season. 

Bondholders arriving for the meeting were shocked to see bright yellow buckets collecting rainwater leaking from the roof in the casino's lobby. "Things were going very well until . . . last year," said a Boston woman whose $10,000 investment in Resorts bonds is worth about $2,800 at current market values. 

