.START 

"Land or sea?" I glanced in despair at my wife, but she seemed as perplexed as I at the pallid, semi-gelatinous mound that lay generously apportioned on our plates. "Land or sea?" persisted our host, a gregarious Chinese who seemed intent on showing us to an evening of genuine Cantonese cuisine. 

Already we had comfortably dispatched three-snake soup, barbecued pigeon, marinated jellyfish, braised whelk and countless other dishes of dubious origin.
But now we were stumped, all the more irritating because, as veteran of Manhattan's Upper West Side, I prided myself on my knowledge of Chinese cuisine. 

Sensing victory, our host cried out, "Duck webs]" -- prompting a roar of approval from the dozen other local denizens who had turned out to welcome this "gweilo" ("foreign devil") couple to Hong Kong.
For the uninitiated, duck webs are indeed the appendages of our feathered friends.
And so began the ongoing culinary onslaught that is a central part of Hong Kong life. 

While strange and exotic foods are the norm, it is more the attitude toward food and the central role of food in business and social entertaining to which the newcomer must adapt.
Hong Kong boasts any number of fine French and Continental restaurants, but locals believe that when it's an important client or occasion, you stick to local fare.
And it is with local fare that "the medium is the message" takes on a new meaning. 

As with so much in Asia, status and prestige are in.
But since Louis Vuitton has yet to introduce branded spring rolls, the host instead learns to rely on that other measure of "Hong Kong good taste" -- money.
Usually, this entails one or more of what I have come to know as the "infallible four": shark's fin, abalone, bird's nest and fish, the prestige dishes of Cantonese cuisine.
While it's true that these dishes can be found at less than extortionate prices, status comes not to those who chintz.
The cost of a proper shark's fin soup (chunks, not slivers) easily could finance the down payment on a medium-size car.
The important thing is to look and act casual as you chomp down on a $100 chunk of abalone, a slippery gray creature that defies all attempts to be picked up with chopsticks. 

Just as in New York, the first sign of trouble in a Hong Kong seafood restaurant is the ominous "fresh fish . . . priced according to market." "Market" here refers less to the availability of a particular fish than it does to the waiter's assessment of your net worth.
But whereas the maitre d' at Manhattan's Le Bernardin might give you an exhaustive rundown of a dozen or more dishes, the invariable offerings in and around Hong Kong are "snapper" or "garoupa" (the same as grouper).
In two years, I probably have eaten what looked like 20 different types of fish, only to be informed each time that I was eating "snapper" or "garoupa." I am convinced now that "snapper" and "garoupa" are cousins of the ubiquitous "sea bass" found in every Chinese eatery in the 

The sole exception (no pun intended) was when I made the fatal error of ordering "so mei" for a client.
This, my office colleagues told me, was the best dish to impress.
And indeed, this homely runt of a fish was delivered to the table with much fanfare.
But it was mushy and tasteless to these Western lips.
The real tragedy came with the bill, and with it the recognition that it would have been less costly to have bought an ounce of Petrossian's best.
And as the client was a transplanted New Yorker, the only retort was, "Wish you could get a decent piece of swordfish around here." Lesson duly noted: Prestige dishes are not for gweilos. 

At least 99% of the time, locals prefer to have their fish steamed lightly in spring onion, ginger and soy.
Unlike Westerners with their salmon steaks, people here seek a softer consistency -- something like tofu, but flaky. 

This unusual texture is only partly achieved in the kitchen.
With great pomp and ceremony the fish is presented to the table accompanied by the oohs and aahs that one normally associates with Thanksgiving turkey.
No sooner has this beautiful fish been placed on the table, than the waiter proceeds to bash, mash and gnash it apart with two spoons, ladling a soupy mixture into each guest's bowl.
The only part remaining intact is the head, given to the guest of honor, not for the eyes as many Westerners believe, but for the succulent cheeks. 

The Cantonese insist that their fish be "fresh," though one whiff of Hong Kong harbor and the visitor may yearn for something shipped from distant seas.
But among locals, this won't do.
To drive the point home, fishmongers often display half filleted fish with their hearts still beating.
And for the true connoisseur, nothing beats going to a favorite market or restaurant to pluck one's target live from the tank. 

Such skill is put to the test on an outing to Lamma Island, where some dozen or so open-air restaurants line the waterfront, beckoning to the disembarking junkloads of Hong Kong gastronomes.
Here cockles, mussels, clams, squid, lobster, prawns -- and of course, "snapper" and/or "garoupa" -- are laid out in a sumptuous feast.
Accompanied by the locally brewed San Miguel beer, dinner at Lamma is Hong Kong at its finest. 

Alas, when it comes to seafood, nothing I say or do can dissuade a local resident from the deep-rooted belief that only in Hong Kong can one eat proper seafood.
But when a client informed me he would be traveling to Manhattan on business, I thought I finally would get a chance for vindication.
Confidently, I recommended Grand Central's venerable Oyster Bar. 

Long after he was to have returned to Hong Kong I still had not heard from him, and reasoned that it must constitute great loss of face to concede the merit of New York's seafood.
And so when I happened upon him at a taxi stand, I inquired about his New York trip without allowing myself even a small gloat.
It was just as well I didn't, for he turned to me and remarked simply: "Not fresh and too hard." With that he turned and walked away. 

Mr. Gettinger is a Hong Kong-based vice president for Merrill Lynch & Co. and a free-lance writer. 

