.START 

Troubled Pantera's Corp. said a filing under Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law proceedings "is imminent" because its secured lenders have terminated a waiver and called in debts of $35.5 million. 

The lenders, Lloyds Bank PLC and Kleinwort Benson Ltd., have frozen the restaurant company's operating accounts, it said. 

The lenders' actions apparently ended a last-ditch effort to reverse the declining fortunes of Pantera's, prompting the resignations yesterday -- only two months after they joined the board -- of its chairman and chief executive officer, Stephen I. D'Agostino and a vice chairman, David C. Fraser.
Mr. D'Agostino is chairman of Lord Capital Corp., a New York merchant bank of which Mr. Fraser is president. 

Under Chapter 11, a company continues to operate under protection from creditors' lawsuits while it works out a plan to repay its debts. 

Pantera's, which operates the Pizza Inn chain, received a waiver from its lenders extending until Sept. 29 a $4.6 million interest and principal payment that had been due Aug. 1.
Mr. D'Agostino said he had "no idea" why the lenders decided to call the loan, adding that he had expected to hear today from a potential source of fresh equity capital. 

Mr. D'Agostino said the lenders informed Pantera's of their decision Monday and he added, "You can't get money when you're in that position." 

Also resigning from the board was R.D. Phillips, according to the company, which said it was reducing its board to five members from eight.
It added that Jack D. Harris, vice chairman, has reassumed the titles of chairman and chief executive. 

At the core of Pantera's troubles, according to analysts and a shareholder suit filed in federal court in Dallas, was the company's decision to create Italian-style buffets in its Pizza Inn restaurants.
The conversion "seemed profitable," said analyst Roger Lipton of Thalmann Ladenburg, but was insufficiently capitalized at a time when the pizza business became "unexpectedly competitive." The shareholder lawsuit, meanwhile, claims the buffet concept was too risky and reduced Pantera's competitiveness.
The company has said it believes the suit is without merit. 

Pantera's also failed to pay interest due Sept. 1 on $6.9 million in debentures, saying a condition of its waiver prevented it from making the payments.
The debentures can be declared in default 30 days after the interest payment is missed. 

The company also hasn't reported fourth-quarter and year-end results for the fiscal year ended in June, but had predicted a "substantial" fourth-quarter loss.
It reported a loss of $4 million for the first three quarters, compared with a loss of $3.2 million for the like period a year earlier. 

Company officials were unavailable for further comment. 

Pantera's shares closed yesterday at 37.5 cents, off $1.50 in national over-the-counter trading. 

