.START 

The dollar finished mixed, restrained by an unexpected intervention by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and two gatherings that could shape the outlook for the U.S. currency. 

The Bundesbank's Central Bank Council is slated to meet tomorrow, and although an increase in German interest rates isn't widely expected to result, participants are reluctant to risk new positions in case the Bundesbank defies predictions, foreign-exchange traders said. 

Also, a meeting of finance chiefs from the Group of Seven major industrial countries set for Saturday in Washington is expected to issue a statement on the dollar that may ruffle an already sensitive market, traders said. 

In the meantime, the dollar, which tumbled hard in a rumor-fraught market Friday, isn't likely to post significant gains while participants cautiously probe for a safe trading range, dealers predicted. 

"It's going to take some time to get the volatility out of trading," said Jeff Mondschein, vice president and managing director of foreign exchange at Continental Bank in Chicago.
Until then, it'll be hard to coax participants who were burned by the dollar's dramatic fall Friday to re-enter the market. 

In late afternoon New York trading yesterday, the dollar was at 1.9545 marks, up from 1.9520 marks late Monday, and at 145.85 yen, almost flat from 145.88 yen.
Sterling was at $1.5700, about even with $1.5705. 

In Tokyo Wednesday, the dollar opened for trading at 146.23 yen, up from Tuesday's Tokyo close of 145.73 yen. 

After sliding in Monday's New York trading, the dollar began the Asian day on a soft note, with participants wary of intervention by the Bank of Japan.
But as the day wore on and the central bank remained inactive, the dollar crept higher.
The U.S. currency continued to nudge higher in Europe, shored up by light shortcovering ahead of the release of August U.S. data on consumer prices and housing starts. 

When the data showed no increase in consumer prices despite forecasts for a small rise, and a fall in housing starts after calls for a modest gain, the dollar slipped.
Participants viewed the slower economic data as increasing chances of renewed interest rate reductions by the U.S. Fed, traders said. 

Lower interest rates generally hurt the domestic currency by reducing the attractiveness of interest-bearing investments denominated in that currency. 

The dollar rebounded after a more careful analysis suggested the data alone won't prompt reaction by the Fed.
Until U.S. interest rates decline, a lower inflation rate will keep inflation-adjusted yields attractive, dealers noted. 

But an intervention by the Fed caught the market off guard around midday in New York.
Dollar sales by the central bank when the currency was trading at 1.9530 marks knocked the dollar substantially lower and seemed to cap the rise. 

Because the dollar wasn't rallying energetically when the Fed entered the market, many traders were at a loss to explain why the Fed acted.
A few, however, suggested the Fed may have been concerned by the market's easy absorption of a coordinated intervention early Friday, when the dollar was rallying, and wanted to ensure support for the U.S. currency didn't build greatly. 

The yen continued to display softness.
The yen has weakened against the mark in recent days because the Bundesbank is seen as more likely to raise interest rates in the near future than Japan's central bank. 

Traders noted that the mark's gains against its Japanese counterpart may quickly erode if the Bundesbank indicates it isn't eager to raise rates soon.
Such an indication may follow tomorrow's Central Bank Council meeting. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $361.20 an ounce, down 50 cents.
Estimated volume was a light 2.1 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Wednesday, gold was quoted at $360.25 an ounce. 

