.START 

Australian businessman Alan Bond announced a new plan to help alleviate the debt burden on his Bond Corp. Holdings Ltd., including the sale of half his Australian brewing empire, his most valuable asset. 

The proposal supersedes a previously announced agreement to sell Bond Corp. 's Australian and U.S. brewing assets to Bell Resources Ltd., which is 58% held by Bond Corp., for 3.5 billion Australian dollars (US$2.72 billion). 

Under the new plan, Bond Corp. will sell its Australian brewing assets, which control about 40% of that country's beer market, to Bell Resources for A$2.5 billion.
The planned sale of Bond Corp. 's U.S. brewer, G. Heileman Brewing Co., has been "deferred for 12 months," Bond Corp. said. 

Once the sale of the Australian brewing assets to Bell Resources is completed, Bond Corp. plans to make a bid for the 42% of Bell Resources it doesn't already own, at A$1.60 (US$1.24) a share.
That values Bell Resources at about A$972 million. 

If this bid succeeds, Bond Corp. plans to sell 50% of its Australian brewing operations to Lion Nathan Ltd., a New Zealand brewer and retailer.
The New Zealand company would assume management control of the brewers. 

The price Lion Nathan will pay for its 50% holding in Bond Corp. 's Australian breweries isn't final.
But from figures provided by Bond Corp., analysts said it apparently would include an equity investment of about A$550 million in the new joint venture. 

Several analysts deemed the proposal crucial to the survival of Bond Corp., which has been aggressively selling assets to improve its cash flow and reduce a debt load estimated by some analysts at A$6 billion.
Analysts have traced the company's problems to its previous rapid expansion and reluctance among its bankers to extend more credit. 

George Sutton, an analyst at the brokerage firm Barclays de Zoete Wedd Australia Ltd., estimated the proposed transactions would reduce Bond Corp. 's debt by about A$1.6 billion. "It obviously takes pressure off Bond Corp. 's balance sheet, and allows {Mr.
Bond} to remain a participant in the Australian brewing industry," Mr. Sutton said. 

Bond Corp. also agreed yesterday to sell its 67.7% interest in the Harriet oil field, off the northwestern coast of Australia, for A$220 million -- at an undisclosed profit -- to Aviva Petroleum Inc., a small, British-based independent oil concern.
And last week, Bond Corp. bailed out of its 20.4% stake in British conglomerate Lonrho PLC for #312 million (US$490 million), at a loss of about #50 million. 

Yesterday's proposal is subject to several conditions, including government approvals and Bond Corp. being able to acquire all of Bell Resources' shares.
While some analysts give the transaction more than a 50-50 chance of being completed, it's unclear whether it will be enough to keep what is left of Mr. Bond's corporate empire afloat. "All the market really knows is Bond Corp. has a general liquidity problem, but we don't know the extent of the cash bind," one analyst said. 

Investors also appeared uncertain.
Bond Corp. 's shares dropped two Australian cents yesterday in Sydney, to 40 cents each.
Earlier this year they were trading at more than A$1.80.
Bell Resources shares rose five cents each, to A$1.25. 

Besides easing Bond Corp. 's debt burden, the proposed transactions are viewed by some analysts as a way to placate stock-exchange officials and corporate regulators who have queried Bond Corp. on several aspects of the original plan, announced in late May. 

Under the original plan, Bell Resources paid a deposit of A$1.2 billion toward the proposed A$3.5 billion purchase of Bond Corp. 's Australian and U.S. brewing operations.
This payment raised concern among some of Bell Resources' minority shareholders as well as corporate regulators. 

The new proposal calls for Bond Corp. to repay A$850 million of that deposit, but to defer repaying the balance until the U.S. brewer, G. Heileman, is sold.
Bond Corp. declined to elaborate, but one source familiar with the situation said Bond Corp. expects G. Heileman's performance to improve over the next year, making the company easier to sell, possibly to the Lion Nathan-Bond Corp. joint venture. 

Also under the new plan, Lion Nathan has agreed to arrange financing for Bond Corp. 's takeover offer for Bell Resources.
The New Zealand company also has agreed to arrange funds for Bell Resources to buy back about A$600 million of bonds it has issued that are convertible into Bell Resources shares, and to arrange funds to repurchase an undisclosed amount of subordinated debentures issued by Bond Corp. brewing interests. 

