.START 

"Catastrophic-health care has become a ravenous fiscal monster," says Rep. Harris Fawell, an Illinois Republican, who is trying to repeal the program.
Just last year, the new catastrophic-care program was projected to cost $30 billion through 1993 and enjoy a $9 billion surplus.
Yesterday, the Congressional Budget Office estimated the costs at $48 billion, and predicted a deficit of more than $6 billion.
The surtax is one thing, but maybe angry voters of all ages should be laying siege to Congress to demand that this fiscal black hole be plugged before it sucks them all in. 

Last year, Congress expanded Medicare to cover catastrophic care at the behest of the American Association of Retired Persons, which assured Congress that seniors wouldn't mind paying the full cost of the program themselves.
Since then, of course, seniors have learned that nearly half of them would pay a surtax of up to $800 a year for coverage that more than 85% of the elderly already have.
Many AARP chapters are in open revolt against their ivory-tower leadership in Washington. 

Until now, the Bush administration has resisted attempts to repeal the program because in its first year it has been projected to bring in some $5 billion more in revenues than it will cost.
Repeal of the program would make it difficult to meet the Gramm-Rudman budget targets. 

This kind of thinking, however, is based on the mistaken presumption that the cost estimates of the catastrophic program are based on something solid.
Estimates of the program's costs in fiscal 1990 for purposes of meeting the Gramm-Rudman targets were frozen as of August 15.
Since then, the Journal's Ken Bacon has reported that the costs of just one element of the catastrophic program -- skilled-nursing care -- may in fact have gone up to as much as $4.2 billion from $1.4 billion.
The budget books may not show it, but next year's "surplus" from the catastrophic program may have vanished already. 

Incredibly, Thomas Burke, the architect of the catastrophic program when he was in the Reagan administration, now says that cost estimates for the catastrophic program mistakenly assumed "that there would be no significant change in utilization as a result of expanded coverage." 

Similar "miscalculations" have helped fuel the growth of every entitlement program of the past 30 years.
Take Medicare, which began as a modest 1960s program to protect senior citizens from bankruptcy.
Medicare spending is now nearly $100 billion a year, and is growing at twice the rate of medical costs and two-and-a-half times the rate of inflation.
If the catastrophic program isn't put to sleep now, Bush administration officials will be spending some restless nights figuring out how to pay for its skyrocketing costs. 

No matter what the fate of the catastrophic program, the controversy over it should nail home some important lessons for policy makers.
The program's stunning cost overruns so early in its life make it unlikely Congress will try to further nationalize health care in the near future.
The emphasis should now shift to dealing with the increasingly obvious faults of an overregulated health-care system.
Right now, health care for everyone over 65 is subject to strict price controls that bring with them predictable shortages, distortions and bottlenecks. 

After living through the catastrophic-care fiasco, Congress and the White House should take a long, hard look at how to make medical care responsive to the market incentives that discipline most of the rest of American life and produce its most lasting benefits. 

