.START 

TAKEOVER EXPENSES create deduction confusion even for the 

It has revoked private ruling 8927005, which let an unidentified company deduct legal, investment-banking, and other costs of defeating a hostile bid and negotiating a merger into a "white knight." On the ruling's heels came Tax Court Judge Clapp's opinion barring National Starch from deducting as current expenses $2.9 million of such costs in its friendly 1978 takeover by Unilever.
He agreed with the IRS that the costs must be capitalized, but rejected the IRS's reasoning and developed his own. 

Tax experts have been debating Clapp's reasoning, whether it clashes with the IRS ruling, and whether the two IRS positions were inconsistent.
The IRS told the subject of the private ruling, a Peat Marwick client, of the revocation. "Apparently, the IRS decided that it was more lenient in the ruling than its litigators were in court and that {the debates} indicate the two cases weren't reconcilable," says Gilbert Bloom of Peat. "We think National Starch was a poor decision, at least intellectually." 

"We also think there will be more litigation on this issue," Bloom adds. "There are a lot of bucks at stake." 

IN GOLD WE TRUST, and for trusts we deduct, says a self-published author. 

As "Don Zolo," engineer Gustavo Garcia of Hacienda Heights, Calif., wrote "Legion of Roots," a Western novel with clues to the hiding places of gold coins "worth $30,000." They really were worth $500; but Garcia put $30,000 in a revocable trust, to be paid if one coin is found and presented to the publisher, which Garcia controls.
He deducted $30,000 as a 1981 business-promotion cost, but the IRS denied the deduction. 

Garcia appealed to the Tax Court, but Judge Drennen has rejected the deduction: As both trustee and publisher, Garcia never lost control of the trust or the funds and in effect "never parted with the $30,000." His liability to pay the $30,000 won't be irrevocably established until someone finds and presents the hidden coin for payment -- and book sales have been so low that royalty income has totaled only $146.94. 

LATE-BREAKING CHANGES in the law may disrupt IRS return-printing schedules.
Congress is debating proposed cuts in capital-gains and Medicare-catastrophic-care taxes for 1989 and other legislation just as the IRS needs to send 1989 forms to 57 contract printers around the U.S. Forms are meant to reach post offices late in November and taxpayers a month after.
Laws have been passed late in a year before, but it's unusual to have changes affecting so many taxpayers in the enactment year, says Ellen Murphy, IRS public-affairs chief. 

The IRS expects over 108 million personal 1989 returns; about 10 million are affected by the Medicare tax and 12 million to 15 million by capital gains, with some overlapping.
The IRS is holding back return packages with forms related to those issues until it decides how to cope with possible changes; it has sent to printers five types of packages for taxpayers unaffected by the issues.
It can't say how much any changes may add to printing costs and postage. 

The IRS budgeted $57 million for printing the 1989 returns and $63 million for mailing and other distribution. 

STARTING AT THE TOP: IRS Commissioner Goldberg, who recently left Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom to take that job, notes that his new salary, $82,500, may be less than that of a 1989 law-school grad at his former firm.
The firm says starting pay will be in a range of $81,000 to $83,000.
The top IRS counsel gets $78,600. 

WOODSTOCK SOUVENIRS for 13 vendors of beads, T-shirts, and such keepsakes at the 20th-anniversary nostalgia trip last month include summonses alleging failure to comply with New York sales-tax law.
Arrest warrants were issued Monday for three who didn't make a first court appearance. 

REQUESTS TO EXTEND the due date for 1988 returns to Oct. 16 were filed on Form 2688, which doesn't include a line for a return-preparer's address.
CPA David L. Zalles of Bala Cynwyd, Pa., urges taxpayers to forward replies from the IRS to their preparers as quickly as possible. 

HIS 'N' HERS tax accounts could resolve a lot of spousal miscues. 

For the IRS, that is.
With a new computer project called OLE (don't ask why), it hopes to cure a major failing -- its inability to do immediate checks of names and Social Security numbers on returns and other papers to spot mismatches with its account records.
Corrections could be made as returns arrive, a test in the Memphis Service Center shows; the present manual paper-shuffling takes three to six weeks.
OLE can provide rapid access to accounts for other purposes, too. 

Taxpayer errors cause many mismatches, but OLE also is designed to end a problem caused by the IRS's filing of joint-return accounts under just one Social Security number.
That creates no end of confusion when a couple marry, divorce, file separately, or merely reverse the order of the numbers on their return.
OLE introduces the expedient of automatic cross-referencing of spouses' and former spouses' numbers. 

The 1989 returns will take a step to facilitate this by putting spouses' names and numbers on separate lines. 

BRIEFS: After nearly 30 years of negotiation, the U.S. and India signed an income-tax treaty, subject to ratification by both . . . . The IRS plans a hearing Nov. 17 on its proposed rules defining excess "golden-parachute" severance payments that aren't deductible by employers. 

