.START 

Saatchi & Saatchi is in the midst of trying to sell off most of its consulting business, but some securities analysts say the sales price may well fall below the company's initial expectations. 

In June, when London-based Saatchi first announced its plans to sell the consulting business, it told analysts the sale should bring in #250 million to #350 million ($392.5 million to $549.5 million).
But analysts have said the figure will be much closer to the lower end of the spectrum, and now some have cut their estimates, saying it's even possible the figure could go below #250 million. 

Meanwhile, although Saatchi hoped to find a single buyer for its various consulting operations, it hasn't had any luck and now must sell the business piecemeal.
Some analysts are also getting edgy because the company indicated that it might announce some sales by the end of its fiscal year, Sept. 30, a goal which now seems unlikely to be met. 

Still, Saatchi continues to say it will announce the bulk of the sales by the end of the calendar year.
And Stephen Schwarzman, president of the Blackstone Group, Saatchi's investment bank, pointed out that the offering memorandums weren't even mailed out to prospective buyers until early August, and "it's unrealistic to expect completed deals within five weeks." 

Mr. Schwarzman said there are "a large number of potential purchasers for various units." A Saatchi spokesman added, "Under no circumstances do we feel compelled to sell these companies.
If we don't get the right price, we won't sell." 

"Are they not being disappointed a little prematurely?
It's only September," the spokesman said. "We're looking to the end of the calendar year to be able to announce these deals, and I don't think we are far away from that." 

Saatchi paid about #250 million to acquire its stable of consulting firms, and most analysts interviewed believe it will make that money back, and perhaps a bit more.
Yet several aren't as optimistic about the price as they were just a few months ago. 

Andrew Wallach, a Drexel Burnham Lambert analyst, recently slashed his estimate of the sale proceeds to #275 million from his previous estimate of #325 million and said he now is looking at a range of #225 million to #300 million.
Brian Sturgess of London-based Barclay de Zoete Wedd also slightly lowered his expectations, from as high as #270 million to "#250 million max." 

"The nearer Saatchi gets to December, the less likely they are to get a good price," Mr. Sturgess said. "A potential buyer knows that Saatchi has to sell {the consulting businesses} separately and knows he can put pressure on Saatchi on price.
A desperate seller never gets the best price." 

Another hitch, according to Mr. Wallach, is the recent weakness of the junk bond market, which in turn is cooling the market for any sort of leveraged acquisition. "People are reassessing the transaction values" for all kinds of acquisitions, he said. 

So far, the analysts' changing estimates haven't affected their 1989 and 1990 earnings forecasts.
But both Jim Dougherty, an analyst with County NatWest Securities, and Emma Hill, of Wertheim & Co., said that if the sales are delayed too long, it will cut into 1990 estimates.
Mr. Dougherty currently is looking for 1990 pretax earnings of #82 million, or 18 pence a share, including #7 million of interest income on the proceeds of the sale.
That estimate assumes, however, "that the business would have been sold fairly early in the year" for net proceeds of #265 million, he said. 

Saatchi wouldn't comment on which companies are interested in its various consulting units.
But industry executives said Marsh & McLennan has expressed interest in the Cleveland Consulting unit, and McGraw-Hill, Alexander Proudfoot, and Dun & Bradstreet have made some inquiries.
Those firms either couldn't be reached or declined to comment.
One executive familiar with the situation said a price is on the table for one of Saatchi's consulting companies, and discussions are getting close on two others. 

Several of the consulting firms, meanwhile, are trying to put together management buy-outs, people familiar with the discussions said.
They said Saatchi's largest consulting unit, Hay Group, was attracting less interest than some of the smaller companies because of its size and some financial problems at the unit.
Hay is one of the companies that may end up in a management buy-out, the people said. 

Another firm trying to put together a buy-out is Gartner Group, a computer consulting firm, said executives close to the situation.
But they said Gartner management would offer less than the approximately $85 million Saatchi paid for the consultant, while Saatchi hopes to command a premium for the firm, which has attracted a fair amount of interest.
Also, Saatchi's Peterson & Co. can't be sold without the approval of its principals and could end up remaining a Saatchi unit, the executives said.
Officials of the consulting firms either declined to comment or couldn't be reached. 

J.P. Morgan Picks Backer 

Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide yesterday picked up J.P. Morgan's $10 million world-wide ad account. 

J.P. Morgan, the New York-based parent of Morgan Guaranty Trust, began the search for an ad agency when its former shop, the now-defunct Doyle Graf Raj, crumbled in June.
Most of Doyle Graf's other clients, including Swissair, Kobrand and Haagen-Dazs, have already reassigned their accounts to new agencies. 

Backer Spielvogel, a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi, will develop campaigns for J.P. Morgan's corporate and product advertising and its private banking business.
Morgan saw many agencies before narrowing the competition to Backer Spielvogel and two other New York shops, Della Femina McNamee WCRS and TBWA Advertising. 

Ad Notes.... 

NEW ACCOUNTS: Procter & Gamble, Cincinnati, moved its estimated $15 million Sure deodorant account to Grey Advertising, New York.
The account had previously been handled by Wells, Rich, Greene, New York. . . . White Castle System, Chicago, awarded its $9 million restaurant account to Gunder & Associates, Columbus, Ohio.
Lord, Sullivan & Yoder, Columbus, previously handled the account.
The additional assignment brings to about $11 million the White Castle ad business at Gunder. . . . J.I. Case, Racine, Wis., awarded its $5 million construction equipment division account to WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson unit, Detroit.
The Tenneco unit's account had previously been serviced by Bozell, Chicago. 

INVESTIGATION: Meineke Discount Muffler Shops, Charlotte, N.C., has pulled TV ads in the New York area touting its low prices after the city's department of consumer affairs informed Meineke of its intent to file suit for deceptive advertising.
A spokesman for the agency said it visited 20 Meineke shops in New York and found that none of them fixed mufflers on city vehicles for the prices advertised ("$18.93 to $26.95").
The average price, the department said, was $99.21.
David J. Kaufmann, Meineke's outside counsel, said the company stands by its ad slogan.
Meineke has admitted no guilt, he said, adding the agency has refused to show the company its data. "I don't believe their numbers," he said.
No suit has been filed, and the two sides are expected to discuss the charges in the near future. 

NEW AGENCY: Sandy Carlson, who resigned as executive vice president at Wells, Rich, Greene on Monday, opened a new agency called Carlson & Partners to service the $10 million Polo/Ralph Lauren account.
Polo/Ralph Lauren, a Wells Rich client for the past three years, left the agency Friday. 

