.START 

The Commodity Futures Trading Commission is facing criticism that it took far too long to bring charges of fraud against International Trading Group Ltd. 

Last week, the CFTC announced the filing of the largest sales fraud case in its history, charging that ITG had used high-pressure sales tactics to bilk customers out of hundreds of millions of dollars. 

But the CFTC didn't say it has been aware of questionable actions at ITG for more than a decade. 

Over the last 12 years, at least two states and one futures exchange have provided the CFTC with evidence against the options brokerage firm.
In addition, an industry group fined ITG $90,000 for using allegedly fraudulent sales tactics.
Over the same period, the CFTC received 212 consumer complaints against the firm, which is based in San Mateo, Calif. 

The CFTC began investigating ITG in 1985 and filed suit in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles last week.
Investors who lost money with ITG are asking why the investigation -- and subsequent charges -- were so long in coming.
So are former investigators for one state agency that pursued the firm, and some commodities lawyers. 

"This is a resource-intensive undertaking," says CFTC enforcement chief Dennis Klejna. "We were able to concentrate resources on the West Coast with the ability to take on these firms only recently." He declined to discuss the specifics of the matter, such as how long the investigation took, citing the agency's pending litigation. 

Michael Diamond, an attorney for ITG, denies the firm has acted illegally, and says it intends to fight the CFTC's suit.
He also argues that the CFTC is wrongly presuming that stressing the positive in sales pitches to potential customers without conveying all the negative amounts to misrepresentation by the firm. 

Making the ITG case even more interesting is the presence at the firm of Fred Konigsberg.
Currently ITG's executive vice president, Mr. Konigsberg used to be a staff attorney in the CFTC's New York office.
He couldn't be reached for comment. 

Unlike the securities business, where excessive commissions are barred, there are no legal limits on the cut a commodities broker can take.
Moreover, the financial instruments that ITG sells are legitimate.
Thus the only area where a futures firm selling to small investors generally can be charged is sales practices, commodities lawyers say. 

It can be difficult to establish a pattern of fraud across an array of options on different commodities.
The fact that most of those sales are made by telephone makes the job even more difficult because investigators need to demonstrate that a given conversation is representative of widespread abuses within a firm. 

One commodities lawyer notes that before 1985 the CFTC was primarily concerned with cracking down on abuses at unregistered operations, and didn't focus much on registered firms such as ITG. 

Ultimately, whether or not the CFTC prevails in its lawsuit, the history of ITG illustrates just how little individual investors in exotic financial instruments can rely on regulators to protect them.
Over the last five years, according to the CFTC's suit, the firm made $283 million in commissions, while its customers, most of them small investors, had losses of $428 million. 

The CFTC was first put on notice about the firm a dozen years ago.
The state of Michigan thought the firm sufficiently suspect to notify the CFTC in 1978, according to Douglas Henney, who investigated ITG for the Michigan Bureau of Corporations and Securities. "As a result of our investigation into the commodities, ITG moved out of Michigan," he says. "There was a lack of follow-up by the CFTC." 

Michigan investigators say they found sales tactics similar to those described in last week's CFTC suit and believe they might have won a case against ITG had the firm not moved its operation out of the state and their jurisdiction. 

Mr. Diamond, ITG's attorney, says he wasn't aware of the Michigan inquiry, but called it "ancient history, totally irrelevant," because ITG was selling different products and had a different approach at that time. 

Before Michigan's investigation was complete, ITG registered with the Florida Secretary of State as an out-of-state corporation and set up an office in Coconut Grove.
By February 1986, the state comptroller, whose office handles consumer complaints, had received enough complaints to start an investigation.
The results of that inquiry were turned over to the CFTC because its jurisdiction supersedes the state's, according to a spokesman for the state comptroller. 

In 1981, ITG became a member of the New York Futures Exchange, a subsidiary of the New York Stock Exchange.
Soon the futures exchange began investigating the firm and turning over its findings to the CFTC. People familiar with that investigation say the CFTC opened a file on ITG in 1985.
It isn't clear what the New York exchange did with the information it found. 

In March 1987, ITG left the exchange of its own volition, according to an exchange spokeswoman.
ITG did so because it didn't feel that the exchange was sufficiently knowledgeable about the options the firm sells to supervise it properly, says Mr. Diamond. 

ITG had joined the National Futures Association, an industry self-regulatory body, in 1983.
By 1985 the association began investigating the firm.
Last year it charged ITG with fraudulent, high-pressure solicitation and misrepresentation of potential profits and risks.
ITG neither admitted nor denied the allegations but agreed to pay a penalty of $90,000.
Seven of its employees were barred or suspended from the industry. 

But in 1987, when San Francisco investor Charles Hsu called the CFTC's Los Angeles office to complain about ITG, he says he was told that there were no pending complaints against the firm, and that there were no grounds for any investigation. 

A CFTC spokeswoman said she could neither confirm nor challenge Mr. Hsu's account, but noted that under usual procedures he would have been told the number of complaints against ITG, but not their substance. 

Discouraged by the CFTC's response, Mr. Hsu says he decided against lodging a complaint.
Thus, he says, he was all the more surprised when the CFTC filed suit last week against ITG, alleging the same sort of misconduct he had tried to report two years ago. 

In the 41-page complaint, the agency alleges ITG told prospects that "you don't have to think it over -- you must take action now." The complaint alleges that "at every stage of its customer solicitation process, ITG makes false, deceptive, or misleading statements and fails to disclose material facts." 

Two people who have heard ITG pitches since the complaint say that the firm's salesmen, when asked about the federal action, blamed the trouble on a few "bad apples at the firm who have been removed." Michigan Commodity Futures Trading Commission pays $90,000 fine practices 

