.START 

Cummins Engine Co. said the rising number of its shares bought by acquisition-minded Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd. still appears to be for investment purposes. 

But Wall Street didn't seem to agree.
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading, Cummins shares closed at $63, up $1.625. 

Industrial Equity said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it raised its stake in Cummins to 11.5%.
In July, Industrial Equity disclosed that it held a 9.9% stake, saying it bought the shares for investment purposes but reserves the right to change its plans.
Industrial Equity officials couldn't be reached for comment yesterday. 

A Cummins spokeswoman in Columbus, Ind., said management at the diesel and automotive parts maker doesn't know of any change in Industrial Equity's plans.
But she conceded Cummins has little information about its big investor except for a sketchy SEC filing. 

Industrial Equity is a vehicle for British and U.S. investments and acquisitions for Sir Ronald Brierley of New Zealand.
Last year, he made an unsolicited and unsuccessful takeover bid of $986.6 million for CalMat Co. in Los Angeles, prompting it to announce a restructuring including asset sales and a stock buy-back.
CalMat's interests include concrete, asphalt and land development. 

Through a network of companies, Sir Ronald controls businesses ranging from auto distribution in Britain to cemeteries in Australia.
In some cases Brierley-controlled companies have sold their holdings back to the U.S. companies at a premium.
Last year, Industrial Equity sold back an 18.6% block of stock it held in Ameron Inc., a Monterey Park, Calif., pipe and concrete maker, for $2.50 a share more than the market price on the day the purchase was announced. 

Securities analysts can't recall Sir Ronald's acquiring a major U.S. company yet.
Nevertheless, his stake is the second in Cummins by a foreign company in the past 10 months.
In July, the founding family at Cummins bought Hanson USA's 8.8% stake for $72 million, ridding itself of that distraction.
Hanson USA is the U.S. arm of Hanson PLC of London. 

Analysts have speculated that the Industrial Equity stake may be an attempt at some form of "greenmail" -- forcing Cummins to buy back the stake at a steep profit.
When Hanson's stake was bought back in July, it was descendants of the founding Cummins family, rather than the company itself, who paid.
Although Cummins and the family acclaimed the purchase of the Hanson stake, saying it wasn't greenmail, analysts said the transaction may make such a stake more inviting to investors. 

Cummins is rebounding from an earnings slump last year.
In the second quarter, net income was $23.9 million, or 83 cents a share, up from $1.7 million a year earlier, when preferred dividend requirements exceeded any per-share profit.
Sales rose 18% to $982 million from $834.4 million. 

