.START 

Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner stepped up his warnings about airlines accumulating "excessive debt" through buy-outs, and said he plans to meet this month with Alfred Checchi, who led the group that purchased Northwest Airlines' parent NWA Inc. 

Mr. Skinner, in remarks following a speech at the International Aviation Club, wouldn't disclose the Transportation Department's views on the $3.65 billion buy-out, but said the agency has completed its review of the transaction.
The department has the authority to revoke the operating certificate of any company it deems unfit to run an airline. 

The department's reaction to the Northwest deal is of keen interest to the aviation community and to Congress, where concern is building about the implications of leveraged buy-outs and the involvement of foreign airlines in helping to finance the transactions.
Foreign carriers are involved both in the purchase of NWA and the proposed $6.75 billion buy-out of UAL Corp., the parent of United Airlines.
The department plans soon to conduct a fitness review of UAL. 

Mr. Skinner's speech yesterday was his lengthiest public statement so far about his concerns over leveraged buy-outs. "I will not allow excessive debt in the airline industry to jeopardize the public interest, especially in the area of safety," he said. 

Mr. Skinner expressed concern that debt-ridden airlines might not have the money needed to maintain older aircraft, to weather recessions, or to expand operations and to modernize fleets. 

On foreign ownership, he voiced his intention to uphold the spirit as well as the letter of the law that prohibits foreign carriers from owning more than 25% of U.S. airlines.
The department, he said, has "an absolute obligation to ensure that U.S. airlines remain fully within the control of U.S. citizens" -- even when a transaction is numerically within the bounds of the law. 

In the NWA transaction, two foreign companies -- KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and Elders IXL Ltd. of Australia -- contributed $480 million out of $700 million in equity financing.
But the companies' combined voting interest is under 20% because $400 million of their stake is in preferred stock. 

When a foreign airline is willing to contribute a large share of equity capital in return for a relatively small percentage of voting stock, "what does the foreign airline think it is buying?" Mr. Skinner asked. 

In the proposed buy-out of UAL by United's pilots and management, British Airways PLC is a major participant. 

