.START 

Brokers still offer some of the choicest yields around on certificates of deposit, but their advantage over yields offered directly by banks and thrifts is narrowing. 

Earlier this year, when CD yields were rising steadily, the yield on CDs purchased through brokers was a full percentage point higher than the average national yield on CDs purchased directly through banks and thrifts.
Now, that spread has narrowed to just a quarter of a percentage point. 

The average annual yield on a broker-dealer CD with a one-year maturity was 8.25% in the week ended Tuesday, according to Banxquote Money Markets, a New York information service that tracks the issues.
The average for a one-year CD sold directly by major banks was 8%. 

"If you look at some of the rates, there has been a slight uptick in some bank rates, while some broker rates have declined," says Albert D. Disposti, managing director of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, a unit of Merrill Lynch & Co.
The big brokerage firm doesn't participate in the Banxquote survey, which studies three major broker dealers and 18 major banks. 

Norberto Mehl, chairman of Banxquote, says the decline in yields is due to legislation passed in August that forced weak thrifts to cut their costs of obtaining deposits. "I don't think {brokerage firms} will be very successful, not with these rates," he says. 

Generally, individual investors should expect little change in CD yields from major banks this week.
Yields were unchanged at the weekly U.S. Treasury bill auction Monday, which is closely watched by bankers setting yield payouts. 

The average six-month CD is being sold with a yield of 8.01%, up from 8% a week earlier.
The average three-month CD fell to 7.91% from 7.93%.
Two-year and five-year CDs fell 0.01 of a percentage point to 7.95% and 7.99%, respectively, according to Banxquote. 

Large denomination CDs, those sold in increments over $90,000, were slightly lower across the board.
The average six-month jumbo, as the CDs are called, fell 0.03 point to 8.17%, while the average one-year jumbo was off 0.04 to 8.13%.
Longer-term issues were off more significantly. 

At the Treasury auction, three-month bills were sold with yields of 7.90% and six-month issues at 8.06%. 

