.START 

"It's neither train nor truck," says Thomas L. Finkbiner, standing in a small rail yard here. 

As he speaks, a Norfolk Southern Corp. diesel locomotive en route from Atlanta to Chicago approaches.
Behind it stretches a string of truck trailers, rubber tires retracted, rolling along the main line tracks on steel-flanged wheels. 

When the hybrid vehicles enter the yard, crewmen with wrenches turn pneumatic valves on several, lowering their rubber tires like landing gear and retracting their steel wheels.
Quickly, the RoadRailer trailers are ready for the road. 

"We don't call them trains, because train suggests slow and dumpy," says Mr. Finkbiner, Norfolk Southern's assistant vice president of international and intermodal marketing. "RoadRailers are fast and sleek." 

The hard-charging Mr. Finkbiner is spearheading a high-profile gamble that RoadRailer technology can pump new life into the nation's underused rails and win back high-value merchandise freight from truckers.
Faced with stagnant or declining bulk shipments, railroads must "capture new markets to survive," says William Withuhn, transportation curator of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington. 

Last week, Norfolk Southern set a record of 2,117 trailer loads a week on its RoadRailers; it had none three years ago.
Although RoadRailer service is still a small part of Norfolk Southern, generating about $60 million, or 1.5%, of corporate railroad revenue this year, it is reaping praise and freight from major shippers.
For 36-year-old Mr. Finkbiner, the challenge now is to make it profitable. 

Mr. Finkbiner also markets the company's piggyback trains, which transport highway trailers on flatcars.
But the 48-foot RoadRailer trailers are his passion.
By avoiding the expensive terminals needed to load flatcars, fuel-efficient RoadRailers will make rail a competitor again in the shorter haul freight routes dominated by trucks, he says. 

Other railroads have dumped RoadRailer because of problems ranging from the high cost of the specialized trailers to derailments, shipper disinterest and financial losses. "We didn't think it was a viable technology," says Ronald Sorrow, a vice president of CSX Corp. 's intermodal unit, which dropped its RoadRailer service last spring.
That left Norfolk Southern as the only U.S. railroad still RoadRailing. 

"I really don't care what someone else does," says the former trucking and air freight executive who remains contemptuous of railroad marketing practices. 

When Mr. Finkbiner joined Norfolk Southern two years ago, the railroad was running a single RoadRailer route between Detroit and St. Louis, mainly to transport auto parts.
His Triple Crown service has grown to as many as 14 RoadRailer trains a day on five routes in the Midwest and South.
He plans to extend the system to New York, Boston, Minneapolis and Dallas as soon as he reaches agreement with connecting railroads.
While he won't talk numbers, Mr. Finkbiner says Triple Crown will turn profitable later this year. 

So far, Triple Crown is impressing shippers. "They really run a clockwork schedule," says Theodore Hamer at Mead Corp. Mr. Finkbiner "is much more like the trucking company executives the shippers are used to dealing with," says Charles Wilkins of Ford Motor Co. 

Like RoadRailer itself, Mr. Finkbiner's career spans road and rail.
The six-foot-four Rutgers University economics graduate got his first trucking job in 1976, after he was ejected from a penthouse New York restaurant for shoving a patron.
As he rode the elevator down with his antagonist, a trucking terminal manager at Roadway Services Inc., the man said he liked Mr. Finkbiner's style and hired him to supervise a loading dock. 

In 1981, after a stint at Airborne Freight Corp., Mr. Finkbiner joined North American Van Lines, since acquired by Norfolk Southern, and rose to vice president, sales and marketing.
He got his current job in 1987 after harshly criticizing the railroad's marketing in a company videotape. 

"You talked about how things are done in the trucking industry," Arnold McKinnon, Norfolk Southern's chairman, told Mr. Finkbiner. "Here's your chance to implement them in the railroad industry." 

Mr. Finkbiner has since set up a hub outside Fort Wayne where RoadRailer trains meet and exchange trailers.
He won union concessions for smaller crews and faster schedules for RoadRailer trains.
He successfully pressed his supplier, the RoadRailer Division of closely held Duchossois Industries Co., Chicago Heights, Ill., to make design changes.
And he hired ex-trucking salesmen at Triple Crown, preferring to go direct to customers rather than rely on the middlemen that sell most rail piggyback service -- angering the brokers.
Mr. Finkbiner says his own sales force will work harder to fill the costly RoadRailer trailers, which represent a big financial drain when empty. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Finkbiner often takes aim at the railroad's rigid chain-of-command. "Transportation is a dynamic business that changes all the time," he says. "But the railroad bureaucracy is set up to enforce the status quo." 

Norfolk Southern top brass tolerates Mr. Finkbiner -- to a point. "Anyone who is blunt has to learn to curb their bluntness," says his boss, D. Henry Watts, executive vice president, marketing. "It's something {Mr.
Finkbiner} has to work on all the time." Even so, Mr. Watts says Mr. Finkbiner is an "effective change agent." 

But change doesn't always come fast enough to please Mr. Finkbiner.
As the Atlanta-Chicago RoadRailer train pulls past him, Mr. Finkbiner notices that the trailers' gleaming white paint jobs, integral to Triple Crown's marketing strategy, are soiled and dingy from diesel smoke. "We painted them white for a reason," says an irritated Mr. Finkbiner to several aides. "We want to tell shippers that this isn't just a dirty old train." 

The next day, soapsuds fly in Chicago and the trailers gleam again. 

