.START 

Campeau Corp. agreed to surrender substantial control of its retail empire to real-estate powerhouse Olympia & York Developments Ltd. in exchange for a rescue loan of $250 million. 

The move could help Campeau's beleaguered retail divisions -- Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores -- get badly needed merchandise in time for the holiday shopping season. 

Under the accord, Olympia & York will be primarily responsible for supervising a major restructuring of Campeau.
The agreement also represents a sharp reversal of fortunes for the mercurial chief, Robert Campeau, who just two years ago promised to reign over a continental retail empire. 

Apparel makers, many of whom halted shipments to Federated and Allied last week, had a mixed reaction to the loan agreement.
Some said they would immediately start shipping again, especially to Federated's Bloomingdale's chain, but others hadn't reached a decision yet on resuming shipments. 

CIT Group, the largest factoring company for the retail industry, said it told clients to resume shipments, but other factors appeared more cautious.
Factoring companies buy retail receivables from apparel makers and in many cases act as their credit managers. 

On the Toronto Stock Exchange, Campeau shares closed at 14.25 Canadian dollars, up 75 Canadian cents.
In national over-the-counter trading in the U.S., the stock closed at $11.875, up $1.
Trading in Campeau stock had been halted since last Wednesday. 

Under the terms of the pact, Olympia & York, based in Toronto, which is owned by the Reichmann family, will increase its fully diluted equity stake in Campeau, also based in Toronto, to 38.4% from 25%.
The fully diluted equity interest of Mr. Campeau, chairman and chief executive officer, will fall to 43.2% from 54%. 

In addition, Campeau's board was cut to 10 from 21 with Mr. Campeau and the Reichmanns naming three directors each.
The other four directors represent minority shareholders. 

In an interview, Mr. Campeau called the new arrangement with O&Y a permanent "50-50 partnership" and disputed suggestions he has surrendered management of his real-estate and retailing empire to the Reichmanns. "We wanted their help and their support and that's what we've obtained," Mr. Campeau said. "I feel very good about it." 

The major financial restructuring of Campeau by O&Y would seek to reduce its $10 billion in debt and improve cash flow.
A committee of four Campeau directors headed by O&Y's chief operating officer, Lionel Dodd, will oversee the restructuring.
Mr. Campeau isn't on the committee. 

In addition, Campeau's U.S. subsidiary will have a new chief executive officer and a new chief financial officer who will report directly to the restructuring committee.
Mr. Campeau said John Burden will remain chairman and chief executive officer of Federated and Allied, but he said he didn't know who will be the new chief executive and chief financial officer of Campeau U.S. 

Mr. Campeau said he expects that the O&Y loan, coupled with proceeds from the planned sale of Bloomingdale's and an $800 million bridge loan that O&Y will use its "best efforts" to arrange, will put Federated and Allied back on firm footing.
He doesn't expect that he will have to sell any more retailing assets to reduce debt. 

In an apparent rebuff of First Boston Corp., the restructuring committee will retain Merrill Lynch & Co. as its financial advisor.
First Boston, a unit of CS First Boston Group, initially arranged much of the financing for the Federated and Allied acquisitions.
A First Boston executive, who requested anonymity, said Merrill Lynch's involvement isn't surprising because it has previously worked with O&Y.
First Boston will continue to act as agent in the sale of Bloomingdale's. 

In an interview, Francis X. Basile, president and chief executive of CIT's factoring unit, said the company told clients yesterday morning they could resume shipping to Federated and Allied.
But he added that CIT will carefully watch the Federated and Allied situation. "Right now we don't feel like we're in possession of all of the facts," Mr. Basile said. 

Other factoring companies were more cautious. "There is a certain credibility gap that needs to be closed," said Richard Zimmerman, senior vice president, Citizens & Southern Commercial Corp. "Until recently we were told that everything was fine at Campeau and that there were no cash flow problems.
Last week, suddenly, cash flow was inadequate and there was a big problem." 

"Basically we feel a little better knowing that this financing is in place.
But we don't know if this solves the problem through the end of Christmas," added Frank DeRita, senior vice president at Congress Talcott Corp. Mr. DeRita said his company is waiting to receive payment on September payables before it releases any of its manufacturers to ship new merchandise to Federated and Allied. 

Apparel makers expressed relief over the financing, but they too are cautious.
Frank Mori, president of Takihyo Inc., which makes Anne Klein and Donna Karan clothes, said he will only resume shipments to Bloomingdale's at this point.
Bloomingdale's is considered such a critical outlet by many manufacturers that Guess Jeans Inc. president Maurice Marciano said he plans to ship to the chain "even if I have to carry them at my own risk." 

Even if most manufacturers resume shipments, the vital Christmas season may still be difficult for vendors and Federated and Allied.
Many retail executives expect Campeau will quickly run through the $250 million loan because many apparel makers are now planning to either cut Campeau's credit lines or require some payments in advance of delivery. 

Alice Beebe Longley, an analyst with Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp., said manufacturers may be forced to bear the brunt of Campeau's problems. "The Reichmann brothers will try to increase cash flow," she said, "which means that payments will probably be delayed.
The department stores have historically been notorious for pushing their problems back onto the manufacturers, and I expect them to do so even more." 

Campeau said O&Y is willing to provide a portion of the refinancing for the $800 million bridge loan O&Y agreed to try to arrange. 

However, O&Y's participation is conditional on the sale of Bloomingdale's and Campeau's buy-back of 75% of Federated's and Allied's $2.4 billion of debentures, notes and preferred stock outstanding at Sept. 15 prices or lower.
Prices of Federated and Allied bonds rose yesterday, which may make it difficult for Campeau to buy back the bonds at a price acceptable to O&Y. 

Because Campeau has been unable to obtain a commitment to refinance a $400 million bridge loan held by First Boston Corp. and others, the debtholders have received a 7% equity stake in Federated.
Campeau said yesterday that under new agreements with the debtholders it has certain rights to reacquire the stock. 

Allied will use a portion of the $250 million loan to make an interest payment due last Friday on its 11 1/2% senior subordinated debentures.
Campeau also said its banks agreed to increase the $600 million cash-draw limit on Federated's working capital credit lines by $50 million and extend the deadline on $1.05 billion in debt due this January to April 

Under the loan agreement, O&Y will receive warrants entitling it to buy as many as 15.6 million common shares of Campeau at $16 each until Sept. 18, 1991.
O&Y also has the right to apply the amount outstanding under its loan to the purchase of the shares.
Campeau and O&Y said they mutually agreed to certain restrictions, including rights of first refusal, on their ability to buy or transfer Campeau stock. 

Mr. Campeau said Campeau's relationship with Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. "remains what it was," although DeBartolo Chairman Edward J. DeBartolo isn't on Campeau's new board.
DeBartolo, a real-estate developer based in Youngstown, Ohio, lent Campeau $480 million during the Federated takeover.
Mr. Campeau said reports that DeBartolo opposed terms of the O&Y loan and delayed resolution of the loan agreement were "totally unfair." Campeau's joint-venture real estate development partnership with DeBartolo is intact, Mr. Campeau said.
Mr. DeBartolo couldn't be reached for comment. 

