.START 

Nasdaq over-the-counter stocks generally marked time along with New York Stock Exchange issues, continuing what traders are characterizing as a consolidation phase. 

The Nasdaq Composite Index improved 0.16 to 467.05 on 136.7 million shares.
So far, September's average daily turnover is about 131 million shares.
That's about in line with Nasdaq's average daily volume of 132.8 million shares for the year. 

Nasdaq's biggest issues didn't move much.
The Nasdaq 100 Index of non-financial stocks added 0.37 to 443.87.
The Financial Index eased 0.25 to 463.86. 

"Absolutely directionless," is how A. Cuyler Kline, managing director of OTC trading at Robinson-Humphrey, described the OTC market. "I think {there's} a lack of conviction on the part of buyers," Mr. Kline said. 

Mr. Kline observed that OTC-market investors seem to be as indecisive as their counterparts in the listed market.
Yesterday, both the Dow Jones industrials and the New York Stock Exchange composite were practically unchanged. "This directionlessness is indicative of a consolidation," Mr. Kline said.
He figures that, after recently setting new highs, both Nasdaq and the Big Board probably need a breather before "assaulting" those new records. 

Several individual stocks moved sharply. 

Xoma dropped 2 to 20 1/2 on 809,300 shares.
Kidder Peabody analyst Robert Kupor told Dow Jones Professional Investor Report that the biotechnology concern's clinical data on its treatment for septic shock, as presented to a conference Monday in Houston, seemed of "borderline quality." He said the data "had insufficient statistical power to convince an FDA panel" that the product is "worth approving within the time frame anticipated." 

Mr. Kupor and other analysts have been expecting Food and Drug Administration approval for the septic shock treatment in mid-1990, the news service said.
But, the approval could now be delayed six months, Mr. Kupor told Professional Investor Report.
Mr. Kupor hasn't lowered his rating on the company, which he calls a "moderately weak hold," the news service said.
Steven Mendell, chairman of the Berkeley, Calif., company, said he believes the scientific results were "well received" by the physicians and analysts at the conference.
He also downplayed the impact of Mr. Kupor's comments, saying that profit-taking probably accounted for some of the decline in Xoma's share price yesterday. 

On 2.7 million shares, Pantera's tumbled 1 1/2 to 3/8.
The franchise restaurant operator said its secured lenders have terminated the waiver they previously gave the company and have declared the entire $35.5 million owed them immediately due and payable.
The lenders have frozen the company's operating accounts, Pantera's said. 

The company also said its ability to continue operations outside of bankruptcy-proceedings is significantly impaired and a filing under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code is imminent.
A Chapter 11 filing allows a company to continue operating with protection from creditor lawsuits while it formulates a plan to pay its debts. 

Grist Mill fell 24%, or 3 1/4, to 10 1/8 after analyst Robin R. Young of John G. Kinnard & Co. in Minneapolis cut his near-term rating on the stock and lowered first-quarter earnings estimates for the cereals and snacks maker, Professional Investor Report said.
Mr. Young told the news service he lowered his near-term rating on Grist Mill to "hold" from "buy," but is maintaining his long-term "accumulate" recommendation. 

The analyst said he lowered his earnings estimate for the fiscal first quarter ended last month to 14 cents a share from 22 cents a share, after company officials told him estimates for certain expenses would be higher than expected.
Grist Mill earned 14 cents a share in the year-earlier period. 

After being halted for three full sessions, trading in Campeau shares resumed.
The stock closed at 11 7/8, up 1 1/8 from last Wednesday when activity was suspended for a series of news announcements.
Yesterday, before trading resumed on the Toronto Stock Exchange as well as on Nasdaq, the retailing conglomerate said it entered definitive agreements with Olympia & York Developments and received a portion of a $250 million secured loan from the real estate giant.
Campeau also said the loan will enable it to meet all obligations to suppliers and creditors of its Allied Stores and Federated Stores units. 

As part of the pact with Olympia & York Developments, Olympia's fully diluted stake in Campeau will increase to 38.4% from 25% and the fully diluted stake of Campeau's chairman, Robert Campeau, will drop to 43.2% from 54%. 

Shares of Micron Technology slipped 1/4 to 13 7/8 after the maker of computer memory chips reported earnings for the fiscal fourth quarter, ended Aug. 31, of 42 cents a share.
A year earlier, Micron earned $1.27 a share.
Analysts' estimates for the quarter ranged from 40 cents a share to 90 cents. 

McCormick added 1/8 to 42 1/8.
The Hunt Valley, Md., distributor of spices, flavorings and tea said its board authorized the repurchase of as much as 5%, or about 1.1 million shares, of the company's 20.8 million common shares outstanding. 

Separately, the company announced operating earnings of 78 cents a share for the fiscal third quarter ended Aug. 31, compared with operating earnings of 47 cents a share a year before.
Estimates from analysts were between 45 cents a share and 65 cents a share. 

Among the OTC's most active stocks, the American depositary receipts of Jaguar gained 1 11/32 to 7 13/16.
Ford Motor said it is seeking an unspecified stake in the British auto maker. 

Shares of Acclaim Entertainment, which completed a secondary offering of 1.7 million shares, advanced 3/8 to 7. 

MCI Communications rose 1 1/4 to 44 7/8. 

CoreStates Financial, which agreed to buy First Pennsylvania for $18.75 a share, or about $730 million, lost 3/4 to 46 3/4. 

Adobe Systems, Stratus Computer and Sun Microsystems also were lower. 

