.START 

Kirk Kerkorian, fresh on the heels of agreeing to sell his movie studio for $1.5 billion, now plans to build a movie theme park and 4,000-room hotel/entertainment complex in Las Vegas. 

The project, which was announced by Mr. Kerkorian's 97%-owned MGM Grand Inc., would cost about $700 million, MGM Grand Chairman Fred Benninger said. 

MGM Grand is considering locating the park on 143 acres it just purchased for $28 million.
The land is adjacent to the MGM Desert Inn Hotel & Casino, which MGM Grand bought in 1987.
The land, which includes the resort's golf course, has been owned since the 1950s by a private partnership, Desert Associates, Mr. Benninger said. 

Before it builds the complex, MGM Grand said it needs to determine if it can use the name "MGM Grand" for the theme park as well as the new hotel.
It filed a suit against Walt Disney Co. on Sept. 6 in state court in Las Vegas seeking a ruling on the issue.
Disney licenses the "MGM" name under a 1985 agreement it made with Mr. Kerkorian's MGM/UA Entertainment Co., now called MGM/UA Communications Inc. Disney, which uses the name on its Disney/MGM Studios theme park in Orlando, Fla., had already informed Mr. Kerkorian's attorneys it would fight any attempt to call a theme park "MGM Grand." 

MGM Grand, which Mr. Kerkorian split off from the movie company in 1980, owns and operates a luxury airline.
It has owned a number of hotels in Las Vegas: the former MGM Grand hotel, devastated by a 1981 fire, was sold to Bally Manufacturing Corp. in 1986.
MGM Grand recently sold the Sands Hotel & Casino, and Mr. Kerkorian was involved in the building of what are now the Las Vegas Hilton and the Flamingo hotels. 

Mr. Kerkorian has a long history with the desert gambling city: he began shuttling gamblers there in a surplus bomber after World War II. 

"Las Vegas needs more than just gambling," Mr. Benninger said. "It needs family entertainment." He added that the proposed hotel would be family-oriented and not as upscale as the Desert Inn.
He described the park as "a little bit MCA, a little bit Disney, and some new things we have in mind." The company has not yet hired designers, but a feasibility study is expected to be completed in six months, and a park could be built by late 1992 or early 1993. 

The theme park business has been booming in recent years, but there are very few major players.
When Disney and MCA build theme parks, the cost is at least $500 million.
Mr. Benninger said the company was not anticipating that it would take partners in the venture. 

Analysts say that Las Vegas is changing as more families and conventioneers flood into town. "Las Vegas is already an adult theme park," says Harold L. Vogel of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets Inc. "This concept is just the logical extension." 

Dennis I. Forst of Security Pacific Merchant Bank says there is little competition for family entertainment now beyond the Circus-Circus resort.
But he said the "$64,000 question" was whether people who go to a place to gamble will take time out to go to a theme park. 

MGM Grand also said it had agreed to buy a Beverly Hills office building for $43 million from MGM/UA Communications -- the entertainment company that Mr. Kerkorian last week agreed to sell to Qintex Group. 

