.START 

More than six months after he was confirmed by the Senate to head the Department of Health and Human Services, Dr. Louis Sullivan may finally be about to emerge from ideological ambivalence. 

Dr. Sullivan, a hematologist who helped found and was the first president of the Morehouse School of Medicine, has been a symbol of Republican concern for minorities and the poor.
But while regarded as intelligent and sincere, he has not earned a reputation as a strong manager or an agenda-setter, and his political instincts are weak. 

While Commerce's Robert Mosbacher, Housing and Urban Development's Jack Kemp and drug czar Bill Bennett have been outspoken on issues and influential in the halls of government, Dr. Sullivan has been traveling around the country bringing a message of hope to his health and welfare constituents.
But his busy travel and speaking schedule has made it difficult even for members of Congress to meet with him. 

Dr. Sullivan's selection to head the Department of Health and Human Services was greeted with satisfaction by generally liberal groups.
The American Association of Retired Persons (AARP), for example, "welcomed" his nomination and spoke of the "admirable selection" in a December press release. 

Conservative leaders, on the other hand, were initially skeptical about Dr. Sullivan because he didn't have the correct ideological credentials.
They were quickly angered by a newspaper report that suggested he not only lacked the commitment to the pro-life cause, but actually opposed the president's position on the issue. 

Dr. Sullivan immediately disavowed the newspaper story and stated that his views and the president's were identical on abortion.
After that, Dr. Sullivan and the White House made a conscious decision to neutralize criticism from the right by appointing conservatives to posts in the department. 

Undersecretary Constance Horner, the number two person in the department, is a loyalist veteran of the Reagan Administration, while Kay James, the assistant secretary for public affairs, formerly served with the National Right to Life Committee and is a favorite with conservatives.
Both were selected with an eye to conservatives, as was the lower level appointment of Patrick Fagan as a deputy assistant secretary. 

But while Dr. Sullivan tabbed some conservatives to his department, he has also sought to fill key slots, such as the head of the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) which handles Medicare and Medicaid, and the assistant secretary for family support, the top welfare position in government, with candidates who were opposed by (and ultimately quashed with the help of) conservatives. 

This has meant that decisions are made within the depths of the bureaucracy.
Given a department staffed by professionals who view the department's role as expanding "rights" and government guarantees, as well as spending more money on government programs, it would be surprising if, barring a different vision from the secretary and his top assistants, HHS didn't follow its traditional role of government activism. 

"In too many instances a career person {rather than a political appointee} is making the day-to-day decisions, and that's not likely to be good from the point of implementing the policies that the Bush administration would like," says Gary Bauer, president of the conservative Family Research Council. 

The vacancies have aroused concern even from liberals, who complain that HHS doesn't have a strong enough voice in the administration. 

Robert Greenstein of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a non-profit group that focuses on policies affecting low income people, calls proposed regulations to implement the new welfare reform law "among the most poorly designed I've ever seen," and he blames them on the lack of a strong assistant secretary in charge of welfare matters. "The vacancies are resulting in severe policy problems which wouldn't have occurred if Dr. Sullivan had been allowed to {fill vacancies with} his choices." 

Dr. Sullivan wasn't available for comment, but there are reasons to believe that he'll become more outspoken on controversial issues and that he'll soon begin to make his mark on the department.
Veteran Washington insider Michael Calhoun has been hired as his chief of staff, and the secretary's attention to policy and the political process is likely to increase.
That should mean a more specific agenda and greater sensitivity to the concerns of opinionmakers. 

The key question is whether conservatives or liberals will be generally pleased with Dr. Sullivan's increased visibility.
The secretary recently testified before Sen. Edward Kennedy's (D., Mass.) Labor and Human Resources Committee, praising the Democrat's "Disadvantaged Minority Health Improvement Act of 1989" and promising support for Sen. Kennedy's proposals.
In the same testimony, Dr. Sullivan identified youth homicide as "a public health priority." 

The department also seems on its way to accepting the "relative value scale for physician reimbursement," essentially a non-market, wage and price system approach to physician payment under Medicare that has the support of the AMA.
And Mr. Bush and Dr. Sullivan have failed to use elderly opposition to the new catastrophic-illness program to justify a reexamination of the law's drug benefit provision, which has been a major factor in the revised estimates of the programs's cost. 

Dr. Sullivan's selection of Martin Gerry to head the Planning and Evaluation Division has some conservatives worried, primarily because they know little about him.
Mr. Gerry is a disability lawyer who served in the department's Office for Civil Rights during the Nixon Administration (when HHS was still Health, Education and Welfare). 

Dr. Sullivan has walked an ideological tightrope in his first months by carefully balancing appointments in the department and by dealing with general concerns rather than specific policy questions.
But the secretary is likely to find that as he involves himself more in policy, he is going to have to take ideological sides. 

One upcoming litmus test for social-issue conservatives will involve fetal experimentation.
They see fetal experimentation as part of the overall abortion debate. "For pro-life forces, fetal experimentation is the next major issue and a key test for Dr. Sullivan.
He should not be dissuaded by sophists attempting to cloud the issue," argues Robert Moffitt, an HHS official in the Reagan administration. 

To date, Dr. Sullivan has left less of a mark on his department than had several of his recent predecessors, including Otis Bowen, Richard Schweicker and Joseph Califano, by this point in their terms.
But more recent events suggest he may be positioning himself as the point man for a "kinder and gentler" Bush administration.
And it may not be the sort of kindness and gentleness that conservatives will reward. 

Mr. Rothenberg is a political analyst with the Free Congress Foundation, in Washington. 

