.START 

Officials at the University of California, Berkeley recently apologized to Asians for admissions policies that discriminated against them.
Berkeley announced that it will raise the number of students admitted strictly on the basis of merit from 40% to 50%.
In other words, half of the students attending Berkeley will now deserve to be there.
So it goes with the politics of academia: still more than a little loony but showing clear signs of improvement. 

Some of the progress consists of penetrations from the outside world.
A few years ago, the faculty senate at the University of Michigan launched a direct assault on the First Amendment.
Henceforth, students at Michigan were forbidden to insult each other on the basis of race, sex, marital status, age and, among other ideological faux pax, Vietnam-veteran status.
Alas, professors discovered that this proscriptive rule inhibited classroom discussion, and so the faculty senate amended the rule to exempt their classrooms, making them a kind of free-speech oasis in otherwise Orwellian Ann Arbor. 

The American Civil Liberties Union challenged the Michigan rule, and last month a federal district judge declared it unconstitutional.
That decision could in turn affect similar suppression of speech rules at Stanford, Duke, Wisconsin and Emory. 

There are also internal signs of restored equilibrium.
At Yale a few weeks ago, President Benno Schmidt delivered an address in which he defended freedom of speech and offered a compelling criticism of the censorship policies practiced at other schools.
Mr. Schmidt also has appointed Yale's eminent classics scholar Donald Kagan as dean of the college.
Mr. Kagan is one of the few conservatives to hold an important post at an elite university, and he reports there has been little overt hostility to his promotion. 

Harvard Law School, the scene of considerable radically driven turmoil in recent years, has a new dean in Robert Clark.
Mr. Clark is not a conservative, but he isn't likely to be a patsy for the faculty and students who've created such problems for the law school. 

On matters of curriculum, there is some indication that the Bennett-Bloom critique has at least caused some of academia's inhabitants to think about what left-wing politics has been doing to their schools.
Mainstream liberal professors may distance themselves from conservatives, but they're also beginning to repudiate the radical teachers who have insistently dominated discussion in recent years.
Even at Stanford, prominant liberals are wondering about the wisdom of diluting the Western Civ. course.
Richard Lyman, director of the school's Institute of International Relations recently asked, "How are we going to be able to react in a given situation when our own cultural moorings are constantly being battered?" 

And then there's Dartmouth, famous in recent years mostly for being the venue for disputes involving the Dartmouth Review, a conservative and independently published student newspaper.
Most recently, the Review's differences with the school grew out of the paper's acrimonious relationship with a black music teacher, Bill Cole.
The dispute led to student suspensions and a subsequent court case.
In the event, a Dartmouth French teacher, Sarah Sully, asked her students to write an essay evaluating the Dartmouth Review on a final exam in French.
Ms. Sully is also Mr. Cole's wife. 

One student didn't condemn the review, and was awarded a "D," even though his essay's French was excellent. "I simply can't in good conscience reward an 'A' to someone who is writing racist remarks, no matter how well it is said," Ms. Sully declared.
But the dean, who is black, found no racism in the essay, merely a failure to condemn the Review.
In the ensuing dispute, the administration stood its ground.
Ms. Sully resigned. 

While these recent developments are encouraging, there is still a long way to go.
Whether in classroom discourse or in the general intellectual life of the university community, there has been a tendency to exclude or silence uncongenial views.
University of Pennsylvania Professor Alan C. Kors has described this movement as a "privileged ideology," primarily because many administrators have been passive to its assaults or in some cases have encouraged it. 

The awareness now dawning on some campuses is that this privileged ideology will suppress dissenting liberals as ardently as it has conservatives.
Awareness alone, however, won't do much to change matters.
The good news is that on some of the campuses most afflicted by intellectual intolerance, decisions are being made to right the balance. 

