.START 

President Bush's education summit with the nation's governors is a week away, but it already is showing results.
The mere preparations for the meeting have begun to produce a commitment to set national performance goals for education. 

In planning sessions for the Sept. 27-28 summit in Charlottesville, Va., the White House and the National Governors Association have agreed to work together to draft standards for the year 2000.
These would include benchmarks for reducing the high-school dropout rate, increasing the percentage of students going on to college or post-secondary vocational training, boosting the scores of U.S. students on international math and science tests, and improving the readiness of preschoolers for first grade. 

"I don't think you can overestimate the political impact of getting the president and the governors to commit themselves to national goals," says Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
Such goals would give schools, parents, students, government and business something to aim for. 

"There's growing awareness of the fact that of all the industrial democracies of the world, the U.S." is the only one that lacks "national standards, national goals, or a national curriculum," says Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers.
The summit could open the way to new standards and federal reporting on what schools are meeting them. 

Ever since Mr. Bush, who says he wants to be known as the "education president," announced the summit in July, governors have feared a political trap.
They worried that Mr. Bush would use the publicity to grab leadership of the school issue at a time when his administration isn't willing to boost educational spending. 

Their concerns were fueled by early White House reports that Mr. Bush wanted to keep the whole summit closed to the media, except for a presidential statement at the end.
In part, this idea reflected White House fears that governors would use a televised summit to lambaste the administration for not spending more on education. 

Money isn't the issue, Mr. Bush insists. "We're spending more per capita than anyone else in the world," says Roger Porter, Mr. Bush's assistant for economic and domestic policy.
Citing the administration's theme for the summit, he adds: "We're not getting enough return on our investment.
The reason is that we don't have enough accountability and we're not sufficiently results-oriented." 

In meetings at the White House last week, Gov. Clinton, a Democrat, and South Carolina Gov. Carroll Campbell, a Republican, worked out a format that includes the governors in an opening ceremony and a closing press conference with the president. 

The White House also agreed to participate in a governors-association effort that Govs.
Campbell and Clinton are heading to set national performance standards.
The governors believe this partnership will lock the administration into serious school-improvement efforts. "Once you pick up this ball, you've got to run with it," Gov. Clinton explains. 

The White House agreed to address another of the governors' concerns -- the current welter of restrictions on how federal education dollars are spent at the local level. "The federal government could help us out with more flexibility on how we spend their money," Gov. Campbell says.
For example, he complains that current rules prevent computers bought with federal funds to help disadvantaged children during the day from being used for adult-training classes at night. 

In return, the governors will pledge to cut educational red tape in their states.
Mr. Bush wants all states to pass laws that allow school choice, a popular effort to generate competition to improve schools by giving parents the right to send their children to the public school they think is best.
So far only four states -- Arkansas, Iowa, Minnesota and Nebraska -- offer statewide choice, although more than half the states are moving toward or considering choice plans. 

Conservatives see the summit as a chance to promote choice. "If George Bush doesn't get a good agenda in his mind that stresses choice, it's just going to be a talkfest," says Jeanne Allen of the Heritage Foundation. "Choice is a strategy that can address the topics of illiteracy, the learning enviroment, teaching" and other problems the governors want to discuss, she says.
A strong presidential push for choice could help governors overcome opposition they face from the National Education Association and some other education groups, she adds. 

The governors' leading idea for improving results -- setting national performance standards -- isn't as simple as it sounds.
U.S. education is primarily a state and local responsibility; federal funds account for only 6.5% of total spending on public elementary and secondary schools.
With local financing comes local control and a traditional aversion to letting Uncle Sam into school. 

But the political dynamics of the education issue are changing.
Frustration over the quality of U.S. education is creating demand for higher national standards and more pressure to meet them.
A recent Gallup Poll found that 69% of the people surveyed favored requiring public schools to use a standardized national curriculum. 

Whatever the results of the summit, it will be rich in symbolism.
The meetings will be held in a building designed by Thomas Jefferson, the ultimate education president, at the University of Virginia, which he founded.
The president and the governors will hold a dinner at Monticello, a house that illustrates the scope of Jefferson's imagination and learning. 

White House officials note that the meeting will be only the third time a president has called the nation's governors together to focus on one issue.
Theodore Roosevelt called the governors to Washington to discuss conservation in 1908.
A Franklin Roosevelt summit to discuss the economy in March 1933 was less successful because it occurred on the same day he closed the banks. "It kind of got swamped by the bank holiday," says Mr. Porter, and not all the governors showed up. 

Much of what the governors want -- national standards, better federal measurement of progress toward those goals, fewer restrictions on federal funds -- won't cost much money.
But addressing two of the governors' major concerns -- early-childhood education and funding for post-secondary education -- could be costly. "We're all concerned about the number of kids who aren't ready for school when they show up," says Gov. Campbell.
The governors want more help for nutrition, health care and preschool programs for poor children. 

They also want more federal assistance for adult education, including college financial aid, vocational education and adult-literacy programs.
One of the themes the governors want to stress is "life-long learning," Gov. Campbell says. 

But, given Washington's concern with the federal budget deficit, the governors don't plan to lambaste the administration for not spending more on education. "There's nothing to be gained from leading with our chins," Gov. Clinton explains. and June 9-11, 1989, surveying 1,584 adults nationwide.
A,B,C,D or Fail?" this community to use a standardized national curriculum?" to choose which public schools in this community the students attend, regardless of where they live?" 

