.START 

Hertz Corp., in a bid to entice more leisure rental-car customers, tapped Wells, Rich, Greene as its ad agency to replace Scali, McCabe, Sloves on its $25 million to $30 million account. 

Scali McCabe, a unit of London's WPP Group, had handled the account for 10 years.
Its ouster almost certainly spells the end of Hertz's latest long-running campaign featuring actress Jamie Lee Curtis and jocks O.J. Simpson and Arnold Palmer.
That campaign was geared largely toward the business customer -- but that segment of the business is growing at less than half the rate of vacation rentals. 

Hertz invited five agencies to vie for the account in a creative shoot-out, with each coming up with speculative campaigns.
The agencies' mission, according to executives involved, was to reposition the car rental company for the 1990s -- to appeal to vacationers in the same way Hertz already appeals to business travelers.
Aside from Wells Rich and Scali, the other agencies involved were WPP's Ogilvy & Mather and privately held agencies Young & Rubicam and N W Ayer, all based in New York. 

For Wells Rich, the win is a much-needed boost.
Earlier this year, it lost the $20 million-to-$25 million Cadbury Schweppes Canada Dry and Sunkist account.
Just in the past few weeks, it lost the $15 million Sure account from Procter & Gamble, as well as the $10 million Polo/Ralph Lauren business.
But the agency, which handled the Pan Am business until last year, has done well in the travel area, picking up more than $30 million in billings from Sheraton Corp. earlier this year.
Last week, it won a $5 million to $10 million Dun & Bradstreet account. 

Kenneth Olshan, Wells Rich's chairman, said agency staffers toasted the win yesterday with champagne in the company's midtown headquarters.
He said Wells Rich will begin working on the account immediately, and ads would probably break early next year.
He declined to describe the creative work used in the agency's pitch. 

At Scali, chairman and chief executive officer Marvin Sloves said, "We'll go on, and there are other rental car companies.
We're ready and we're waiting." He added, "I'm tough enough and mean enough to want to get even, but I'm also gracious enough to know that you win some and lose some." Scali had had an otherwise good year until now, winning the Trump Shuttle, among other accounts. 

Hertz, the nation's largest car-rental company, in recent years has been squeezed by smaller competitors such as Alamo and Thrifty that have aggressively wooed vacationers.
Charles Finnie, an analyst with Alex.
Brown & Sons, Baltimore, notes that over the past five years, for example, Alamo has grown at more than a 25% a year pace by courting leisure travelers. "That's a business that Hertz doesn't want to give up without a fight," he says.
During the same period, Hertz grew 5% to 10% a year, though from a much larger base. 

Vacation rentals have been booming since the deregulation of the airline industry in 1978, when airfare prices plummetted and more people began flying to vacation spots.
At the same time, Mr. Finnie notes, two-income families "have changed the way they vacation.
Instead of piling into the car and going away for two weeks, they take short vacations" -- and in vacationing more frequently, they rent cars more often. 

Hertz has run ads geared to leisure travelers before, primarily by dressing Messrs.
Simpson and Palmer in tacky tourist clothes and having them croon "California, Here We Come" and "Moon Over Miami" while at the wheel of a rented car.
But those ads apparently didn't have the intended result.
Whether the car rental giant now can shake its image as an expensive firm more suitable for expense-account travel than for vacationing remains to be seen. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

ACQUISITION: New York-based Lowe Tucker Metcalf, a unit of Lowe International, acquired Homer & Durham, a small New York agency.
The combined agency, which will be called Lowe Tucker Metcalf, will have billings of $55 million.
Terms weren't disclosed. 

UNITED AIRLINES: In a new TV spot, the airline unit of UAL Corp. pitches the power of business travel to companies that have cut travel expenses.
Leo Burnett Co., Chicago, developed the ad, which shows a chief executive-type telling his troops that a major client is taking its business elsewhere, possibly because one-on-one business communication had been replaced by fax transmissions and phone calls. 

NEW ACCOUNT: Hewlett-Packard Group, Andover, Mass., awarded its $3 million medical products group account to Leonard Monahan Lubars & Partners, Providence, R.I.
The account had been handled by Giardini/Russell, Watertown, Mass. . . . Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, San Francisco, picked up two accounts, Fisher MountainBikes, San Rafael, Calif., and the Hyatt Hotels in San Francisco. 

