.START 

Borden Inc. unveiled an extensive restructuring program designed to shrink its dairy business and streamline its food and consumer products operations. 

The plan calls for Borden to establish a $404 million after-tax reserve for restructuring costs, which will result in a loss of $300 million to $305 million for the third quarter and $47 million to $58 million for the year. 

Last year, the New York-based company earned $311.9 million, or $4.22 a share, on revenue of $7.2 billion. 

Romeo J. Ventres, Borden's chairman, wouldn't forecast the effect of the restructuring on Borden's 1990 earnings.
But he insisted the company is standing by its target of 15% average annual earnings increases. 

"Efficiencies from the reconfiguration will strengthen the company's competitive position and make a major contribution to margins in the '90s," he said.
Mr. Ventres estimated that cost savings from the reorganization will increase pretax earnings by more than $340 million over the next five years. 

Under the plan, Borden intends to sell or close 65 of its 265 plants world-wide within three years.
Of those plants, 45 produce food or consumer goods and 20 are dairy facilities.
Borden also will reduce its work force by 7,000, or 15% of its 46,000 employees. 

The move reflects Borden's difficulties in the dairy industry.
In addition, Borden has been on an acquisition binge in recent years and is now seeking to consolidate its far-flung holdings.
Since 1986, the once-sleepy dairy company has made 77 acquisitions that have added $3.1 billion in annual sales.
Borden's brands now include Wise potato chips, Creamette pasta and Elmer's glue.
Of the reserve for restructuring costs, 60% is earmarked for Borden's nondairy businesses. 

Wall Street analysts reacted favorably to the plan, saying Borden was moving decisively to sustain the momentum in its earnings. "This is a kind of a 'mea culpa' by Mr. Ventres," said William F. Maguire, an analyst at Merrill Lynch. "He is saying, 'Hey we made some mistakes and now we're fixing them. '" 

Nomi Ghez, an analyst with Goldman Sachs & Co., said Borden's earnings would have risen about 13% this year, less than the company's 15% goal.
She says that after the restructuring, Borden's "earnings will be accelerated meaningfully." 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Borden's stock closed at $36.75, up $2.25. 

At a time when the dairy industry is beset by record increases in raw milk costs and by intense competition, Borden is scaling back.
The company, the nation's leading milk producer, will stop selling milk, cottage cheese and yogurt in selected markets.
Although the company wouldn't name the markets it is quitting, its business has been hardest hit in the Midwest and along the East coast. 

Borden's dairy business now accounts for about one-third of company revenues.
After the restructuring, the business will account for about 20%.
But Mr. Ventres sought to dispel rumors that Borden is seeking to leave the dairy business altogether.
In an allusion to Borden's bovine mascot, Mr. Ventres said: "We're very committed to remaining in the dairy business -- Elsie is just going on a little diet." 

Borden says the cost savings from the reorganization will allow the company to boost its budget for advertising and promotion by $75 million to $100 million over the next two years.
This year, Borden expects its marketing costs to reach $507 million.
Despite the consolidation, Mr. Ventres said no brands will be discontinued. 

