.START 

Merchant bankers don't often target ethnic groups' financial wherewithal, but Henry R. Silverman has gotten rich doing just that. 

Mr. Silverman's Days Inns of America Inc. has prospered by attracting Asian-American franchisees, particularly of Indian and Pakistani descent.
And in the face of skepticism from potential advertisers, he has created a rapidly expanding TV network -- Telemundo Group Inc. -- for the Spanish-speaking community. 

The 48-year-old investor portrays himself as an opportunist scrambling for a quick profit buying and selling companies.
And he has found that identifying underappreciated minority groups is a speedy way to do that. "I look for niches, and usually the niches you find are the ones that people don't want or are ignoring," he says. 

Reliance Capital Group Limited Partnership, which Mr. Silverman leads, will soon close the sale of Days Inns to its biggest franchisee, Tollman-Hundley Hotels, for $190 million plus the assumption of $575 million of debt.
The sale will earn $50 million for the investment firm, which took control of Days Inns in 1984 and owns 65% of Telemundo, its only holdings. 

The profit will pay capital-gains taxes for the partners and provide added investment in Telemundo.
Mr. Silverman also says he is likely to use part of the proceeds to make another acquisition, but he says he has "nothing currently on the plate." 

Many Asian-American hotel owners are choosing to link up with Days Inns, says Bill Gillette, the managing editor of the trade publication Hotel & Motel Management.
About 30% of all U.S. hotels are owned by Asian-Americans, who are drawn to the business because it means control of real estate and employment for an entire family.
Yet industry executives say that big hoteliers have considered Asians "franchisees of last resort." 

Mr. Silverman has learned the hard way that marketing to Hispanics, even on a TV network designed specifically for them, isn't a priority of some major companies.
Mr. Silverman told the chief executive of a big New York retailer that targeting Spanish speakers could increase cash flow. "You're right," the executive said, "but I don't want your people in my store." 

Mr. Silverman is undaunted by such attitudes.
He has been doing deals almost since he graduated from the University of Pennsylvania Law School in 1964.
At the small Wall Street investment firm of Ladenburg, Thalmann & Co., he started a corporate-finance department.
Through his own firm, he put together investment partnerships and tax shelters.
And with Reliance Capital, he spearheaded the acquisitions, stock offerings and junk-bond financings of Telemundo and Days Inns -- which he later took private. 

Mr. Silverman acts like the prototypical deal maker.
When he visits Atlanta, the home of Days Inns, Mr. Silverman stays at the tony Ritz Carlton Hotel, shunning the mid-market Days Inn. (A light sleeper, he claims the company hotel is too near a busy highway.) Smoking oversized Cuban cigars -- sent via Geneva -- has cost him a table in the Ritz's main dining hall so often that he automatically takes a private dining room.
Says Michael A. Leven, president and chief operating officer of Days Inns: "Enormous cigars make him feel like a mogul or something." 

Mr. Silverman is a participative manager, aides say.
Days Inns franchisees say he returns calls promptly and is a fair and quick decision maker.
Yet personally, "he keeps his distance; he rarely asks you how your kids are," says Mr. Leven. "He thinks he needs that kind of image." 

Reliance Capital is an affiliate of Reliance Group Holdings Inc., the insurance and investment firm controlled by Saul P. Steinberg, the New York investor.
Reliance Group holds 12% of Reliance Capital, which was established in 1983.
Mr. Silverman is president, chief executive and a holder of less than 5% of Reliance Capital, which also includes about 50 other investors.
He is chairman and chief executive of Days Inns. 

In 1988, Mr. Silverman garnered $1,063,000 as Reliance Group's senior vice president of business development, according to proxy material.
He also reaped $2 million from options last year, when Reliance Capital bought the shares of Days Inns it didn't already own. 

Sensing a potential windfall of franchisee fees, Mr. Silverman induced many independent Asian-American hotel owners to build new hotels and convert existing properties to the chain.
He touted the benefits of national marketing and doled out 20-year financing packages. 

Now Asian-Americans hold 27% of Days Inns franchises and franchise agreements, compared with 15% in 1987.
Other minority groups aren't well represented, though, and most Asian-owned properties are concentrated in the Southeast, Mr. Silverman notes. 

"Words cannot express what they have done for the Indian community," says Sonny Anand, an India-born franchisee in Chattanooga, Tenn., who owns seven Days Inns and has agreed to build 10 more. "But the Indian community has done a lot for them." 

At Telemundo, where he is president and chief executive, Mr. Silverman concentrates on budgeting, leaving broadcast decisions to Hispanics in the company.
The National Hispanic Media Coalition has charged that Hispanics aren't given enough senior-level responsibilities.
After meeting with the Los Angeles group, Mr. Silverman announced that a third Hispanic director will join Telemundo's 11-member board. 

Telemundo was formed around a TV station Mr. Silverman owned in Los Angeles and two independent Spanish-language stations acquired in Reliance Capital's 1986 takeover of John Blair & Co. Mr. Silverman is counting on marketers rethinking their strategy and regularly advertising on the all-Spanish network.
Their reluctance to advertise so far has kept ad rates very low. 

Telemundo isn't expected to earn a quarterly profit for "another year or two," says Mr. Silverman.
Its major competitor, Univision Holdings Inc., has eight stations to Telemundo's seven and will also remain unprofitable for a few years, says Univision President J. William Grimes.
Each of the networks will add another station this year.
Both Telemundo and Univision, which is 80% held by Hallmark Cards Inc. and 20% held by a venture capital arm of First Chicago Corp., report "positive cash flow," which they say better represents their strength. 

"Fortunately, the Hispanic market is concentrated," Mr. Silverman says, adding that Telemundo reaches about 75% of Hispanic households, compared with Univision's 85%.
About two-thirds of the nation's approximately 20 million Hispanics live in New York, Chicago, California, South Florida and Texas, Telemundo says.
Next year, in a project the two networks will fund, Dun & Bradstreet Corp's A.C. Nielsen Co. will begin providing ratings specifically for Spanish-language TV. 

No one was surprised that Mr. Silverman cashed out of Days Inns. "It was always on the block with Reliance," says Mr. Gillette of Hotel & Motel Management.
Nor will Mr. Silverman say how long Reliance will hold on to Telemundo, but he hints: "You can't fall in love with your {operations} when you are in the used-car business." 

