.START 

Viacom International Inc. announced a major financial restructuring that gets the company out of the high-yield "junk" bond market and gives it considerable flexibility to make acquisitions and pursue other expansion plans. 

Viacom's chief executive officer, Frank Biondi, said the company is considering a number of "small-to-medium-sized acquisitions," such as television stations, and has had talks with a number of other entertainment concerns regarding possible combinations or joint ventures.
The company also continues to pursue a sale of an interest in its Showtime Networks Inc. unit to other companies in the cable-TV industry, Mr. Biondi said. 

Viacom, a broadcasting, cable-TV, and entertainment concern, was acquired two years ago in a $2.3 billion leveraged buyout by National Amusements Inc., a Dedham, Mass., theater chain controlled by Sumner Redstone.
National Amusements wound up with control of 83% of Viacom, and has since sold a number of Viacom assets to raise cash and to pay off debt. 

Mr. Biondi declined to discuss recent reports that the company has had talks with companies such as Paramount Communications Inc. and MCA Inc. about a possible merger or other combination. "What both Sumner and I have said is that we will consider any deal that makes sense for the company," Mr. Biondi said.
But he stressed that Viacom won't be sold outright because Mr. Redstone "wants to be involved in management and be a significant owner" of any concern. 

Mr. Redstone, meanwhile, said Viacom has considerable borrowing capacity available if it wants to make a big purchase, which it will pursue "if it makes rational sense." But he agreed with Mr. Biondi that "we wouldn't do it unless we control the company." 

As part of the restructuring, Viacom said it is replacing its remaining $1 billion of high-yield bank debt with a $1.5 billion unsecured bank agreement.
Mr. Biondi said the new credit line will give the company $400 million to $500 million in additional borrowing capacity, part of which will be used to redeem $200 million principal amount of its 15.5% junior subordinated debentures due 2006.
Viacom has a total of about $480 million of these securities outstanding. 

"We can now retire the preferred without selling more assets," Mr. Biondi said yesterday. "Under the old agreement, we would have to hock assets to retire the preferred or other outstanding debt." Since the 1987 buy-out, Viacom has raised cash from the sale of assets such as its Orion Pictures Corp. stock for $44 million and two cable systems for $545 million. 

While a number of such highly leveraged companies have had extreme difficulty recently, Viacom appears to have emerged from the high-yield market as a healthy ongoing concern.
Mr. Biondi and Mr. Redstone, who is chairman of both National Amusements and Viacom, said in a statement that the financial restructuring announced yesterday removes "the last vestiges of our LBO structure" and frees the company of a number of restraints contained in the prior credit program. 

Viacom said its new 10-year bank agreement, provided by a group led by Citicorp's Citibank N.A. unit and Bank of New York will allow it to lower interest costs significantly and to launch a $500 million commercial paper program, which was approved by the Viacom board yesterday.
Under the new bank agreement, Viacom can make as much as $300 million in asset sales without bank approval, and invest as much as $300 million in ventures or existing operations without approval. 

Viacom may have some tough going ahead, however.
The company is launching a new cable comedy channel at the same time as one being launched by archrival Home Box Office, a unit of Time Warner Inc.
The competition is likely to be fierce among the two, which are also embroiled in a major legal battle in federal court here.
In May, Viacom filed a $2.5 billion antitrust suit against Time and HBO, charging unfair competition in the pay television market. 

