.START 

Du Pont Co., seeking to speed to market some of its more promising drug candidates, entered a research and marketing pact with Merck & Co. 

Du Pont and Merck will collaborate in developing a class of compounds for treating high blood pressure and heart disease, called angiotensin II receptor antagonists.
The two companies also will market the compounds together, if regulators grant marketing approval.
In addition, Du Pont gains marketing rights to two of Merck's established prescription drugs. 

For Du Pont, the agreement represents an attempt to accelerate the payoff from its ambitious but expensive push into pharmaceuticals.
Merck, based in Rahway, N.J., is the world's largest prescription drug company, with a veteran sales force and a strong record in taking drugs through clinical trials.
Du Pont, based in Wilmington, Del., is a major chemicals and energy company. 

Joseph A. Mollica, Du Pont's vice president for pharmaceuticals, noted that Merck's involvement also "represents a recognition of the strength of our research effort." Although several companies including Merck have research interests in angiotensin II receptor antagonists, a spokesman for Merck said it considers Du Pont to be leading the pack. 

A Du Pont compound has just passed human safety trials and is in early efficacy trials.
Du Pont, which hopes to get marketing clearance by the mid-1990s, estimates that the alliance with Merck could cut development time for the compounds by two years.
The compounds block the action of a hormone, angiotensin II, which has a role in many cases of high blood pressure. 

Merck will lead the effort to take the compounds through clinical trials and regulatory reviews.
In exchange, the company gets to share with Du Pont world-wide marketing responsibilities and sales revenue. 

The other marketing accords comprise two Merck products with relatively small sales: Sinemet, for Parkinson's disease, and Vaseretic, for high blood pressure.
That arrangement will enable Merck, whose research pipeline has been paying big dividends in recent years, to free up more of its sales force to concentrate on other Merck products.
For Du Pont's part, it gets more drugs to sell while its own products are in earlier stages of development. 

Du Pont will have exclusive marketing rights to Sinemet in North America starting in 1990.
In 1988, North American sales of the drug were about $100 million. 

Du Pont will obtain exclusive North American marketing rights to Vaseretic starting in 1992 and will jointly promote the drug with Merck in certain European countries starting in 1990.
In Europe the drug is marketed under the name Co-Renitec.
An industry source estimated 1988 sales of the drug in Europe and North America at $45 million. 

Michael Waldholz in New York contributed to this article. 

