.START 

President Bush and the nation's governors agreed to draft educational performance goals designed to produce substantial improvement in America's schools by the year 2000. 

Following the two-day education summit, the president and the governors issued a joint statement committing themselves to set specific goals to improve the readiness of children to start school, boost performance on international achievement tests -- particularly in math and science, lower the school dropout rate, boost adult literacy, improve training for more technologically advanced jobs, increase the supply of qualified teachers and establish safe, drug-free schools. 

The administration and the governors hope to set these goals by February.
The governors and many educators believe that challenging performance goals -- something the nation has never had before -- could lead to better results. "When standards and expectations are high, everyone does better," Mr. Bush said yesterday at the University of Virginia, where the summit was held. 

In addition, the administration agreed that Washington will give schools more flexibility in the use of federal education funds, and the governors said they will work to restructure schools through such steps as giving parents more choice of public schools for their children, boosting incentives to improve schools and teachers and making schools more accountable for the results. 

The administration also agreed to improve federal measurement of how well states and schools are meeting the goals. "Once we establish national goals and a strategy to meet them, every year . . . the American people should get a report, not only on all the school children, but on every school in America, every state and the national government, to see how all of us measure up to what we promised to do and what the country needs," explained Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas. 

Summit leaders expressed satisfaction with the agreement on education goals, which was hammered out after dinner Wednesday night by Gov. Clinton, a Democrat, and presidential assistant Roger Porter.
Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers, noted that both the statement and the president's speech stressed the need for improving the results of the nation's schools by setting firm goals, giving schools more flexibility to meet the standards and holding politicians and school officials accountable for meeting the standards.
He said Mr. Bush's speech "defined a vision of education.
I'd give him an A." 

The agreement didn't reflect some criticism of the level of federal education spending.
Although education is primarily a state and local responsibility, governors of both parties complained that the federal government, which spends about 2% of its budget on education, isn't doing enough.
Several governors made it clear that they expect money to follow tougher standards. "If we get an honest commitment to national performance goals, the money will follow," Gov. Clinton explained. 

The governors came to the summit with requests for three things: better preschool preparation for disadvantaged children, more flexibility to spend federal funds and improved federal measurement of educational performance across the country.
The joint agreement recognizes that preschool preparation is primarily a federal responsibility but -- noting current budget constraints -- doesn't commit Washington to spend more.
However, the joint statement urges "that priority for any further funding increases be given to prepare young children to succeed in school." 

Both the governors and the president stressed the need for more accountability.
In his speech, Mr. Bush said, "To get results, we will need a new spirit of competition between students, between teachers and between schools -- a report card for all." 

