.START 

A Salomon Inc. unit's issue of warrants for the stock of Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp. marks the first time a third party has sold warrants for a Hong Kong company's shares, and might lead to further such offerings, analysts said. 

The warrant offering in London by Salomon Brothers International Ltd. is an attempt by the investment house to capitalize on interest in the Hong Kong stock market.
The warrants' popularity could be aided by persistent rumors that Hongkong Bank may merge with Midland Bank PLC of Britain, although Salomon said that wasn't a reason for the issue. 

Ian Hannam, who arranged the issue for Salomon in London, said Hongkong Bank was selected because it is a blue-chip company and its performance closely matches that of the Hong Kong market as a whole. 

A warrant gives the buyer the right, but not the obligation, to buy stock at a fixed price.
Each Salomon warrant gives the holder the right to buy one Hongkong Bank share for 6.40 Hong Kong dollars (82 U.S. cents) within two years.
The bank's stock closed yesterday in Hong Kong at HK$6.30. 

Salomon issued 43 million warrants this week at HK$1.32 apiece, making them profitable if the stock's price rises above HK$7.72.
Stock-market analysts said the warrants will be popular with investors who want to limit the money they invest initially and still take advantage of price gains on the volatile Hong Kong market. 

Salomon said the warrants were sold mainly to European investors.
The investment bank has targeted Europe as its main market initially because of the success of similar instruments in London in the past two years and because of difficulties and delays in issuing a new instrument in Hong Kong. 

Government officials in Hong Kong were unavailable for comment on whether they would allow a third-party issue to be listed in the colony.
Hong Kong companies have issued warrants on their own shares, and these warrants trade locally. 

Mr. Hannam said Salomon is "committed to making a secondary market" in the warrants.
Analysts said liquidity in the secondary market will be essential in convincing third parties to take the risk of issuing warrants. 

A successful issue might be followed by offerings of warrants on a handful of Hong Kong's biggest and most international companies and might open up a new area of business for Hong Kong's merchant banks, analysts said.
They noted, however, that the number would be limited because the shares of only a few companies are liquid enough to sustain a secondary market in warrants. 

"We believe there's a lot of interest in the Hong Kong market.
We would like to issue more," said Mr. Hannam. 

The warrants issued this week are covered in that Salomon has access to enough Hongkong Bank shares to back them; the investment house has bought Hongkong Bank stock or options to buy the shares from other institutions, a spokesman said.
Some analysts were surprised by the issue because of the risk Salomon may take in obtaining access to 43 million shares of the bank's stock. 

Mr. Hannam wouldn't say how many Hongkong Bank shares Salomon had bought outright. "There are many ways of hedging this," he said. 

For investors, Hongkong Bank is attractive because there have been rumors that the bank is preparing to move its headquarters out of the colony by arranging a merger with Britain's Midland Bank before 1997, when Hong Kong will return to Chinese control.
Hongkong Bank is the largest shareholder in Midland, with a 14.9% stake, and after a standstill agreement expires in December 1990, it can alter its stake. 

Hongkong Bank officials have said they are committed to staying in the territory, but in recent statements they haven't ruled out the possibility of a merger in the future if it makes commercial sense for the two banks. 

"The big attraction" of the warrants "is if all the talk about a Midland merger comes true," said Eric Sandlund, a stock analyst at Tyndall International Ltd., a Hong Kong brokerage company.
A rise in Hongkong Bank's share price in recent weeks has been fueled by those rumors. 

