.START 

Right-wing media magnate Robert Hersant won a court battle in the politically charged fight for control of France's third-largest television station, La Cinq. 

A Paris civil court decided to freeze the 16.8% stake held in La Cinq by insurance group Mutuelles Agricoles.
Mr. Hersant had feared the group was preparing to sell out to his adversaries, who want to oust him as La Cinq chairman. 

Two other leading shareholders in the station, pro-Socialist businessman Jerome Seydoux and Italian businessman Silvio Berlusconi, want to replace Mr. Hersant with an as-yet unidentified person of their choosing. 

Mr. Hersant's media group, which also controls the newspapers Le Figaro and France Soir, owns 25% of La Cinq, the maximum allowed by law.
An ally holds another 10.8%.
Mr. Berlusconi controls 25%, and Mr. Seydoux controls 6.9%.
The two sides are battling for control of the remaining shares.
La Cinq is among the five television stations in France that are accessible to all viewers. 

While the two sides officially are simply arguing over the station's mounting financial losses, the battle has a political background.
Mr. Hersant won control of La Cinq under a former center-right government, which lost power in France last year.
Messrs.
Seydoux and Berlusconi had controlled the station under the previous Socialist government, and with the Socialists back in power, the two men are seeking to regain control. 

While the two sides await a ruling from the court, the board seat controlled by Mutuelles Agricoles is in the hands of a neutral party.
A lawyer for Mr. Hersant said the effect of the litigation, including appeals, will be to leave the La Cinq chairman in place until year end.
That would give Mr. Hersant time to try to improve the station's finances and possibly seek a compromise. 

The judge has scheduled a hearing in about a month on the substance of the dispute over the Mutuelles Agricoles shares.
Mr. Hersant says a sale would violate an agreement that shareholders offer their shares among one another on a prorated basis.
The insurance group denies that it is preparing to violate the agreement. 

