.START 

Section 89, the loopy provision of the tax code that would have buried American business under an avalanche of paper work, is headed for the legislative graveyard.
Inasmuch as it was a microcosm of what is wrong with the legislative process, we hope Members of Congress take home some lessons from Wednesday's 390 to 36 House vote repealing Section 89. 

Section 89 became part of the 1986 Tax Reform Act after two Treasury Department staffers, Kent Mason and Harry Conaway, decided companies should be forced to prove that their employee fringe benefits weren't skewed in favor of higher-salaried workers.
They drafted the legislation and somehow persuaded House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski to fold it into the tax-reform bill without a single hearing or official sponsor.
Last week, we incorrectly identified Messrs.
Mason and Conaway as having worked for the Ways and Means Committee.
Mr. Mason did not join the Joint Committee on Taxation, co-chaired by Mr. Rostenkowski, until shortly after Section 89 passed. 

Small business, of course, quickly saw the nightmare this stealth legislation represented.
Congressional analysts estimated that Section 89 would pile on the nation's employers some 22,000 worker-years of paper work -- all to satisfy a notion of social engineering that hadn't been vetted by elected Congressmen. 

Relentless pressure from business groups persuaded 315 Members to call for repeal of Section 89.
Mr. Conaway, who joined Mercer Meidinger Hansen Inc. to advise clients on compliance with Section 89, told Nation's Business this year that no one had "fully assessed the real administrative difficulties that would be imposed on business." 

Through it all, Chairman Rostenkowski refused to disown his unintended handiwork.
He agreed to consider some changes in Section 89, but blocked any attempt at repeal from reaching the House floor.
In a speech in March, he told business groups they could be hurt on other issues before his committee if they pressed for repeal. "You do so at your peril," he warned. 

It is a credit to small business that it chose to stand up to this kind of intimidation.
Opponents flooded Congress with complaints from business owners, and forced procedural votes to make certain pro-repeal Members put their votes where their rhetoric was.
This week, the Democratic leadership finally told Chairman Rostenkowski the political heat was costing them too much and that they had to agree to a floor vote. 

Section 89 may soon be history, but it is the Members who at their peril will forget the frightening ease with which this idea actually became law.
Hatched by two unelected technocrats in the Reagan Treasury Deparment, it sailed through Congress without any real debate and with most Members completely unaware of its existence.
Not one Member remotely comprehended its effects on the economy.
A legislative process that can so frivolously pass such a monstrosity is in danger of public ridicule. 

H.L. Richardson, a veteran Member of the California Legislature, titled his memoirs "So You Think We Read the Bills?" It seems possible the legislative process has become so degraded that the law of the land is turning into an insiders' joke.
The Section 89 story suggests that whatever else Members of Congress think they're in Washington to do, they ought to start taking some personal responsibility for their work. 

