.START 

Auto makers, after 12 years of fighting off attempts to require on-board cannisters to catch refueling vapors, find the threat renewed as Congress reshapes President Bush's clean-air bill. 

A House panel voted to add a requirement to the bill ordering manufacturers to equip new cars with devices to catch 95% of gasoline fumes that now escape during refueling.
The requirement would start with 1993 models. 

In addition, gasoline stations in the most-polluted cities would have to install equipment at the pump to catch the fumes, which contribute to smog and are health risks. 

Both the auto and oil industries claim the systems are too expensive.
In addition, the auto industry claims that the cannisters could pose a fire risk.
Rep. John Dingell, (D., Mich.), a powerful auto-industry ally, said he fears the cannisters would turn cars into "motorized bombs." 

Until now, one of the battles over capturing gasoline fumes has been over choosing who should bear the expense of installing new equipment -- car makers or service stations.
In his clean-air proposal, Mr. Bush chose gasoline stations; he would have required stations in 69 polluted cities to install special hoses and tanks at a cost of $2,000 a pump.
The pump devices are now in use in California, New York and Washington, D.C. 

The action by the House Energy and Commerce subcommittee on health and environment would require the same changes at the pump, though in only about half as many cities.
In addition, it would require car makers to install equipment to capture fumes, most likely cannisters about the size of five-pound coffee cans that would condense the fumes and return the gas to the gas tank. 

Under the committee's provision, the new-styled pumps could be phased out once cars with special cannisters are in widespread use. 

Both the Bush administration and business lobbyists said it's a mistake to require changes by both industries. 

The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that the cannisters would cost $14 a car.
But auto makers say the costs would range from $40 to $120 a car and would require major modifications to body parts to accommodate the equipment. 

There is sharp disagreement over whether the cannisters would be safe.
Mr. Dingell said auto-insurance companies are worried about an increased risk of fire in the event of a crash.
He cited a study by Arthur Little that found the devices, which are still under development, pose a "potential safety risk." 

However, the EPA doesn't think there are safety problems and has tried for years to require the cannisters. "This is one of the biggest bugaboos we've heard in a long time," said subcommittee chairman Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.), author of the cannister amendment. 

General Motors Corp. said: "The public shouldn't be in a position of potentially sacrificing safety for a minimal reduction in emissions that can be obtained by safer and less expensive means." 

The fumes retrieved by both the new pumps and special cannisters would be less than 5% of the hydrocarbons that cause smog in cities.
However, the toxic chemicals in gasoline fumes are thought to cause 25 to 75 cancer cases a year. 

While auto companies dislike the cannister provision, they're more concerned about attempts to force cars nationwide to meet tougher tailpipe-emissions standards adopted for smog-ridden California.
Mr. Waxman, who lost an initial vote for the tighter standards, is trying to win over Republicans to a compromise that would be tougher than the president's bill on tailpipe emissions. 

