.START 

NCNB Corp. projected strong earnings in 1989 and 1990 because of continued growth in its banking operations in the Southeast and Texas. 

The forecast came amid calls by banking executives in the Southeast to eliminate legal barriers to nationwide interstate banking in the wake of the $4.7 billion merger accord between Citizens & Southern Corp. and Sovran Financial Corp. 

NCNB's chairman and chief executive, Hugh L. McColl, said he is comfortable with widely shared estimates on Wall Street of $4.25 a share in net income in 1989 and $6 a share in 

News of the projections helped nudge NCNB's stock price to $52.50, up 87.5 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday. 

"The rules of banking are changing, and we plan to be in a position to compete," Mr. McColl told investors in Charlotte. "That's why I'm comfortable with Wall Street estimates.
In fact, if there are to be any changes {in the estimates}, it will likely be on the up side." 

In 1988, NCNB had net income of $252.5 million, or $2.90 a share. 

Mr. McColl attributed the strong outlook to continued growth in NCNB's Southeastern banking operations and the contribution from the recent acquisition of the remaining 51% of NCNB Texas National Bank from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.
The Texas operation, he said, is expected to earn about $250 million this year. 

In response to a question, Mr. McColl said he agreed with earlier statements by Bennett A. Brown, chairman and chief executive of Atlanta-based Citizens & Southern, that the barriers erected by the Southeast Regional Banking Compact should be removed.
That compact, established in 1985, protects banks in 11 Southeast states from acquisition by banks in other regions.
Now, some Southeast bankers say restrictions in the compact handcuff them from acquiring banks elsewhere in the U.S. and strengthening their own hands. 

"It's just not logical for us to imprison ourselves," Mr. McColl said. 

John G. Medlin, chairman and chief executive of First Wachovia Corp. in Winston-Salem, N.C., said he wouldn't object to eliminating the compact, as long as it was a "unanimous" decision.
But he added: "Current differences of opinions among the {compact's} banks and various states mean it will be slow in coming about." 

