.START 

The drug RU-486, which is vigorously opposed by right-to-life groups as an "abortion pill," has been found by University of Southern California researchers to be effective in treating certain types of brain and spinal tumors. 

The preliminary findings, presented yesterday by the Los Angeles-based researchers at a meeting of the American Academy of Neurological Surgeons, show that the controversial drug may have medical applications in treating a benign tumor that accounts for about 18% of all brain tumors. 

RU-486 is currently used in France, and has been used in China.
But in the U.S., any possible interest in marketing the drug has been dashed by right-to-life groups that have made it clear they would lead a boycott of any company that tried to market the drug.
RU-486 can be used as an abortifacient in the early stages of pregnancy; about 250 women a day take it in France, where it accounts for one out of every four legal abortions. 

Clinical tests, however, are now looking at other medical applications, including treatment of breast cancer, pituitary-gland disorders and endometriosis, a disorder of the uterus that is the third-leading cause of female infertility in the U.S. 

"I hope the controversy around RU-486 doesn't prevent the use of this drug for other purposes," said Steven Grunberg, a USC associate professor of medicine and oncologist who led the brain and tumor study. 

Earlier this week, Etienne-Emile Baulieu, the French creator of the abortion pill, won the prestigious 1989 Albert Lasker Medical Research Award for his research on the role of steroid hormones in brain and sexual functions. 

The two-year USC study showed shrinkage of meningioma, a tumor of the brain and spinal cord, in four of 14 patients.
Some of these tumors occur in the base of the brain and are not accessible by surgery, so RU-486 could be used as an alternative to radiation treatment, the study found.
Such tumors, which occur more often in women than men, can cause blindness, headaches, muscle weakness, paralysis, confusion and seizures. 

"Obviously, as time goes on, other uses for this drug will be found," said Jeannie Rosoff, president of the Alan Guttmacher Institute, a research group that focuses on fertility and family-planning issues. 

Richard Glasow, education director of the National Right to Life Committee, a leading anti-abortion group, said that studies on other medical uses for RU-486 in Europe and in the U.S. have been largely inconclusive.
The drug "is now being marketed to kill unborn babies," he said.
But he added that his group would not oppose controlled marketing of the drug for purposes other than abortion, provided that larger, conclusive studies had been conducted. 

