.START 

The early bird gets the worm.
But it may also get a lot of heat from the rest of the flock. 

Witness the current brawl over a new life-insurance investment pioneered by Jackson National Life Insurance Co. of Lansing, Mich. 

Jackson National, a unit of Britain's Prudential Corp. PLC, uncovered an apparent loophole in a 1988 tax law that stripped some of the investment appeal from so-called single-premium whole life insurance.
Eager to capitalize on its discovery, Jackson National developed a policy with the high-tech-sounding name SPWL II and introduced it to the public a few months ago with high hopes for big sales. 

But Jackson National didn't figure on the negative reaction within the insurance industry, where it has been lambasted for "irresponsible action," betrayal and imprudence. 

A large association of insurance agents not only criticized the loophole policy to Congress, it helped shape legislation that has brought sales of Jackson National's new product to a halt.
The measure is attached to the tax bill being debated by the House, and is considered likely to become law if Congress adopts a tax package in the coming weeks. 

"I don't remember when I have seen such a vehement attack on one company by people in the industry," marvels Joseph M. Belth, an insurance professor at Indiana University. 

What possible reason could the trade group, the National Association of Life Underwriters, have for running to Congress about Jackson National's policy? 

The greater good of the whole industry, say officials of the Washington-based association. 

As they see it, the new policy violates the spirit of the 1988 tax act.
And, they say, an angry Congress could turn around and attack the key tax benefit of life insurance -- the tax-free growth of the savings component, or "cash value," within whole life policies. 

"Anything we do in this industry which has the slightest chance of bringing about an invasion of that tax-free inside buildup is irresponsible," says agent Thomas J. Wolff, a past president and active member of the NALU. Mr. Wolff has publicly accused Jackson National of performing "a distinct disservice" to the industry. 

Jackson National adamantly denies that its new product violates the spirit of the 1988 act.
On the contrary, says William A. Gray, a vice president, the policy precisely meets the act's requirements. 

He also sees some less-than-altruistic factors behind the trade group's complaints.
The association's elected officials are agents for East Coast mutual insurers, Mr. Gray says.
Some of those companies, he asserts, have higher operating costs and are less able to make a profit on newer investment-oriented policies than are some competitors -- Jackson National, for instance. 

Mr. Gray contends that's one reason the trade group didn't oppose restrictions on single premium life last year. "To protect these things aren't necessarily in their best interest," he says. 

He adds that the group may be smarting because Jackson National criticized its lobbying position last year. 

Rubbish, says NALU executive vice president Jack E. Bobo.
The suggestion that the trade group has a prejudice against Jackson National is "100% paranoia on their part," he says.
In fact, he adds, it could be Jackson National that holds a grudge against the NALU for prevailing in last year's congressional battle. 

The single-premium life insurance policies at the heart of the current squabble are simply standard cash-value life policies purchased with one lump-sum premium.
In recent years, stockbrokers and life-insurance agents have sold billions of dollars of this coverage as an investment-insurance combination. 

Some lawmakers have felt the protection element was getting short shrift from buyers and sellers.
So, in the 1988 tax act, they knocked out a significant investment appeal of the lump-sum insurance purchases: the ability to borrow money through policy loans without incurring tax. 

Jackson National says it was able to resurrect that loan feature on its SPWL II through a complex product design that includes insuring two people -- such as a husband and wife -- on the same policy, and reducing the death benefit after the first seven years. 

That product design, however, would be invalidated by a provision in the House Ways and Means tax bill.
The provision was introduced by Rep. Barbara Kennelly, a Connecticut Democrat who played a major role in drafting last year's restrictions.
The new rule would be effective for policies purchased beginning Sept. 14. 

Compared with the furor over the Jackson National product, sales of the policy have been minimal.
The company says it has issued 163 policies with premiums totaling $3 million. 

Jackson National's Mr. Gray says the agents' trade group is responsible for the latest legislation. "NALU went to Congresswoman Kennelly and said, 'We think this is not what you wanted {the 1988 act} to do, '" he says. 

But Mr. Bobo isn't willing to take that much responsibility for the measure -- although the association strongly supports it.
NALU didn't go "screaming up to Capitol Hill" with an advertisement for the Jackson National policy in hand, he says. "We are in and out of Congresswoman Kennelly's office on a frequent basis," talking about industry developments. "My sense is even if we did bring it up, the office was already aware of it." 

An administrative aide to Mrs. Kennelly, Michael J. Prucker, first said the impetus for the measure came from Congress, not the industry.
But asked again, he said the Jackson National product was brought to the staff's attention by people he wouldn't identify. 

Whatever the case, the dispute shows that in the high-stakes world of financial services, where firms are waging a pitched battle for investors' dollars and future market share, even turning in a member of the family is sometimes considered acceptable. 

And in the case of the 1988 restrictions, Mr. Prucker encourages it.
If insurers find other ways to get around the restrictions, he says, "we would hope somebody would bring it to our attention again." 

