.START 

Two years ago, after the British Labor Party's third huge defeat at the hands of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, observers were ready to write the socialist opposition party off.
It seemed hopelessly out of touch with a country greatly changed by a decade of Thatcherism.
If Labor didn't broaden its appeal, even party stalwarts warned, it would never again govern Britain. 

Now, Labor is fighting its way back.
The party is expected to take a big step at its annual conference next week, when it finally ditches its support for unilateral nuclear disarmament and embraces -- sort of -- capitalism.
That political turnaround, the centerpiece of the conference that starts Sunday in Brighton, will be the culmination of a two-year policy review. 

Labor already is benefiting from its shift toward the political center.
For the first time in two years, it enters its annual conference with a lead over the governing Conservatives in national opinion polls of between five and 10 percentage points.
The Tories, doggedly pursuing unpopular policies and battered by their poor showing in June's elections for the European Parliament, look more vulnerable. 

"People are beginning to see Labor as an alternative government," says Vernon Bogdanor, a political scientist at Oxford University. "That's a great psychological change." 

Labor's newly confident leaders say they're certain where they are headed. "Toward government," says Tony Blair, one of the party's rising stars. "Mrs.
Thatcher has lost the initiative now." 

Such bravado faces plenty of tests.
Mrs. Thatcher doesn't have to call an election until June 1992.
That gives her nearly three years to backpedal on unpopular policies and to pump up Britain's sagging economy.
And Labor has plenty of time to fall into its habitual partisan squabbles.
But it holds interesting cards.
Party Leader Neil Kinnock has won his six-year battle against Labor's left wing, all but excluding it from decision-making.
Another big liability for Labor, its close ties to the trade unions, also may be easing. 

Most important, Labor occupies popular political ground on issues close to British voters' hearts, such as the National Health Service and the environment.
Previously, Labor's lack of credibility on defense and economic matters swamped its popularity on those domestic issues.
Now, the party is set to drop its electoral millstones. 

"The policy review is absolutely critical in persuading the public that Labor has modernized," Mr. Blair says. "We've now got a set of policies that are radical, but sensible and realistic.
They are more in tune with the times." 

Labor fought the 1987 election on a platform calling for unilateral nuclear disarmament and the closing of U.S. nuclear bases in Britain.
Two years later, the conversion by top party officials is complete.
After announcing the policy review committee's recommendations last May, Mr. Kinnock, long an ardent opponent of nuclear weapons, said he no longer would argue for unilateralism. 

Labor's new defense stance is far from hawkish.
It calls on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to renounce first use of nuclear arms and espouses the goal of ridding the world of nuclear weapons by the year 2000.
It also would end testing of British nuclear devices. 

But simply abandoning unilateralism could be enough to satisfy voters, suggests Oxford University's Mr. Bogdanor. "All they want is a government they feel will defend Britain," he says. 

Over the years the defense issue has epitomized Labor's internal divisions.
That intra-party antagonism has been as big a vote-loser as the policy itself.
Once the breach is healed, defense probably won't be a major issue in the next general election, especially with the U.S. and Soviet Union negotiating arms reductions. 

On the economy, Labor backs away from previous commitments to renationalize industries sold to the private sector, although it says it will buy sufficient shares in the country's main telephone company, now 49%-owned by the government, to raise the state's share to a controlling 51%.
The party's policy review also calls for a maximum income-tax rate of 50% -- above the current 40% but well below the 83% ceiling of the previous Labor government. 

Labor plans to concentrate its fire on health and the environment, issues that top the list of voters' concerns in polls.
They are also issues where voters tend to trust Labor.
The Tories are widely blamed for pollution problems ranging from London's litter-strewn streets to the European Community's plans to prosecute the country for failing to meet European water-purity standards. 

And in a Gallup survey this week, 73% of respondents disapproved of government plans to inject free-market principles into the health service.
Among other things, the Tories suggest hospitals be allowed to run themselves and that family doctors be given control of their own budgets -- responsibilities currently held by centralized health authorities. 

"The government can't win on the environment because their belief in market forces is inconsistent with the tough government regulation and intervention required to protect the environment," Mr. Blair says.
As for the National Health Service, "no one believes Mrs. Thatcher is committed to it." 

