.START 

Plastic Engines May Aid 

Detroit in Weight Battle 

ADVANCES IN composite materials and Detroit's desire to trim car weight are fueling a drive for plastic car engines. 

Ford Motor Co. is testing a 2.3-liter, four-cylinder engine made from moldable fiber-reinforced phenolic composites.
The Polimotor, developed by Rogers Corp. of Rogers, Conn., and Polimotor Research Inc., Franklin Lakes, N.J., produces 170 horsepower and weighs 175 pounds.
By contrast, metal engines weigh as much as 300 pounds. 

Weight reduction translates into higher fuel economy, an increasingly important goal for auto makers, which must pay penalties if the average gas mileage of their cars exceeds federal limits.
Lighter engines allow cars to use lighter brakes, shock absorbers and other parts, creating further weight savings. 

Phenolic resins, developed decades ago, have since been strengthened with glass fiber reinforcement and proven to be durable in a variety of parts under the hoods of cars on the road. 

But Walter A. Hayes Jr., vice president of Rogers's Molding Materials division, says it will probably be 10 years before plastic engines appear in commercially produced cars. 

Car companies remain concerned about whether composite materials over long periods of time can withstand the heat and stresses produced by internal combustion engines, Mr. Hayes says.
The industry's caution partly stems from the failure of some plastic engine parts introduced in the mid-1970s before composites and reinforcing fibers were strengthened. 

Besides saving weight, phenolic composites resist corrosion and damp noise and vibration, Rogers says.
The Polimotor's injection molding production process also costs less than conventional engine manufacturing because several parts are combined into one piece that needs less machining than metal.
In full production, plastic engines should cost about $750, compared with $1,000 for conventional metal engines, Rogers says. 

GE Develops Material 

That Can Take the Heat 

THE RE-ENTRY Systems Department of General Electric Co. developed a laser-resistant graphite material able to withstand temperatures of as much as 3,000 degrees Celsius. 

GE says the material may prove useful in a variety of applications, including the National Aero-Space Plane under development by the Air Force and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Finding lightweight, heat-resistant materials is a key problem in building the hypersonic space plane, which is expected to fly at speeds of Mach 10 -- or 10 times the speed of sound -- and faster. 

The material also could be used to harden equipment to resist nuclear blasts, the company says, as well as to make intercontinental ballistic missiles impervious to laser weapons. 

The company declined to comment on testing of the material or when it is expected to be available for commercial use. 

The material's resistance to lasers comes from its structure of many thin layers of reflecting graphite, GE says.
Each layer of graphite acts like a mirror in reflecting laser energy instead of absorbing its heat. 

A Faster Way to Find 

Flaws in Bridges, Planes 

TEXAS A&M University is testing a fast, nondestructive method to find flaws and measure damage in major structures such as bridges and airplanes. 

The new system, which measures the responses of structures to vibrations, also can assess the integrity of structures that are hard to reach, such as pipelines and offshore drilling platforms, says Norris Stubbs, a civil engineering professor who is leading the experiments. 

Most systems of nondestructive testing, called "local methods," rely on ultrasonics to find structural flaws, but must inspect structures inch by inch, a costly and time-consuming process, Prof.
Stubbs says.
That process would require months to examine a major structure such as the George Washington Bridge, he estimates.
The same task could be done in a few days using Texas A&M's "global method," which examines a structure in larger pieces, he says. 

The method under development relies on analysis of such properties as the unique resonant frequencies of structures.
To examine a large structure, such as a bridge, a "vibration exciter," a suitcase-sized device, is attached to a beam.
As the exciter causes the bridge to vibrate, the structure's movement is measured by a series of accelerometers or laser instruments.
A computer evaluates the fluctuations in frequencies and other properties that indicate changes in the fundamental characteristics of a structure.
These changes "are like the symptoms of a disease that you compare against the initial 'well' frequency of a structure," says Prof.
Stubbs. 

Odds and Ends 

COLOGNE, West Germany, is using 110 tons of plastic trash -- about 50 truckloads of bottles, yogurt containers and other refuse -- to build a noise and pollution barrier along a 1,050-foot stretch of freeway.
The waste is being ground into small pieces, heated and poured into molds to form components for the three-meter-high wall.
The cost: 480,000 marks ($255,216). . . . University of Florida scientists say they have found the optimum nesting habitat for the endangered American crocodile: the cooling canals and berms at FPL Group Inc. 's Turkey Point nuclear plant.
The site, protected from wind, waves and people, accounts for 14% of the state's crocodile hatchings. 

