.START 

The majestic rock you see pictured, rising 1,500 feet from the Trans-Pecos plain, is El Capitan, pride of the Guadalupe Mountains.
Because its limestone face is too "soft" to hold the pitons that mountaineers use to hoist themselves in difficult places, it has been scaled rarely, and only by experts.
I did not climb it. 

I did, however, climb that small-appearing bump at the far right of the frame.
That's Guadalupe Peak and, believe it or not, it's about 700 feet higher than El Capitan.
It's all a matter of perspective. 

Now, you might ask why our illustration features El Capitan while this story is about gentler-sloping Guadalupe Peak.
The answer is that El Capitan makes a better picture.
Gotta sell those newspapers] 

You also might be curious about why a sensible fellow like me would want to climb a mountain of any height or configuration.
That answer is a bit more complicated.
Part one is that scaling Guadalupe Peak requires stamina but no technical skill; it's really just a vertical hike.
Part two is that Ray Sokolov, who proposed the expedition, is the editor of this page.
In other words, he's my boss. 

In August, 1985, Ray and I hiked up 14,421-foot Mount Massive in Colorado, or, more accurately, about 14,300 feet of it.
That was long enough ago for me to forget the blisters and sore muscles, but not long enough to have forgotten the beauty of the place and my pleasure over making it as far as we did, so I assented.
The same thinking process, I suppose, explains why some women have more than one child. 

We picked Guadalupe Peak because at 8,751 feet it's the highest in Texas (]), it's climbable by an average person (me), and its situation in a northern finger of the Chihuahua Desert provided an unusual mix of mountain and desert scenery.
The Texas location also allowed us to inveigle some local talent from Texas Monthly magazine, an estimable publication, to mosey up from Austin, interpret local speech and share expertise in general, as we raced them to the summit. 

Besides, we would fly into El Paso, just across the border from Juarez, and the Mexican food there is wonderful.
That last point was especially persuasive. 

More information came in a chat with Bob Valen, chief of interpretation for Guadalupe Mountains National Park.
He explained that the range, running about 50 miles northward from West Texas into New Mexico, is geologically interesting because it isn't composed of volcanic igneous rock, like the Rockies, but the sedimentary variety, caused by the accumulation of lime deposits. 

The lime came from the shells of zillions of aquatic beasties; millions of years ago, Guadalupe Peak and El Capitan were, first, part of an ocean reef, and, then, cliffs on the shore.
Valens noted that sea could replace desert here again, but surmised that it might be a bit premature to start building a marina. 

More recently, the mountains were home to the Mescalero Apache, who believed their gods dwelled on its summits, and the peaks were skirted by the Butterfield stagecoach route.
They contain no precious metals, but around 1900 a man named Long found a chest of gold coins in a cave in one of their canyons.
No dummy, he used them to buy a ranch in cool, green Oregon. 

Our expedition began with a disappointment for me.
I was met late last Monday afternoon at the El Paso airport by Ray and the Texas Monthly guys, senior editor Steve Harrigan and art director D.J. Stout.
The three had arrived earlier and lunched in Juarez, and, still burping, didn't feel like a repeat. 

Ray tried to assuage my hurt by offering me a bag of a barbequed pork rinds to eat on the ride to our lodgings in White's City, N.M., 135 miles thence.
All Texans, including George Bush, loved 'em, he assured me.
One handful, though, was enough to both confirm my general opinion of Bush and make me suspect that my companions didn't want to give me a head start, stomachwise, the next day. 

That day dawned soon enough, hot and clear, and we were at the trail head, elevation 5,800 feet, at 7:45 a.m. Harrigan's contribution to the expedition became clear: Something of a naturalist, he identified the local flora as we climbed, and our pauses to admire it gave us chances to catch our breath without appearing to seek them. 

Stout, young and exuberant, supplied thrills by venturing to the edges of rocky precipices.
The rest of us told him we'd voted, 2-to-1, to go after him if he fell. 

The abundance of desert plant life -- mainly sticklike cholla cactus, plump prickly pear and sharp-leafed agave -- was in contrast to the apparent absence of fauna.
I inquired of Valen about this later, and was told that while the Guadalupes are home to many animal species, including raccoon, skunk, mule deer and, even, mountain lion, they were mostly nocturnal feeders with more sense than to be out in 90-degree sunshine like us. 

Sweaty but triumphant, we reached the top around 11 a.m. to find a glorious view of the arid landscape, a metal pyramid bearing the symbols of the U.S. Postal Service and American Airlines that (strangely, we thought) honored pioneer aviators, and a box containing a log for recording climbers' impressions.
We scanned its contents, and along with the usual stuff ("Made it]") found some poetry by a woman named Belinda, who'd been there just the day before. 

"Mountain, I want to be in you.
Together we could grow wild and natural things," Belinda wrote, among other, much -- steamier, lines. 

The way down was easier on the lungs than the way up, but harder on the legs, and the rocks underfoot felt sharper.
That's the main part I'd forgotten from last time.
But down we loped, blooming blisters or no, and in much better time than it had taken to ascend.
Gravity favored us, and beer beckoned.
And there was the thought that, if we hurried, we might catch up with Belinda. 

For the record, Mr. Klein, as lead climber for the Journal team, pushed his way past the others, trampling the lunch of two hikers in his black army boots, and won the race to the summit.
The Texas Monthly pair made it first to the parking lot.
Who won?
The dispute has been submitted to the Pulitzer Prize Alpine Committee for arbitration. -- Ed. 

