.START 

A late burst of program trading drove stock prices sharply higher.
The dollar managed a tiny rebound despite a fourth consecutive day of strong selling by central banks. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average shot up 21.85 points to 2694.91, with much of the gain coming in the final half hour of trading.
Bargain hunters bid the dollar up slightly on the assumption central banks can't maintain the pace of intervention set this week.
Bond prices, which have been tracking the dollar's fortunes, barely moved. 

Stock market analysts said the computer-driven program trading climaxed a day of growing optimism about the outlook for stock prices.
The relative stability of stock prices in the face of the dollar's drubbing earlier this week and of International Business Machines' prediction Wednesday of lower-than-expected earnings was reassuring to many money managers.
Passage of a capital gains tax-reduction bill by the House of Representatives added to the positive mood. 

"For the market to ignore IBM seems to show some strength," said Hugh Johnson, chief investment officer at First Albany Corp. 

Currency traders said the intervention against the dollar in the wake of last weekend's meeting of finance ministers and central bankers from the major industrialized countries may have finally hit resistance.
Cyrus Whitney, chief trader for Commerzbank in New York, said the dollar is now "at an artificial level" and will need either continuing intervention or interest-rate adjustments to keep it there. 

Speculation is growing that West Germany's central bank soon will raise interest rates as part of the assault on the dollar.
Some analysts also predict the Federal Reserve will let U.S. interest rates slip lower to undercut the dollar's strength. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices rallied in moderate trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 164.2 million shares.
Advancing issues on the Big Board were ahead of decliners 918 to 536. 

The dollar rose.
In late New York trading the U.S. currency was quoted at 1.8823 marks and 140.65 yen, compared with 1.8794 marks and 140.15 yen. 

Bond prices were unchanged to slightly lower.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond lost less than an eighth of a point, or less than $1.25 for each $1,000 of face amount.
The yield on the issue stood at 8.25%. 

