.START 

A new congressional report criticized the Food and Drug Administration's food-safety inspection force for concentrating too much on warehouses and other low-risk enterprises and too little on canneries and other plants that are susceptible to bacterial contamination. 

The General Accounting Office, the audit arm of Congress, said the FDA frequently duplicates the efforts of state regulatory agencies, many of which inspect the same companies four times a year.
The GAO also faulted the agency for not carrying out its policy of concentrating inspections on companies with poor compliance records. 

The GAO said more than 62% of the 11,500 U.S. companies inspected in fiscal 1987 were bakeries, bottlers and warehouses, even though the FDA regards seafood processors, infant-formula manufacturers and canned-food plants as posing a greater food-poisoning threat to consumers.
Meanwhile, fewer than half of the companies inspected that year had histories of serious violations, the GAO added. 

The report was released by the House Energy and Commerce Committee's oversight and investigations subcommittee yesterday as lawmakers questioned FDA officials about shortcomings in the agency's inspection program for imported foods. 

The subcommittee staff has found that of the more than one million imported-food shipments in the fiscal year ended September 1987, the short-staffed FDA checked the paperwork on only 9% and tested only 2% for pesticides and other impurities.
Of the imports tested, 40% didn't meet FDA standards. 

At yesterday's hearing, William Schwemer, a senior FDA official, defended the agency's import-screening efforts, saying the 40% violation rate "indicates our targeting approach is highly effective." At the same time, he acknowledged that the FDA has neither the manpower nor the statutory mandate to inspect the roughly 3,400 foreign food-canning plants that are registered with the FDA.
In view of several food-poisoning outbreaks involving canned Chinese mushrooms earlier this year, lawmakers expressed concern about the influx of low-acid canned foods from overseas. "These foods don't contain enough natural acid or sugar to prevent the growth of microorganisms that can cause illness or death," said Rep. Dennis Eckart (D., Ohio). 

He cited recent Agriculture Department estimates that more than 6.5 million Americans become sick and 9,000 die each year from microbial food contamination.
Imports make up 9% of food consumed in the U.S. 

But Mr. Schwemer countered that the FDA officials don't regard low-acid canned food as a major public-health problem.
A review of complaints to the FDA showed no deaths from eating imported canned foods, he said. 

Mr. Schwemer said the FDA gives much higher priority to inspecting foreign drug makers than to inspecting overseas canneries because improperly formulated drugs have a far greater potential for harm.
While swollen and leaking cans are warning signs of possible contamination, he added, "there's no way for consumers to detect poorly made drugs." 

