.START 

The Chicago Mercantile Exchange has brought a disciplinary action against a firm headed by its former chairman, Brian P. Monieson.
The Merc charges failure to supervise two commodity brokers who allegedly defrauded customers. 

The Merc's action, which doesn't name the influential Mr. Monieson, closely parallels charges brought a year ago by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
The CFTC, which did name Mr. Monieson as a defendant, has asked that Mr. Monieson and his firm, GNP Commodities Inc., essentially be banned from trading. 

A hearing on the more recent Merc charges has been put off until the CFTC case is resolved, Mr. Monieson confirmed in an interview.
He denied any wrongdoing in the matter. "We felt we acted with integrity," he said.
The CFTC hearing is set to begin Nov. 6. 

Both the CFTC and Merc allege that GNP failed to supervise the activities of Norman K. Furlett and Ira P. Greenspon, two non-employee brokers who were affiliated with GNP until 1987.
In scores of instances, the brokers allegedly stuck customers with losing trades and kept winners for themselves.
They did this, the CFTC and Merc charge, by submitting trades to GNP's floor brokers without the required customer-account number -- waiting to see how the trade turned out to decide who to give it to.
The practice is known as "allocating trades." 

James Koch, a lawyer for the two men, said: "They vigorously deny any and all allegations." 

Earlier this week, Mr. Greenspon settled charges brought by the National Futures Association, an industry group that handles some regulation of brokers, that he had an associate take a licensing test for him in 1975.
Mr. Greenspon, while neither admitting nor denying the charge, agreed to leave the futures business for 10 years. 

This charge and the trade-allocating charges were prompted by complaints from Barbara Fiore, a former office manager for Messrs.
Greenspon and Furlett.
She claimed in an April 1986 letter to the Merc that she was fired by the men "because I refused to take part in their illegal trading practices." In another letter to the NFA, she claimed: "Ira and Norman also churn these accounts on a daily basis and laugh at the fact that even if the customers lose they {Ira and Norman} still make the commission on all of the trades." 

After leaving GNP in 1987, the two brokers became affiliated with another firm run by another former Merc chairman, John F. "Jack" Sandner.
His firm, Rufenacht, Bromagen & Hertz Inc., allowed the two brokers to solicit trades using the firm's name. 

Mr. Sandner said in an interview that he had no idea the two men had been accused of fraudulent trading when they became affiliated with his firm and that he severed the relationship with them after the CFTC charges were made a year ago.
He added that his firm didn't receive any complaints about the two brokers. 

A compliance official at Mr. Sandner's firm did sign registration forms for the two men that indicated they faced some kind of charges.
Mr. Sandner said he was never made aware of this.
He added that he also never knew about the Merc case against GNP and the brokers because even as chairman he stayed out of disciplinary cases. 

As reported, Mr. Sandner's firm employed some former salesmen of First Commodity Corp. of Boston while the salesmen were under federal investigation for alleged fraud.
Mr. Sandner said he now regrets not checking more thoroughly into the backgrounds of brokers doing business with his firm. 

Meanwhile, in the CFTC case against Mr. Monieson, the agency charges that he "was put on notice by at least five different GNP employees that Furlett, and later Furlett and Greenspon, were engaging in suspicious trading activity or were actually defrauding customers." The agency says he didn't move promptly to stop the alleged activity. 

The CFTC is asking administrative law judge George H. Painter to suspend or revoke GNP's registration that allows it to clear futures trades, to suspend or revoke Mr. Monieson's registration as a floor broker, and to assess fines.
Mr. Monieson and GNP are expected to vigorously contest the charges.
Messrs.
Furlett and Greenspon are expected to voluntarily leave the industry. 

