.START 

"To be Jewish," Cynthia Ozick once told a Paris Review interviewer, "is to be a member of a civilization -- a civilization with a long, long history, a history that is, in one way of viewing it, a procession of ideas." Few figures in American letters have struggled to swell the ranks of that procession as visibly as have Ms. Ozick and her fellow novelist Saul Bellow.
For Ms. Ozick and Mr. Bellow are not only authors but intellectuals, intensely engaged with weighty social, moral and metaphysical questions. 

Both could be justly faulted, however, for being rather too preoccupied with intellectual matters for their own good -- or, to be specific, for the good of their fiction.
Their characters almost invariably are highbrows, their narratives habitually crowded with heady abstractions.
Both are better at making a reader think than at making him feel; both often appear to be more interested in philosophizing about a story than in bringing it to life. "I believe unashamedly," Ms. Ozick has said, "that writers are the most (maybe the only) interesting people." Not infrequently, alas, one has the impression that both writers find only themselves interesting. 

Yet both have chosen, in newly published books of fiction, to treat a subject remote from their own experience: the life of a Polish Holocaust survivor in America.
In the hands of such cerebral, egotistic, and less-than-diffident writers, this might seem a treacherous topic.
Fortunately, however, Ms. Ozick and Mr. Bellow have approached their momentous common theme with considerable circumspection.
As if to reflect this stance, both volumes are exceedingly modest in scale. 

Ms. Ozick's book, "The Shawl" (Knopf, 70 pages, $12.95), consists of two related stories that were published in The New Yorker in the early '80s.
The first, the taut, harrowing "The Shawl," depicts the incidents leading to the concentration-camp death of Rosa Lublin's baby, whom she has kept hidden in a shawl.
In "Rosa" she appears 30 years later -- solitary, mad and dwelling in a Miami residential hotel for the elderly.
Ms. Ozick does a splendid job of conveying the hotel's atmosphere: It's less a place to live than a waiting room for death.
And indeed, though her niece urges her to forget the past and go on with life, Rosa's constant refrain is that she doesn't have a life: "Thieves took it." Yet Ms. Ozick succeeds stunningly in bringing this tragic, demented woman to life.
One reason is that Ms. Ozick doesn't render Rosa as an unimpeachable icon of suffering; on the contrary, Rosa is an intellectual snob whose outrage over the Holocaust centers largely on the fact that it reduced her delicate, poetry-writing mother and her distinguished bank-director father ("who knew nearly the first half of the Aeneid by heart") to the level of "teeming Mockowiczes and Rabinowiczes and Perskys and Finkelsteins, with all their bad-smelling grandfathers and their hordes of feeble children]" Beautiful and harrowing, these stories are a masterly achievement. 

Mr. Bellow's "The Bellarosa Connection" (Viking/Penguin, 102 pages, $6.95) is, like "The Shawl," concerned with survival and memory.
The narrator heads the Mnemosyne Institute, a Philadelphia school for mnemonic techniques. "Memory is Life," he says, and the story he tells concerns his memories of his late friend Harry Fonstein.
Fonstein was saved from the Holocaust through the capricious long-distance intervention of Billy Rose, the flamboyant Broadway producer, whose name he heard as "Bellarosa" and whom, after coming to America and making good, he vainly attempted to meet and thank. 

A preposterous situation?
Yes.
And that's Mr. Bellow's point: How is one to find existence anything but absurd when an impulsive act by a ludicrous show-biz figure can mean the difference between life and death?
Like Rosa's niece, the narrator counsels forgetting: "First those people murdered you, then they forced you to brood on their crimes . . . . Forget it.
Go American.
Work at your business." But Fonstein cannot forget. 

This story is elegantly shaped and compellingly told.
But Mr. Bellow shows too little, tells too much.
Fonstein and Rose barely exist except as excuses for him to touch upon pet themes and to pontificate about such things as "the ground bass of brutality, without which no human music is ever performed." Yes, he keeps Rose mostly offstage for a reason: He wants him to remain mythical, as concealed from us as from Fonstein.
But the effectiveness of all this depends largely on whether the reader is as captivated as Mr. Bellow is by flashy gangsterish types like Rose. 

Too much of this book, moreover, strikes one as artificial.
Mr. Bellow's chief device for underscoring the memory theme -- the Mnemosyne Institute -- never seems anything but a slick contrivance.
And the story itself sometimes feels overly schematic, its contours and denouement a bit too glibly reminiscent of previous Bellow fictions, especially "Seize the Day" and "Humboldt's Gift." Though it is, then, in many ways, a testament to its author's deep intelligence and moral seriousness, "The Bellarosa Connection" ultimately lacks both the passion and the compassion of "The Shawl." 

Mr. Bawer is a literary critic in New York. 

