.START 

Financially troubled BCE Development Corp. said it arranged an 18-month line of credit for as much as 100 million Canadian dollars (US$84.9 million) from a Canadian bank. 

The real estate development company said the credit is conditional on receiving a guarantee from BCE Inc., which owns 67% of BCE Development.
It said BCE Inc. 's board had approved the guarantee in principle. 

BCE Development recently said it expected a significant write-down of its real estate portfolio and suspended payment of its preferred share dividends. 

In trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange yesterday, BCE Development closed at C$1.71, up eight Canadian cents. 

Koito Manufacturing Co. says it will continue to move cautiously in considering proposals from T. Boone Pickens Jr. until he explains how he became the Japanese company's biggest share owner. 

In a letter sent to Mr. Pickens, Koito's president, Takao Matsuura, said he would consider "fully and carefully" any formal request from the Texas oil man for a special meeting of Koito's shareholders.
He also said the board of the automotive-lighting maker, a close affiliate of Toyota Motor Co., will consider a request from Mr. Pickens that the company raise its interim dividend. 

But Mr. Matsuura said Koito will continue to view Mr. Pickens's intentions warily until he clarifies his relationship with Kitaro Watanabe, who once tried to pressure Toyota into buying him out at a premium and from whom Mr. Pickens bought his 26.2% stake in Koito. 

Mr. Matsuura's letter was clearly an effort to rebut an intense public-relations blitz by Mr. Pickens, who has characterized his inability to win a role at Koito as a barrier to U.S. investment in Japan. 

Australia is encouraging people under 40 to move there under its business-migration program.
On Oct. 1, the minimum amount business migrants under 40 will need to transfer to Australia to guarantee entry under the program will fall 30% to $260,000, a government statement says.
Business migrants aged 58 or over will need $640,000, an increase of 70%.
The $375,000 minimum for migrants aged between 40 and 57 remains unchanged.
Any migrant admitted today might find it hard to get around: Australia's domestic-airline pilots, who resigned en masse seven weeks ago over pay, yesterday rejected official mediation. 

A review committee overseeing Canada's intelligence service released a report suggesting that Canada could benefit from using secret agents to keep tabs on trading partners.
Canada doesn't operate a foreign secret service such as the CIA.
But Peter Russell, a University of Toronto political scientist who studied the question of foreign spying for the committee, said Canada needs much more information on major trading partners such as the U.S. Mr. Russell said it would be naive to think the U.S. didn't use covert means to obtain information on Canada's position during free-trade negotiations last year. "I think Americans are great people, but they play hardball," he said. 

Chinese leaders feted 2,793 "model workers." The star citizens, most of them Communist Party members and ranging from a 16-year-old acrobat to an 84-year-old university professor, were honored at a meeting in the Great Hall of the People.
For several years, China had neglected model workers, who two decades ago filled the pages of newspapers as examples to the rest of the country, Premier Li Peng said in a speech.
He called that neglect "the disastrous result of contempt for people's creative labor caused by the rampancy of bourgeois liberalization." 

The Soviet Union and the European Community could sign a trade pact by year end.
A second round of talks on a 10-year trade and economic-cooperation agreement will be held Oct. 9 and 10, and negotiations are expected to run smoothly, the EC's commission says.
Moscow hopes imports of Western consumer goods will help allay a wave of popular discontent with President Mikhail Gorbachev's economic reforms. "To achieve perestroika, it is essential to open the {Soviet} market to the outside," says Vladimir Shemiatenkov, Soviet ambassador to the EC. 

Some 1,500 television producers, directors, and engineers from 27 nations will gather in Paris Saturday for three days to find ways of boosting European programs and television technology. 

Foreign ministers from the European Community and other West European nations plus the Soviet Union, Hungary, Poland, and Yugoslavia will discuss joint production and distribution projects. "What would remain of our cultural identity if audio-visual Europe consisted of European consumers sitting in front of Japanese TV sets showing American programs?" asks France's European Affairs Minister Edith Cresson. 

The Council of Europe, grouping 23 West European nations, has already agreed to a convention requiring that its broadcasters show a majority of European programs "where practicable." 

French Foreign Affairs Minister Roland Dumas notes that Europeans produce a mere 2,500 hours of program material a year compared with the 16,000 hours shown on their screens. 

The chief neurosurgeon of Cyprus's main hospital performed a 45-minute operation on the brain of a sea turtle apparently injured by a ship's propeller, the Cyprus Mail reported.
Surgeon Nicos Spanos said: "It was not a difficult operation, but undeniably an interesting one.". . . Two men admitted in a Scottish court that they scuttled a yacht belonging to a son of the ruler of Dubaih last month.
The $800,000 vessel sank in a loch near Dingwall, and the prosecutor told the court that the two on trial held a grudge against the yacht owner's gamekeeper. 

