.START 

Commodity futures exchanges are stepping up enforcement actions against floor traders who break the rules, but these efforts vary widely among exchange. 

According to a new Government Accounting Office report on the four biggest U.S. commodity exchanges, stepped-up enforcement started even before the federal probes of trading abuses in Chicago and New York became public earlier this year.
But some observers say the exchanges got tougher because they were beginning to feel that they were being watched more closely by federal regulators and because of complaints from their own members. 

The two biggest U.S. exchanges, the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, sharply increased their enforcement actions and imposed stiffer penalties in recent years. 

But James Stone, former chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and now president of Plymouth Rock Assurance Co. in Boston, asserted that fear of a crackdown prompted the Chicago exchanges to increase fines and suspensions. "They wanted to clean up their own act before the sheriff came in and cleaned it up for them," he said. "I believe that when you look at the statistics for the last two years, they are somewhat distorted." He argues that several years before the investigation of the two Chicago exchanges became public, the word got around that they were under surveillance. 

Officials at both the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Chicago Board of Trade strenuously denied that they had any advance knowledge of the federal investigation of futures trading on their floors.
Indeed, the total surprise expressed by exchange officials in mid-January, when the investigation was disclosed, has led most industry officials and lawyers to conclude that the government kept a tight lid on the probe. 

Gerald Beyer, a Merc senior vice president, said that, largely in response to complaints from members in early 1987 about alleged trading violations, the Merc increased fines for trading violations.
It also barred brokers on the top step of its S&P 500 stock-index futures pit from trading for their own as well as customer accounts on the same day. 

The increase in market oversight at the Merc put pressure on the nearby Board of Trade to follow suit.
A Board of Trade spokesman said that many of the exchange's steps taken to stiffen its market oversight were working their way through exchange committees in 1988, before the investigation was announced. 

In contrast to the two big Chicago exchanges, the New York Mercantile Exchange disciplined its traders less from 1987 to this year.
New York Merc officials told the GAO that reduced enforcement was caused by problems with staff turnover and low staffing levels. 

Jan Kay, marketing vice president of the New York Merc, said the exchange took a hard look at the entire compliance operation in 1988.
It then began hiring additional people, upgrading job descriptions and salaries to attract and keep qualified individuals. "We have also spent a lot of money on computer systems in order to obtain a better audit trail," she added. 

James Goodwin, senior vice president for compliance at New York's Commodity Exchange, said that increased compliance efforts began at the exchange when he and two others were hired to reorganize the compliance department in 1983. "We put into place new methods of surveillance," he said, "but after that it still takes several years to complete investigations and bring them to final resolution." He noted that these efforts began to bear significant results in 1986. 

The GAO report did not evaluate the significance of the differences in exchange disciplinary actions because "the universe of abuses is unknown and the uniqueness and complexity of each case preclude an assessment of the adequacy and consistency of penalties." 

Effective enforcement, said a former high New York exchange official, means "large fines and suspensions for major offenses and not a lot of traffic tickets for speeding." 

The Chicago investigation has resulted in 45 traders and one clerk being charged with trading abuses; no New York traders have been charged.
But Mr. Stone said it is naive to think that most of the bad guys are in Chicago. 

Trading dishonestly "is not something that the majority indulges in, but it's a frightening minority," Mr. Stone said.
He noted that his wife is a member of the board of governors of the New York Mercantile Exchange. 

One reason commodity exchanges have had trouble catching cheaters is inexperienced policemen. "They hire people as investigators who are right out of school and may not know what a futures contract is," said James McGurk, a former assistant U.S. attorney in Chicago and CFTC senior trial counsel.
He is now in private law practice and is representing some of the individuals indicted and subpoenaed in the Chicago investigation. 

The GAO also surveyed the size and experience of exchange investigators as of June 30.
The Chicago Mercantile Exchange had nearly 50% more investigators per 10 million contracts of trading volume than the Chicago Board of Trade.
New York's Commodity Exchange had a ratio of investigators to volume that was more than 135% greater than at the New York Merc. 

According to Mr. McGurk, those trained by the exchanges to conduct investigations find the pay low and opportunities for advancement severely limited.
They then leave the exchanges and go to work as compliance officers at brokerage houses.
Because the exchanges don't pay enough to keep experienced investigators around, they are doomed to operate with non-professionals. 

"If you have a trader who has been on the floor for two decades, knows everybody and has done everything," Mr. McGurk observed, "what hope is there of an inexperienced investigator catching him?" 

Mr. McGurk believes that additional resources should be devoted to the training and retention of investigators.
According to the GAO report, in 1988 the two largest Chicago and New York commodity exchanges had a total regulatory staff budget of $10.7 million and employed 243 people.
In the same year, the regulatory budget for the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange and National Association of Securities Dealers totaled $161.3 million and employed 1,592 people. 

Though comparisons are difficult, people familiar with both stock and futures markets say the security exchanges appear to have fewer problems with floor traders breaking rules.
However, the GAO report notes that the structure of securities markets causes more abuses to take place off the trading floor -- insider trading among them. 

The report says the single most important step the exchanges could take is to improve their tracking of all trades.
With precise, complete tracking, the report concludes, most of the abuses alleged in Chicago could have been detected more readily. 

Not so coincidentally, the two big Chicago exchanges and one in New York have announced they are developing hand-held electronic transaction-entry devices that will supplant the cards and pencils traders currently use.
Though the systems would work somewhat differently, both would independently add an exact time as each trade is entered and produce an "audit trail" of transactions that couldn't be altered subsequently. 

The Chicago exchanges announced their system in August and said it would be ready in about a year.
Earlier this week, the Comex, which is working with the other four New York exchanges, said it would begin testing its system in the first quarter of next year. 

annualized volume and multiplying the result by 10 

