.START 

Many of the recent airline alliances struck between European carriers or between European and U.S. airlines are "more smoke than substance," according to Robert L. Crandall, chairman of AMR Corp., parent of American Airlines. 

In an interview in Frankfurt, West Germany, Mr. Crandall said American doesn't intend to join the crowd.
First of all, U.S. antitrust laws prohibit American from entering the sort of agreements into which European carriers are rushing.
Secondly, "it's not that we don't believe in partnerships, but we haven't been able to identify the substance of a marketing alliance," he said. 

That isn't to say that the largest U.S. airline isn't talking to a variety of potential partners in Europe and elsewhere, however.
Mr. Crandall said his airline is talking with both Lufthansa and Air France about so-called code-sharing on a limited number of routes.
That would entail coordinating flight schedules so that, say, an American flight to Paris could funnel traffic onto an Air France plane headed to another destination.
The two flights would be listed as one in world-wide computer reservations networks. "But we can't jointly do a route," Mr. Crandall added, at least not without facing scrutiny from the U.S. Justice Department. 

He said the talks with other carriers center on a few routes where real commercial opportunities exist.
U.S. regulations on code-sharing limit such links to U.S. destinations where foreign carriers already have traffic rights.
American already has code-sharing arrangements with Qantas, the Australian carrier, and is negotiating similar links with Cathay Pacific Airways and Air New Zealand. 

Mr. Crandall, en route to an American Airlines board meeting in Switzerland, said his airline also is discussing with Lufthansa and Air France the possibility of jointly developing a world-wide computer system for cargo.
Additionally, American's computer reservations unit Sabre is talking to the European computer reservations system Amadeus about some sort of collaboration. 

He said a link between Sabre and Amadeus, which counts among its owners Lufthansa and Air France, could take the form of a share swap, an unbalanced investment or a software contract.
He said American's interest in such a deal is motivated more by seeking to position Sabre world-wide than in boosting American's stock price to discourage U.S. takeover artists from making a play for the airline. 

"We have to be aware of the interest of financial buyers in the U.S.," Mr. Crandall said.
To give shareholders additional value, American has looked at many options, including selling shares in Sabre, he said.
Mr. Crandall declined to comment on any overtures American may have received from corporate raiders. 

But he poured cold water on accords such as the one announced yesterday between Scandinavian Airlines System and Swissair, or the one reached two weeks ago between Air France and Lufthansa. "What is it that you're going to do for one another that you're not going to do for another airline?" he said.
Airlines aren't going to turn down business because of their partners, he added. 

Under U.S. antitrust law, which is extraterritorial, it is illegal for carriers to team up in purchasing airplanes, and probably illegal to operate joint-venture flights.
Both of those ideas are contained in some new European airline accords. 

Mr. Crandall predicted that the completion of the European Community's internal market after 1992 will subject aviation to European protectionism.
He said the only way around this obstacle is internal growth and selected partnerships. 

European law "limits our ability to invest in airlines here {in Europe}," he said. "I doubt we're ever going to be permitted to be a majority owner of a European airline." On the U.S. side, regulators prohibit foreign companies from owning more than 25% of U.S. airlines or from exercising control. 

Regarding trans-Atlantic airline investments, such as British Airways' planned 15% stake in United Airlines and KLM Royal Dutch Airline's planned stake of 25% in the cash equity of Northwest Airlines, Mr. Crandall said: "I think they'll have effects. . . . But we're not tremendously concerned about them." As for United's plans to start flying to Europe next year, he said, "Welcome aboard." 

American, the third-largest U.S. carrier to Europe in market share after Pan American World Airways and Trans World Airlines, is continuing its rapid expansion.
Mr. Crandall said American plans to add Stuttgart to its list of destinations in November.
Next spring, the carrier hopes to open additional routes.
The list of possible cities includes Barcelona, Spain; Nice, France; Amsterdam; Glasgow, Scotland; and Birmingham, England.
The carrier also is considering services to Budapest; Warsaw; Helsinki, Finland; and Moscow.
Some of the new services will orginate from American's hubs in Miami and San Juan, Puerto Rico, he said. 

If Pan Am's foreign routes or Eastern Airline's Latin American routes become available, Mr. Crandall added, "we'll be there" as a buyer.
But for the moment, American's overseas expansion is tempered by a lack of airplanes. 

"The big story isn't strategic alliances and globalization," the executive said. "The story is . . . that the demand for travel is limitless." He said governments should be encouraging airline competition and improving airport and air-traffic control infrastructure to accommodate that travel demand. 

Restrictive government policies and some of the recent airline alliances illustrate that "people are worrying too much about preserving their piece of the existing pie," Mr. Crandall said, "instead of trying to make the pie bigger." 

