.START 

U.S. auto makers will begin the 1990-model year with a whimper next week as slow sales of some models force the Big Three to temporarily idle at least nine car and truck assembly plants. 

The closures are the latest sign that U.S car makers could face rough going for the rest of the year.
Companies have already cut back on their fourth-quarter production schedules and put consumer and dealer incentives on many of their 1989 and some of their 1990 model cars. 

But the closings next week indicate the incentives and previously announced cutbacks aren't enough to keep inventories under control. 

Such control is especially important now, as 1990 models begin rolling out of assembly plants.
Some of these models are headed for dealer lots already crowded with 1989 models. 

"Auto makers are willing to take {production} cuts instead of doing something drastic" such as cutting prices, said analyst John H. Qualls of Micro-Economics Ltd. Stickers on most 1990 domestic models are rising significantly from 1989 levels, partly because of new safety equipment. 

Almost 24,000 workers will be laid off because of the plant closings. 

The largest number of shutdowns will come at General Motors Corp. Company representatives said the No. 1 auto maker temporarily closed a truck plant in Pontiac, Mich., this week and next week will idle truck plants in Shreveport, La., and in Moraine, Ohio.
The three plants, which employ a total of 6,900 workers, all build compact pickups and sport utility vehicles.
The Pontiac plant is scheduled to reopen Oct. 16.
The other two plants are expected to resume production a week later. 

Two GM car plants in Bowling Green, Ky., and Wilmington, Del., also will close temporarily next week for inventory adjustment.
Bowling Green, which builds the Chevrolet Corvette, is slated to reopen Oct. 9, while Wilmington, which builds Chevrolet's Corsica and Beretta, will remain closed until Oct. 16. 

GM also will close for one week its Fairfax, Kan., assembly plant, which employs about 4,000 workers, to "adjust" parts deliveries from suppliers, a company spokeswoman said.
The plant builds the Pontiac Grand Prix.
As of the end of August, GM had a 99-day supply of the two-door cars; a 60-to-65-day supply is normal. 

GM has scheduled overtime this week at assembly plants in Janesville, Wis., Lordstown, Ohio, and Flint, Mich., that build more popular products: the Chevrolet Cavalier, Pontiac Sunbird, Buick LeSabre and Oldsmobile 88. 

Ford Motor Co. said it will shut for two weeks its Loraine, Ohio, assembly plant and close for one week its truck plant in Louisville Ky., because of "a shortage of dealer orders," the company said.
About 2,700 employees will be affected by the downtime at the Loraine plant, which builds the Thunderbird and Cougar.
The Kentucky truck plant builds medium-duty and heavy-duty trucks and employs about 2,000 hourly workers. 

Chrysler Corp. is temporarily closing two assembly plants next week for slow sales.
The St. Louis Assembly Plant No. 1, which employs 3,300 hourly workers and builds Dodge Daytona and Chrysler LeBaron, will resume production the week of Oct. 9.
The Dodge City truck assembly complex in Warren, Mich., will resume production the week of Oct. 16.
That plant employs 2,700 hourly employees. 

Meanwhile, the nine major U.S. auto makers plan to build 149,601 cars this week, down 4.4% from 156,445 a year earlier and 1.7% lower than last week's 152,135. 

The Diamond-Star Motors Corp. plant in Normal, Ill., a joint venture of Chrysler and Mitsubishi Motors Corp. worked two hours a day of overtime this week.
Ford and Chrysler also scheduled overtime this week at a total of three U.S. plants. 

f-Includes Chevrolet Prizm and Toyota Corolla. r-Revised. x-Includes Volkswagen U.S. production through July, 1988. 

