.START 

American Express Publishing Corp., in several ambitious moves to expand its franchise in magazine publishing, said it will acquire Atlanta magazine and launch two new magazines -- one for college students and the other for small business owners. 

American Express Publishing, a unit of American Express Co., said it agreed to purchase the slick consumer monthly Atlanta from Metrocorp for an undisclosed amount.
Industry sources estimated the sale price at less than $10 million. 

Thomas O. Ryder, president of American Express Publishing, said the company will continue to look to acquire magazines in major metropolitan areas in the U.S. "The vast majority of American Express cardholders are in the top 20 markets in the U.S.," he said. "We want to build stronger relationships with card members.
This is not an isolated event.
Our aspirations are to do more than this." 

In five years as head of American Express Publishing, Mr. Ryder, 45, has expanded the company's stake swiftly in consumer magazines, using the credit card mailing lists of American Express to build circulation.
While the company has published Travel & Leisure, the country's largest travel magazine, since 1971, under Mr. Ryder it has purchased Food & Wine magazine and the city/regional magazines New York Woman and L.A. Style.
It also publishes Departures, a travel magazine, for the company's platinum card holders. 

In a related development, American Express Publishing said it will launch two custom magazines in early 1990.
Connections, an existing magazine for 700,000 college students who hold American Express cards, will be revamped and expanded.
American Express also plans to launch & Company, a magazine for owners and partners in small businesses of less than 100 employees, with a circulation of 1.2 million.
Each magazine will be mailed free to American Express cardholders.
With the two magazines, American Express now joins a growing group of major consumer magazine publishers who have expanded into the area of custom publications: largely controlled-circulation magazines created for advertisers or published with only one advertiser in its pages. 

Although on a smaller scale, Atlanta will be part of American Express Publishing's group ad package.
Atlanta magazine has been owned for the last two years by Metrocorp, which also publishes Philadelphia, Boston and Manhattan, inc. magazines.
Metrocorp executives couldn't be reached to comment on why they're selling the magazines, but according to sources close to the magazine, it has operated profitably.
Mr. Ryder said its annual ad pages have grown from about 700 in 1987 to an estimated 800 ad pages this year. 

