.START 

Boatmen's Bancshares Inc., helped by economies associated with a recent acquisition, expects to report third-quarter earnings in the range of 90 cents to 95 cents a share, or an indicated $31.2 million to $33.6 million, said Andrew B. Craig III, chairman, chief executive officer and president. 

That would represent about a 5.8% to 14% increase from the year-earlier period, when the regional bank-holding company had net income of $29.5 million, or 86 cents a share.
The per-share figures reflect an increase in common shares outstanding to 34.3 million from 33.5 million. 

Last year's results have been restated to reflect Boatmen's $467 million acquisition of a former rival, Centerre Bancorp.
The December acquisition, which made Boatmen's the nation's 39th-largest bank-holding company, was accounted for on a pooling-of-interest basis. 

"We've been concentrating during 1989 on implementing the consolidation of Centerre," Mr. Craig said in an interview, "concentrating on the internal growth of the company, taking advantage of opportunities to reduce costs, to improve the quality of our loan portfolio, and increase noninterest income." 

The acquisition has allowed the company to cut costs by consolidating certain functions, such as its credit-card operations, Mr. Craig said.
The company had projected $55 million in savings from the acquisition over a three-year period, said Mr. Craig, and "the first year is right on schedule." Third-period expenses will be down about $2 million from $108.7 million in the second quarter, he said, and 6% below those of the year-earlier period. 

The company is getting some help from lower tax rates, as well, with an effective tax rate in the latest period of about 20%, compared with 22.5% a year earlier. 

Also, "We're seeing some good, solid growth in our trust business," with the third quarter expected to show about a 10% year-to-year increase in operating income, said Mr. Craig.
Centerre's sizable trust operation, when combined with Boatmen's, created the nation's 12th-largest trust department, he said. 

Boatmen's is emphasizing development of such noninterest-income sources, said Mr. Craig, calling that an area where "we've been historically low." Boatmen's, he said, "along with banking institutions in general," will in the future feel a longterm squeeze on net interest margins -- the so-called "spread" between what a bank pays for funds and what interest it can charge for loans.
Although final figures aren't yet available, the third period's net interest margin narrowed somewhat from 4.11% in the second quarter. 

Mr. Craig wants to see noninterest income grow eventually to about 35% of operating profit from about 30% in the latest period and 25% before the acquisition.
Such revenue offers a way to stabilize income stream and diminish the impact of narrowing spreads, he said. 

In the third quarter, "We'll see a moderate increase in nonperforming loans," said Mr. Craig, but "nothing dramatic." Assets at the close of the quarter will be between $14 billion and $14.5 billion, he added. 

Boatmen's, which has historically been very strongly capitalized, will have a very robust -- about 7.5% -- equity-to-asset rate at the quarter's close, placing it among the top 10 major U.S. banks in that category, Mr. Craig said.
The strong capitalization, besides allowing Boatmen's to be "comfortable with a relatively high {dividend} payout level," allows the company, "when considering acquisitions, to increase our leverage if appropriate." Mr. Craig, asked if the holding company was interested in acquiring any thrifts, said, "We're always looking at opportunities." If a thrift were available at the right price and "offered entry into the right market, we would be interested." He cautioned that the company is "not involved in anything at the moment." 

Mr. Craig said Boatmen's is "reasonably confident about 1990," which he says will be a "positive year," during which it will realize the biggest portion of its projected cost savings from the Centerre acquisition. 

