.START 

British Airways PLC and the labor-management group bidding for United Airlines have begun lobbying to avert any government-imposed changes in their $6.79 billion bid for UAL Corp. 

The effort follows news that Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner has persuaded Northwest Airlines to reduce a stake taken by KLM Royal Dutch Airlines to limit the influence of foreign airlines on U.S. carriers. 

The group, apparently surprised by Mr. Skinner's tough stance against Northwest, is hoping to avert a similar change that could delay or derail its purchase, set to close late next month.
The group's campaign is likely to encompass both politics and finance. 

British government aviation officials urged "an open and free investment climate" at a previously scheduled meeting Tuesday with U.S. Transportation and State Department officials.
But an aide to British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said she hadn't made any calls to U.S. officials. 

Financially, the group can argue that British Air's $750 million investment meets a 25% limit on foreign stakes in U.S. airlines even though it represents 78% of $965 million in cash the buyers are putting forth.
Mr. Skinner is forcing KLM to cut its Northwest stake to $175 million, 25% of $700 million in cash equity used by Los Angeles investor Alfred Checchi to finance the purchase. 

That argument will rest mainly on the idea that $200 million in expected annual employee concessions represents "sweat equity" worth about $1.2 billion, at the going rate for airline takeovers of six times cash flow. 

Counting $15 million from management, $200 million from the UAL pilots and $750 million from British Air, that would put the total equity at $2.17 billion.
Using that denominator, British Air's stake would be 35%.
If British Air speeds up a resale of $300 million in UAL preferred stock, its $450 million would be only 21%. 

Politically, the buyers are expected to enlist elected officials to speak out in favor of the bid's 75% employee ownership. 

Yesterday, in a Senate floor speech, Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.) said that despite British Air's stake, UAL "will remain a truly American asset" because employees are participating.
Sen. Byrd said the employee takeover of once-faltering Weirton Steel Corp. in his home state represents a "major success story of employee ownership." 

A Byrd aide said the senator fears that the United transaction, which would result in the largest employee-owned company in U.S. history, will fall apart if British Airways is forced to reduce its equity stake. 

The group can also be expected to question the strength of Mr. Skinner's own mandate within the Bush administration to crack down on foreign airline investment. 

"I can't for the life of me figure out why foreign investment is the battlefield he decided to pick," said one person familiar with the United buy-out.
Mr. Skinner has also expressed concern over the financial risk of airline leveraged buy-outs. "What constituency really cares about the KLM investment in NWA?" 

Sen. Byrd sharply criticized Mr. Skinner and warned him against taking any action that could derail the United deal.
Characterizing his handling of Northwest as "creative freelancing," Sen. Byrd accused the secretary of exceeding his authority in pressuring KLM to reduce its stake. 

The senator said he was concerned about the "attitude of the energetic secretary of transportation toward the United takeover," and added that "it would be imprudent of him to attempt to disrupt the timely completion of this rather exciting development." 

United Airlines executives agreed. "We think Sen. Byrd accurately stated the case about why UAL's employee-ownership proposal makes sense for this country from a policy perspective and why it is consistent with U.S. law," said UAL spokesman Lawrence Nagin. 

But some lawmakers approve of Secretary Skinner's actions so far, and support legislation codifying his authority to approve or reject LBOs. "Congress as a whole is really uncomfortable with leveraged buy-outs," said an aide to Sen. Wendell Ford (D., Ky.), chairman of the aviation subcommittee. 

A British Air spokesman denied the airline is participating in any lobbying campaign. "This is strictly a U.S. domestic matter.
We are confident this will be approved," he said.
But the carrier has informed British Embassy officials of its stake in the deal. 

Another difference between the buy-outs of Northwest and United is that Great Britain has far more political clout in Washington than the Netherlands.
KLM executives were said to be angered at the airline's treatment in the Northwest-Skinner talks.
But since Mr. Checchi agreed to the cutback, KLM appeared to have little recourse. 

Asra Q. Nomani contributed to this article. 

