.START 

In less than 12 months, Indonesia's stock market has gone from being Asia's wallflower to the belle of the ball.
Yet for all of its success, the market hasn't reduced its potential for vexing and hurting its many eager suitors. 

Government officials are delighted that the small market has come to life.
But many financial analysts and businessmen see substantial problems in addition to the pluses resulting from the market's sudden growth. 

They note the inability of the Jakarta Stock Exchange, as currently run, to efficiently handle heavy trading and delivery of share certificates.
They are concerned about the lack of a code of ethics for brokerage firms.
And they question the standard of local accounting and of underwriters' qualifications for evaluating a company. 

All these factors leave Indonesia's largely inexperienced investors highly vulnerable, the analysts say, especially given the absence of commercial laws to which the victimized might have recourse.
Meanwhile, the government's zigzags on policies, especially those covering foreigners' access to the market, have created frustration.
There is pessimism, too, about whether the stock market will develop smoothly. 

"I'm worried about the market, and I'm worried that so few people seem worried," says a foreign securities analyst. "It looks good, but the odds of a crash or serious correction have to be pretty high." 

Another foreign participant isn't as pessimistic, though.
Gavin Graham, fund manager for Thornton Management (Asia) Ltd. in Hong Kong, says there's "potential for nasty things ahead," but he adds that he thinks the market will be "mature and resilient enough to come through" any difficulties. 

Some Indonesians are uneasy about the market's rapid development.
Kwik Kian Gie, an economist and businessman, describes as dangerous some of the accounting practices of companies issuing shares.
And he is concerned that the handling of applications hasn't been fair.
The stock market's expansion has been extraordinary.
After offering only 24 listed companies for the past five years, the market is expected by year's end to have surpassed the government's target of 50 listings -- a goal many analysts considered unattainable six months ago. 

There are also four small companies listed on Jakarta's parallel exchange, which opened last December, but it is mainly a local market with little foreign participation. 

Some businessmen who have complained about the slow rate of change in Indonesia in general now are wondering whether the pace of change is too fast in the stock market.
They assert that it can't handle this year's jump in volume. 

Finance Minister J.B. Sumarlin acknowledges that many of the questions and criticisms have validity. "We want orderly growth," he says, adding that the government is aware of "excesses" that can happen in young markets and will work to avoid them. 

Not all analysts are convinced, however.
While acknowledging the difficulties of resolving the many policy questions cropping up with the market's rapid expansion, they say the government must reduce the kind of confusion to which Mr. Sumarlin contributed in setting guidelines on foreigners' share purchases. 

After doubts on that question clouded some big initial offerings, Mr. Sumarlin first said that foreigners could own 49% of all the shares of a company traded on the market.
Later, he ruled that there couldn't be any foreign holdings in banks. 

Beyond the confusion over how wide a role foreigners can have, problems have emerged over the handling of initial offerings, the allocation of shares and the mechanics of how transactions are completed. 

Some analysts expect these problems to be worked out. "The operational headaches will definitely disappear over time because they have to," says Alan Moore, country manager for Bankers Trust Co., which is providing technical assistance to a local broker. 

Indonesian officials acknowledge that foreigners have played the major role in the exchange's development.
In December 1987, the government opened the market to limited non-Indonesian participation.
Early last August, the scope of foreign participation was substantially widened to well beyond that available in some bigger Asian exchanges. 

That sent volume soaring last month, when sligthly more than 18.4 million shares were traded, with a total value of 189.92 billion rupiah ($107 million).
Last month's exceptional activity underlined the market's extraordinary expansion: In August 1988, only slightly more than 522,000 shares were traded, with a total value of 1.27 billion rupiah. 

The market has drawn a host of new funds.
This year, units of Thornton Management, France's Banque Indosuez and Hong Kong's Jardine Fleming Holdings Ltd. have started managing funds, and Japan's Nomura Securities Co. will begin doing so soon.
In the case of Thornton's $21 million Jakarta Fund, it was almost necessary to "beat people away with cattle prods" demand was so great, Mr. Graham says.
However, Indonesia's outdated legal framework isn't equipped to cope with modern-day disputes such as those stemming from securities trading.
Commercial codes date back to Dutch colonial days. 

The exchange agency, known as Bapepam, plans to turn over operation of the market to a private group -- a move endorsed by brokers and analysts.
Bapepam needs computers to eliminate a backlog of transactions and to modernize record-keeping; but, before it can buy them and solve crushing problems, it needs approvals from several layers of government bureaucracy.
That can and does often take months. 

