.START 

Big Mac is losing Big Mo. 

More than two decades of steady growth made the story of McDonald's Corp. inspirational for entrepreneurs.
Today, it serves up almost a third of the burgers Americans down each day, and a quarter of the french fries.
Adjusted for splits, the stock is up 24,000% since the initial offering in 1965. 

But lately the magic appears to have vanished.
The first sign of trouble cropped up last summer, when sales in McDonald's domestic restaurants open at least a year showed a decline on an inflation-adjusted basis.
The fast-food giant initially shook this off as an aberration.
But now the dropoffs have occurred for five consecutive quarters. 

McDonald's won't confirm those calculations, but it voices concern. "Sales are softer than we'd like," concedes Jack Greenberg, chief financial officer. 

As a result, McDonald's management is considering taking steps that would represent some of the most radical changes ever for the world's largest restaurant chain.
Not only has it decided to put pizza on the menu at all of its 8,014 U.S. restaurants, but it is thinking hard about other ways to bring in new business. 

Apparently concerned over future growth prospects for breakfast and lunch, company executives are openly talking about changing McDonald's dining environment to attract evening patrons.
Among the ideas: turning down the lights, adding music, repackaging lunch-time fare with side dishes and raising prices. "They will try to create a different unit after 4 o'clock," says one analyst who attended a recent briefing at company headquarters.
A McDonald's spokesman confirms such discussions, but adds: "None of those things are definite." 

Soft sales are hard to take at a go-go place like McDonald's, where near-manic devotion to growth keeps employee morale up.
With constant growth, kitchen workers can aspire for promotion to manager, and franchisees can hope to be bigger franchisees.
If demoralization sets in, "that affects quality and service," says Al Ries, a marketing strategist in Connecticut. "The competition's morale has already suffered, but this will be something new at McDonald's." 

The challenges besetting McDonald's in particular and the fast-food industry in general include a saturated market, changing consumer tastes, unfavorable demographics and the need to pay more for help. "We've come to the end of the cycle," says a veteran Burger King franchisee. "It's not instant pudding anymore.
It's a long, hard grind." 

McDonald's has managed to keep most of its numbers rising.
For the second quarter, it reported gains of 4.9% in revenue and 11% in net income.
But the revenue increase was the smallest for any quarter, and was due largely to new restaurant openings. 

Three top McDonald's executives recently sent out a message designed to fire up the troops.
It is summarized by one as "Let's kick some butt: clean bathrooms, hot food, good service." Those things are part of the time-honored McDonald's formula, but the company is also trying another, more radical tactic.
Meeting its most dangerous fast-food foes head-on, McDonald's is trying out menus that offer fried chicken and pizza.
Other new products in test include yogurt, low-fat milkshakes and a sherbet, as well as a robot named Arch who makes french fries and talks to the crew. 

There are risks in this, including confusing the customer.
The once-spare McDonald's menu has ballooned until it includes about 41 items at the average U.S. outlet. "They're turning themselves into the very kind of restaurant they used to run out of business," warns Mr. Ries. 

McDonald's has been testing a 14-inch pizza in 24 stores in Indiana and Kentucky for only a few months.
Even so, "It's no longer maybe.
They're going to do it," says IDS Financial Services analyst Michael Kennedy, who heard McDonald's executives rave about the product this week.
He says management cautioned that a national rollout is at least a year away because of the new ovens and other modifications required, such as wider drive-through windows to accommodate the pizza boxes. 

Asked about the rollout plans, a McDonald's spokesman yesterday said: "That's the intention." 

McDonald's has been facing unusually aggressive competitors, including a feisty new breed of mom-and-pop lunch stands.
The big rivals are on a tear.
Burger King is readying a major promotion funded by its rich new parent, Grand Metropolitan PLC of Britain, and PepsiCo Inc. 's Taco Bell is slashing the price of tacos from 79 cents to 59 cents and even 49 cents.
PepsiCo's other two fast-food players, Pizza Hut and Kentucky Fried Chicken, have gone on similar discounting binges. 

This puts pressure on McDonald's franchisees like Warren Barnes of Milford, N.H. "We'll drop $300, $400 in the next couple of days as soon as KFC puts {coupons} in the papers here," he says.
To fight back, "we're running 99-cent specials all over the place." 

McDonald's officials describe the discounting as "hysteria." At the corporate level, the company refuses to play the game.
While others have been slashing prices, McDonald's raised its own about 4.5% earlier this year. 

Leslie Steppel, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities, wonders about the impression this leaves.
The risk, she says, is that "suddenly you go to McDonald's and, relative to what you spent around the corner last week, you don't get quite the same feeling you're getting a good price-value relationship." 

Price may not be the only danger zone.
People surveyed by Consumer Network research group in May gave McDonald's a dismal customer satisfaction rating of 5.6 on a scale of 10 -- nearly a point below laggard Wendy's. "And this year we're starting to hear that not all McDonald's are clean," says Mona Doyle, Consumer Network's president. "People have found dirt at McDonald's]" 

The chain doesn't concede that.
It recently launched a campaign re-emphasizing cleanliness, but says this was a response not to complaints but to compliments. "It wasn't because we perceived a problem," a spokesman says. 

Keeping up service standards is likely to remain a headache, however, in light of the labor situation.
To achieve the famous McDonald's predictability, everything has to be done precisely by the book, which means with well-trained crews.
But hiring reliable help is becoming more difficult and more costly. 

"The minimum wage {of $3.35 an hour} is a fiction," says one veteran operator in the Midwest. "We're now advertising for people at $5 to $7.
We still can't get them." Nationwide, McDonald's says its average crew pay is $4.60 an hour.
It says turnover is stabilizing, partly because of the hiring of more senior citizens and working mothers. 

Opening outlets is also getting more expensive.
Analysts estimate the price tag of a new McDonald's at $1.4 million and say it has risen about 10% a year for the past four years.
Average sales per restaurant have gone up at half that rate.
Expansion is obviously crucial to revenue growth in an era of stagnant same-store sales. 

But in the U.S., some McDonald's restaurants are now so close together that they steal sales from one another.
It's hard to travel more than a few miles without encountering golden arches, even around such byways as Devil's Lake, N.D., (pop. 7,442) and Cut Off, La., (pop. 2,000).
Houston alone has 75 McDonald's. 

Founder Ray Kroc used to say that "the only definition of saturation is a sponge -- there's really no limit." The company now is invading less conventional fast-food sites such as hospital cafeterias and airport terminals.
To the approximately 10,720 McDonald's restaurants world-wide, it adds another every 15 hours.
It has the formula so well refined that less than 0.5% fail.
Two-thirds of the stores are operated by franchisees, the rest by the company. 

The restaurants opened abroad are the best sellers.
While volume at company-owned outlets in the U.S. barely edged up last year, to about $1.5 million each, those abroad show steadily rising volume that last year averaged nearly $1.9 million.
However, Merrill Lynch estimates that the strength of the dollar could cost McDonald's $40 million in sales in the current quarter. 

McDonald's also relies on menu growth for expansion.
But new culinary territory is harder to conquer than real estate.
The recent McChicken Sandwich has proved disappointing, perhaps because it arrived long after Burger King launched such an item.
It spent years perfecting McChicken Sandwich, and tested it in more than 5,000 restaurants before taking it national. 

"We were late out of the block," says William Konopnicki, head of a large McDonald's franchisee group, and the item "hasn't had the impact it might have had five years ago." At McDonald's, he adds, "There is a tendency to take too long to get stuff rolled out." 

It certainly isn't going to be first with pizza or fried chicken.
George Rice, a Chicago-based restaurant consultant, thinks pizza "will be the hardest thing they've ever done.
It requires a wide variety of options for condiments: Do you want pepperoni, sausage, mushrooms?
McDonald's specialty has always been telling people pretty much how they should have it." 

Critics also wonder whether customers used to instant service and low prices will be willing to wait as long as five minutes for a pizza or pay as much as $9.95 for one.
Or whether they'll be satisfied with a frozen pizza dough or pies that come with only four choices of toppings. 

Lisa Euler has no complaints. "It was really good -- I was surprised," says the teacher who tried McDonald's pizza in the Evansville, Ind., test market. "I expected a frozen-pizza taste." But Jim Jones, a student at Evansville's Central High (who by virtue of being a kid belongs to the prime pizza-eating population), was less satisfied. "It tastes like microwave pizza," says the 16-year-old. 

In a perhaps ominous twist, independent restaurants of the sort McDonald's ran out of business in the '60s and '70s now are sprouting up again to nibble at the giant. "Like the little girl warned in 'Poltergeist II,' they're back," warns Chicago franchisee Angelo Lencioni, who says his restaurants lose as much as $500 a day in sales to a half-dozen new independents. 

Nearby Deno's Deli, for instance, "is a family business doing things we can't do," he says.
Dean Christos, who inherited the place from his Greek immigrant parents, says he's turning the tables on McDonald's with an expanded menu of fried chicken, turkey sandwiches and frozen yogurt -- plus computer screens in the kitchen that enable cashiers to instantly relay orders. 

One thing at which McDonald's still leads is promoting, what with its annual promotion budget of $650 million and phenomenal name recognition.
McDonald's is the single most advertised brand in the U.S., according to Advertising Age magazine.
And when the giant moves, look out, says Norman Brinker, chairman of the Chili's restaurant chain: "They've got locations, marketing skills and power no one else can come close to matching." A feistier survivor would be hard to find.
Look at its track record, says Mr. Kennedy, the IDS analyst. "We've written them off before, and they did breakfast.
We said there weren't enough sites left, and they got into colleges and tollways.
Then we said they were so slow developing overseas, and that's grown 30%.
It's been wrong to bet against this company over time." 

