.START 

Japan's political wars resume Sunday with a by-election that could set the tone for the next several months. 

Voters in Ibaraki prefecture, outside Tokyo, will be filling a single vacancy in the upper house of the Diet, or parliament.
But pundits and politicians say the election, the first since Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu took office early last month, will have a major impact on the Diet's debates on an unpopular consumption tax and on the timing of lower-house elections. 

"It's a very important election symbolically," says Shoichi Nakagawa, a young lower-house Diet member of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party. 

In July, the scandal-plagued LDP suffered a stunning setback, losing its majority in the upper house to a coalition of opposition parties headed by the Japan Socialist Party.
The Ibaraki election, says an influential LDP elder, "will determine whether we can stop the trend that came out of the upper-house elections." 

If the LDP succeeds, party advocates of an early lower-house election will get a boost.
By law, the lower-house election has to be held by next June.
The party is divided between those who want to go to the voters later this year and those who want to wait until the first few months of next year. 

Those who want to delay hope that the passage of time will help voters forget their anger with the LDP.
A victory by the LDP's candidate in Ibaraki, 47-year-old Itsuo Nomura, would suggest that the electorate's anti-LDP mood is already changing. 

A victory for the JSP-supported candidate, 63-year-old Shizue Hosogane, would have a less predictable impact.
As the consumption tax has been a focus of the Ibaraki campaign, the main effect of a Hosogane victory would be to hobble the LDP by underscoring the tax's unpopularity. 

The 80-day extraordinary session of the Diet that opened yesterday is expected to focus on conflict generated by the opposition's proposal to abolish the 3% tax and the LDP's hope to revise the tax rather than abolish it.
Tactically, in the event of an Ibaraki defeat, the LDP could call an early election before the opposition plan gels or wait until after an abolition bill passed the upper house and an LDP revision plan passed the lower house. 

The polls say the race is neck and neck.
Working against the LDP is the JSP's 50,000-vote victory in the prefecture in the July upper-house election.
In addition, the vacancy being filled was created by the death of an LDP politician whose widow wished to fill his seat.
But party leaders gave the nod to Mr. Nomura and pressured the widow to back out.
As a result, a 173,000-member farmers group that supported the deceased politician has told its members to vote as they wish. 

Factors in the LDP's favor include Prime Minister Kaifu's growing popularity.
According to a newspaper poll published yesterday, public support for the Kaifu cabinet has climbed to 40.9%, while 38.1% don't support it, marking the first time in a year that this newspaper's polls have shown a cabinet as having more supporters than opponents. 

Also helping the LDP is the presence in the race of a relatively strong Japan Communist Party candidate, 41-year-old Setsuo Yamada, who is likely to split the anti-LDP vote.
Finally, the JSP and three other non-Communist opposition parties have called for replacing the consumption tax with a series of "commodity taxes" on certain items.
Newspaper editorials have been generally critical of the opposition's tax plan. 

