.START 

Come Monday, scores of folks from hereabouts will be making their lunch reservations for January, or, if they don't call until late in the day, for February or March. 

If they'd rather dine on a day in November, too late.
October, November and December got booked on Saturday, July 

It wasn't always like this at Table for Two, a restaurant that serves lunch to two people per day.
It is thought to be the smallest restaurant in the world, unless somewhere out there there's a one-stooler. 

Time was that habitues of the table could reserve for lunch just a week in advance.
Then a newspaper restaurant reviewer published his opinion that the food here was the best in town.
By 1:30 that afternoon, the place was booked for the rest of the year. 

Owners Nancy Briggs and Juanita Crampton started the restaurant four years ago as a sideline to their catering firm, Briggs & Crampton.
The reasoning was simple: Since they hired servers and were never present at their catered events, they didn't get to hear the yummy noises from people who ate their food. 

But yummy noises from two people per day, sometimes going on for hours and hours depending on their rate of consumption, was about all the women could take.
Pleas from customers to add another table, or at least another chair, go unheeded. 

Some customers, on the other hand, are willing to wait months just for the opportunity to dine without hearing noises of any sort from other diners.
Another attraction of the place is the absence of anyone who pops by to inquire, "How we doin'?" 

My lunch companion said the wait was worth it just to know she'd be spared a waiter who would spread a napkin in her lap. 

Ms. Briggs and Ms. Crampton speak sparingly to their two daily customers, except to identify the food, which is always a surprise.
Although they will take requests, they prefer simply to know what foods their customers won't eat, and then steer around them. 

I, for example, informed them ahead of time that I would refuse to eat liver and lima beans, no matter how elegant the presentation.
Presumably then they ditched all their liver and lima bean recipes and instead served me a delectable filet of salmon with blackberry-basil sauce. 

In four years of serving gourmet lunches four times a week, Ms. Briggs and Ms. Crampton have never done the same meal twice.
They rarely serve red meat, preferring to prepare seafood, poultry or game birds.
Other than liver and lima beans, the most frequently eschewed foods have been shellfish and oysters, although there was one couple who requested that oysters be in every course of their meal. 

Ms. Briggs and Ms. Crampton have found that there are certain drawbacks to their tiny restaurant's enormous acclaim.
For one thing, the place is such a hit that Ms. Briggs's husband, who used to hold the title of most frequent guest (probably just checking to see what leftovers he'd be eating that night), rarely gets to eat at his favorite restaurant anymore. 

"He has to get in line like everyone else," said his wife, with a helpless shrug.
Obviously, at this place, it doesn't matter whom you know. 

Another problem is that most of the customers are total strangers to Ms. Briggs and Ms. Crampton.
It used to be that only their friends, or friends of friends, frequented the place, so the two chefs never felt shy about unleashing their culinary derring do. 

"We've had some pretty bizarre lunches that have been a lot of fun," reminisced Ms. Crampton. 

Such as?
Well, there was the time they served green-lipped mussels from New Zealand.
Their guests smacked them right up.
Made yummy noises, too. 

Some customers come to Table for Two only because they've heard it's terrific for a tryst.
They barely notice the stunning displays of food that are placed before them.
Clearly, their minds are not on their plates. 

"More than one person has asked us if we have a room upstairs," said Ms. Briggs. (She didn't specify if that included the couple who ate all those oysters.) 

As far as I could determine there is no room upstairs, but it doesn't rile the chefs when folks express their urge for hanky panky, just as long as they do it on a full stomach.
Ms. Briggs and Ms. Crampton admit to getting hurt feelings if a lot of food is left untouched.
And, unlike your mother, they don't object to the occasional customer who picks up the plate and licks it. 

What peeves them most is when a guest is totally oblivious to the food, like the oaf who managed to insult both the chefs and his date by spending the entire time yakking on his cellular phone.
He never once covered the mouthpiece to remark how great the food was, or how lovely his date looked sitting across from him at the only table in the world's most intimate restaurant. 

On that day, nobody made yummy noises. 

Ms. Hauser is a free-lance writer based in Portland. 

