.START 

The over-the-counter market sprang to life, posting its strongest gains in over a month. 

Traders said Wednesday's resiliency in equity markets helped boost prices yesterday.
They added that end-of-the-quarter buying has helped many issues' prices climb. 

The Nasdaq Composite Index jumped 3.37 to 471.14, or 0.72%, its biggest one-day advance since gaining over four points in late August.
By comparison, the New York Stock Exchange Composite rose 0.9%. 

"The market's telling you it isn't ready to go down," said E.E. Geduld, president of Herzog Heine Geduld. 

Along with other traders, Mr. Geduld expressed surprise that stock prices withstood Wednesday's gloomy earnings outlook by International Business Machines Corp., which also influences OTC technology stocks. 

"When they don't go down on bad news, you know they're going up," he said. 

Trading volume climbed to 133.1 million shares from 123.2 million on Wednesday.
Stocks that gained in price led decliners, 1,057 to 838. 

Ralph Costanza, head of the OTC trading department at Smith Barney, Harris Upham, said low inventory among dealers and a reluctance by many institutions to sell at the end of a strong third quarter have shrunk the supply of stocks available to buyers.
That sets the stage for higher prices when investors decide to buy, he said. 

Mr. Costanza said this lack of supply, coupled with a resilient market and high cash levels among retail investors, could mean further gains in the fourth quarter. 

Waste-management stocks provided investors with a focus in both the OTC market and on the Big Board.
Analysts say buyers have been attracted by the relative values in the group, according to Dow Jones Professional Investor Report.
Some analysts said much of the buying was fueled by a move by investors out of technology stocks, which have been plagued by earnings disappointments.
Among those issues benefiting from the trend was Laidlaw Transportation, the OTC market's largest transportation stock.
The Class B shares of the waste transporter rose 7/8 to 19 1/2, a new 52-week high.
The stock was on the most active list, with volume exceeding 2.5 million shares.
Laidlaw's Class A shares also gained 7/8 to 19 3/4. 

The boost in Laidlaw pushed the Nasdaq Transportation index up 9.62 to 480.50, making it the strongest of the Nasdaq indexes. 

Other waste-management stocks that gained in OTC trading included Allwaste, which surged 2 1/8 to 23 1/4, and Brand Cos., which added 1/4 to 28 1/4. 

The Nasdaq Utility Index gained 7.41 to 746.55.
The index includes cellular telephone issues, as well as other telecommunication stocks. 

Among those gaining, LIN Broadcasting rose 1 3/4 to 109 3/4.
McCaw Cellular Communications has been rumored to be preparing a sweetened offer for the company.
McCaw added 1/2 to 36. 

Lincoln Telecommunications, whose shares have languished since the company stiffened its anti-takeover defenses earlier this month, rose 1 to 63 1/2. 

MCI Communications, the largest Nasdaq stock, gained 3/4 to 45 1/4.
Moody's upgraded the company's subordinated notes and debentures, citing the company's improving cash flow and profitability. 

Guber-Peters Entertainment was the most active OTC issue, rising 3 7/8 to 17 on volume of more than 2.8 million shares.
The company accepted a $17.50-a-share cash acquisition proposal by Sony USA.
The proposal was linked to Sony Corp. 's offer to buy Columbia Pictures. 

Commercial Intertech jumped 6 1/2 to 25 1/2 following Wednesday's $27.50-a-share acquisition offer for the company from the investment firm Haas & Partners. 

Carrington Laboratories fell 2 1/2 to 21.
The stock has been hurt by speculation that Ohio Casualty might sell its 10% stake in the drug maker because the portfolio manager who took the position has died, the Professional Investor Report said.
Neither Ohio Casualty nor Carrington Labs officials could be reached for comment. 

Campeau lost 1 1/2 to 8.
Analysts said investors are concerned about the company's financial outlook. 

