.START 

As part of its intensifying thrust to revive tobacco sales with a new generation of products, Philip Morris Cos. said it is rolling out a low-smoke cigarette called Superslims under the Virginia Slims brand name. 

The nation's largest tobacco maker said its new ultra-low-tar cigarette will emit 70% less smoke from the lit end than conventional cigarettes through a special combination of porous and nonporous paper.
In addition, Superslims are skinny: only 17 millimeters in circumference, compared with 25 millimeters for standard cigarettes. 

Some analysts played down the significance of the introduction, saying the niche product isn't a technological breakthrough and is unlikely to reverse the decline of the tobacco industry.
They speculated that Philip Morris is simply trying to blunt the success of Capri, the ultra-thin cigarette made by B.A.T Industries PLC's Brown & Williamson Co. subsidiary.
Capri holds 0.6% of the market.
Ads planned for Superslim will state that it produces 60% less smoke than Capri. 

"It's possible that a cigarette with less smoke will permit women to smoke more, but it still isn't going to be a big product," said Roy Burry, a Kidder Peabody analyst.
Mr. Burry added that the cigarette probably won't deliver enough taste -- and enough nicotine -- to suit most smokers. "When you cut smoke, you cut the tar and nicotine," he said.
Superslims contain 6.0 milligrams of tar and 0.5 milligram of nicotine.
By comparison, full-strength Marlboros contain 16 milligrams of tar and 1.1 milligrams of nicotine. 

The introduction of the low-smoke cigarette comes just a few months after Philip Morris began testing Next, billed as the first virtually nicotine-free cigarette.
The product, which looks and burns like a regular cigarette, is a sharp contrast to RJR Nabisco Inc. 's ill-fated "smokeless" cigarette called Premier.
Premier, essentially a gizmo designed to deliver nicotine, didn't burn tobacco.
RJR is currently testing its own low-smoke cigarette called Vantage Excell 100's. 

A Philip Morris spokesman said the company is so confident about the success of Superslims that it is rolling the product out nationally without the usual test-market phase. (Analysts note that the rush to market is also neatly timed to coincide with the Virginia Slims tennis tournament next month). 

The ad campaign for Superslims, developed by Leo Burnett U.S.A. agency, will begin late next month with the slogans, "Introducing the first low-smoke cigarette for women" and "Fat smoke is history." 

Virginia Slims, the leading cigarette among women, has about a 3% share of the U.S. tobacco market. 

