.START 

Through a takeover bid it didn't want or expect to succeed, Harlin Holdings Pty. has tripled its stake in Elders IXL Ltd., raising speculation some Elders assets will be sold to handle the nearly two-billion-Australian-dollar (US$1.55 billion) transaction. 

Far from aiming to accumulate a large stake in the brewer, last month's offer was designed to appease critics who objected to a separate plan by Harlin -- which already owned 18% of Elders -- to acquire as much as 17% more from a small group of holders at A$3 (US$2.33) a share.
Detractors thought all holders deserved the chance to sell at that price. 

When the one-month general offer closed Wednesday, however, Harlin found that 21.5% of Elders shares had been tendered, including 110 million shares, or 6%, on the final day alone.
Combined with a 15.5% stake derived from the special transaction that touched off the controversy, the tendered shares pushed Harlin's holding in Elders to 59.3%. 

Initially, analysts had expected no more than 100 million shares, or 5% of the total, to be tendered in response to the general offer, which was widely viewed as undervaluing the company.
Harlin's strategy went awry, analysts say, because Elders's annual earnings, disclosed last week, disappointed investors.
Moreover, Australian stock prices have weakened recently. 

Harlin is a closely held company controlled by Elders chairman John Elliott, several Elders executives, the Elders pension fund and AFP Group PLC, a London-based investment company. 

The tide of acceptances of Harlin's offer caused its debt load to balloon, says Tim Buckley, an analyst at securities firm Macquarie Equities Ltd. Harlin has "got to act quickly" to reduce its debt, he says. 

Analysts doubt Harlin will make another, higher offer for Elders -- a step it might be expected to take in order to complete its ownership of the company and gain access to its cash flow.
They think it is more likely Harlin will offer investors more equity in itself, or perhaps persuade Elders, one of Australia's biggest companies with interests in brewing, financial services, natural resources and agribusiness, to sell assets and return the cash to Elders shareholders. 

If Elders assets are sold, analysts believe the ones that could go first are Elders's 4.7% stake in Kerr-McGee Corp., a U.S.-based chemical-and-resource company; a 13.5% stake in British brewer Greene King & Sons PLC; and an approximately 23% holding in Scottish & Newcastle Breweries PLC, which British corporate regulators have stipulated must be cut to below 10% by July 1990 anyway. 

Elders also holds a 14% stake in NWA Inc., parent company of Northwest Airlines in the U.S. 

Max Ware, Harlin's managing director, declined to comment on market "speculation" about Harlin's course of action.
Elders also refused to comment. 

Analysts say Harlin's original intention was to simply tighten its control over Elders, mainly by grabbing up to 17% of shares held jointly by AFP Group and Goodman Fielder Wattie Ltd., an Australasian food concern, through another company, Petitio Ltd. Harlin didn't want to get stuck with a big expensive holding if it wasn't at least a 90% stake. 

AFP and Goodman Fielder wanted to sell the Petitio stake and, in May, Elders proposed to offer the 17% parcel to other shareholders at A$3 a share.
Because Elders was trading below A$3, it appeared unlikely that many shareholders would pay the asking price being asked.
As a result, Harlin, underwriter of the sale, would acquire most of the stake.
Elders's share price, though, rose to around the A$3 level after the general offer was announced. 

In July, following criticism of the limited offer, Harlin announced plans to make a general offer at A$3 a share, valuing all of Elders at A$5.4 billion.
Mr. Elliott and other Elders directors urged shareholders to reject it.
Moreover, First Boston Australia Ltd., acting as an independent expert, valued Elders shares at a higher range of A$3.36 to A$3.79 each. 

To finance the general takeover offer, Harlin lined up a package of loans and got several international companies to agree to take so-called standby equity in Harlin, with the amounts varying depending on the number of Elders shares that Harlin acquired.
However, Harlin said its original shareholders, including Mr. Elliott, would maintain voting control of Harlin. 

Among the international companies that agreed to invest in Harlin are Canadian brewer Molson Cos., with which Elders has a joint brewing venture in Canada, Prudential-Bache Interfunding Inc., Cie.
Financiere de Suez, Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp. and Grand Metropolitan PLC, which brews some of Elders's Foster's-brand beer under license in Britain.
Hongkong Bank and Citibank agreed to arrange loans for Harlin. 

