.START 

United Industrial Corp. likes to move fast.
Last week, the Singapore trading and investment-holding company said it sold a shopping center to a unit of Japanese retailer Sogo Co. for 690 million Singapore dollars (US$348.7 million), nearly double the price it paid just 10 months ago.
The next day, UIC said it had paid S$230.7 million for a 13% stake in Singapore Land Ltd., the country's leading property company. 

Singapore's stock market responded favorably.
Shares of property companies -- especially those with holdings on Orchard Road, where the shopping center was located -- rose sharply, as did the prices of UIC and Singapore Land. 

With an estimated S$1 billion in assets, UIC may be on the verge of transforming itself into one of Singapore's leading property concerns, analysts say.
First, though, they say, it must decide whether it will become a staid member of Singapore's corporate community or whether it will continue as an aggressive trader.
Given the company's new prominence, the swift asset-trading moves that have been UIC's trademark could become less welcome in in highly regulated Singapore. 

A reminder of the republic's toughness came Sept. 16 when Allan Ng, a businessman and former executive deputy chairman of Singapore's biggest bank, United Overseas Bank Ltd., was sentenced to a year in prison after pleading guilty to insider-trading charges. 

Mr. Ng was briefly the darling of the market after he carried out three big property transactions in 1987.
He was credited with reviving Singapore's then-moribund property market, but he came to grief while gaining control of what ultimately became his stock-market vehicle, First Capital Corp.
In pleading guilty, Mr. Ng admitted to having First Capital shares bought for him while in possession of price-sensitive information. 

Mr. Ng sold his stake in First Capital to UIC in 1987.
UIC has undergone a metamorphosis since then, says Lim Kok An, an analyst for Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith (Singapore) Pte., from a small detergent maker with scattered investments, including pig farms, to a huge concern with most of its assets in property. 

Mr. Lim believes the transformation will last. "I don't think you can ignore it's now a prime property stock," he says, adding that the president and chief executive officer, Oei Hong Leong, "is looking for a long-term play." The company's chairman is Lee Kim Yew, younger brother of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew. 

Mr. Lim says UIC has been attracting interest from overseas investors.
Other analysts say the company's aggressive reputation makes many foreign fund managers nervous. "The management have always been wheeler-dealers," says Simon Woods, head of research at Barclays de Zoete Union Pacific Pte.
But, says Mr. Woods, "there's no large institutional following." 

