.START 

Kyocera Corp. agreed to acquire AVX Corp. for stock valued at $31.98 a share, or $561 million, apparently marking the first time a Japanese company has bought a U.S. concern entirely for stock. 

Kazuo Inamori, chairman of Kyocera, a maker of ceramic packages for semiconductors, said in an interview that he wanted to buy AVX for stock partly because of trade frictions between Japan and the U.S.
He said he wanted to emphasize that AVX, a maker of electronic components, was a partner that would remain intact. 

"When we buy with cash, there is a connotation -- certainly in Japan and maybe in the U.S., as well -- that we bought the company, it is ours and we can do anything with it," Mr. Inamori said through an interpreter. "That certainly is not the spirit of this arrangement." 

John O'Herron, a general partner of Lazard Freres & Co., which helped represent AVX, said he thought this could lead to similar acquisitions because it could show Japanese companies how to limit the predatory image they sometimes have in the U.S. 

Mr. Inamori also has argued that Japanese companies need to take the initiative in buying parts from U.S. companies and moving manufacturing to the U.S. 

In fact, Mr. Inamori said he and AVX Chairman Marshall D. Butler, who have known each other for almost 30 years, initially talked about having AVX make some parts for Kyocera, especially in Europe, where Kyocera has almost no manufacturing capacity.
Kyocera, based in Kyoto, generates just $200 million of its $2.5 billion of annual sales in Europe.
Kyocera wants to expand there before internal European Community trade barriers come down in 1992. 

Mr. Inamori said the decision to purchase the company for stock faced some obstacles, notably that Japanese law forbids subsidiaries from owning stock in the parent.
But he said he interceded with Japanese ministries and won "a liberal interpretation of the rules." 

Mr. Butler said he agreed to the purchase because it would give AVX access to a broad line of parts that it could sell in Europe, where AVX currently generates 25% of its $408 million of annual sales.
Mr. Butler also cited Kyocera's technology; while AVX and Kyocera both make capacitors, Kyocera also makes a broad line of electronics, including printer heads, liquid crystal displays and personal computers. 

In addition, Mr. Butler said AVX's stock was undervalued.
AVX stock surged $8 yesterday to close at $29.625 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

If the necessary governmental approvals are received and a majority of AVX holders accept, each share of AVX will be exchanged for 0.39 Kyocera American depositary receipts.
The ADRs, each of which represents two shares of Kyocera common stock, closed yesterday at $80.625 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, up 12.5 cents. 

The number of ADRs exchanged will be increased if their average closing price remains below $82 during the 15 days beginning a month before the AVX shareholders vote on the acquisition, probably in late December. 

