.START 

Wellcome PLC's antiviral drug AZT may prevent, rather than simply alleviate, a common symptom of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, a team of Dutch scientists concluded. 

The drug appears to prevent dementia -- which seriously afflicts about one-third of people suffering from AIDS -- according to a study of 196 Dutch patients.
Previous research indicated AZT merely could relieve AIDS victims' mental confusion and memory loss. 

The latest findings, reported in this week's British Medical Journal, may reduce AIDS patients' need to be hospitalized because of their mental deterioration.
The study also could further spur the use of AZT, the world's only prescription medicine approved for treating AIDS, at earlier stages of the fatal disease. 

"You can infer . . . from this data that if you treat healthy {infected} individuals, dementia will never occur," said Jaap Goudsmit, a virologist and lead author of the report. "It looks like giving AZT eliminates the disease course in one part of your body" -- the brain, added Dr. Goudsmit, chief of the Human Retrovirus Laboratory at the University of Amsterdam's Academic Medical Center. 

Demand for AZT already is expected to mushroom due to findings announced in August that the drug slows the onset of AIDS in people infected with the virus but not yet showing any symptoms of disease.
That suggests the Wellcome drug will benefit hundreds of thousands of infected people besides the tens of thousands of patients with AIDS symptoms.
Analysts have projected a broadened market for the British pharmaceutical maker's product could boost AZT sales to $1 billion by 1992, from an estimated $220 million in the year ended Aug. 31. 

Anticipating this growth and bowing to patient pressure, London-based Wellcome announced a 20% price cut last week that effectively reduced AZT's retail price to $6,400 from $8,000 a year per patient.
The new realization that AZT may forestall dementia represents "a very significant advance," said Charles Farthing, an AIDS investigator at New York University Medical Center.
Demented AIDS patients "often are the ones who have to be institutionalized." 

Dr. Farthing believes the study also "might have the good effect of persuading more {AIDS} patients to try the drug at any stage" because many "enormously fear losing their mental faculties." Some AIDS victims now avoid AZT because it can cause serious side effects such as anemia and bone-marrow suppression. 

In the Dutch study, Dr. Goudsmit and his team kept track of neurological symptoms in 196 AIDS patients between 1982 and 1988.
The incidence of dementia dropped markedly once AZT was introduced in May 1987.
The scientists found 38 of the 107 patients not taking the drug developed dementia.
By comparison, only two of the 89 receiving the medication became demented. 

The fact that some AZT-treated patients still showed mental deterioration implies the drug "won't stop the occurrence of dementia" entirely, Dr. Farthing argued.
Dr. Goudsmit disagreed. "You don't know if you have treated people too late" to avoid dementia, he noted. "I think {the drug} prevents it." He said final proof should emerge from ongoing U.S. studies involving AZT and symptomless carriers of AIDS. 

In a related development, Wellcome announced a new chief for Burroughs-Wellcome Co., the Research Triangle Park, N.C.-based unit that has borne the brunt of the recent U.S. uproar over AZT's high price.
Philip Tracy, Burroughs-Wellcome's executive vice president, will succeed T.E. Haigler, Jr. as the unit's president and chief executive following Mr. Haigler's retirement Nov. 1.
Mr. Tracy also will join the parent company's board, along with David Barry, Burroughs-Wellcome's vice president of research and development. 

