.START 

L.A. Gear Inc. 's net income nearly trebled for the third quarter ended Aug. 31 to $22 million, or $1.21 a share, from $8.7 million, or 50 cents a share, a year ago. 

Sales of the sneaker and sportswear company soared to $215 million from $76.1 million. 

Yet the company's stock price dropped yesterday to close at $43.25, down $1.875, after climbing $3.625 a share in the prior day's trading in anticipation of the earnings report.
Volume was heavy, nearly two million shares in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Similar stock action has occurred in previous quarters when the company also posted record earnings, and industry analysts attributed the drop in the stock price to profit-taking, rather than any disappointment on Wall Street with the results.
Some of the company's executives cashed in portions of their L.A. Gear stock holdings in a public offering of 1.2 million shares in August. 

"The stock has run up tremendously recently, and people may be taking profits at this point," said Todd Berko, an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in New York.
The quarterly earnings were better than the $1.15 a share that Mr. Berko had projected, and the analyst said he is now likely to increase his full-year earnings estimate of $3.20 a share. 

In addition to several positive devlopments at the company in recent weeks, including an agreement with singer Michael Jackson to design and market a line of fashion sneakers and other apparel, analysts have attributed at least a part of the recent stock increases to arbitragers covering their short positions. 

In the first nine months, net income jumped to $43.4 million, or $2.47 a share, from $15.8 million, or 93 cents a share a year ago.
Sales increased nearly threefold to $450.7 million from $159.9 million. 

Per-share earnings in both the third quarter and nine months were adjusted for a two-for-one stock split that became effective earlier this week. 

Robert Y. Greenberg, L.A. Gear's chairman and chief execuitive officer, said that although the third quarter is typically the company's strongest because of back-to-school business, "we are very optimistic for the performance of our company in the coming months, as reflected in our current backlog of approximately $225 million, compared with $150 million at Aug. 1, 1989." He said the third-quarter performance can be linked to continued strong demand for the company's footwear, apparel, jeans and watches. 

