.START 

Because of U.S. reservations about increasing the resources of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, both institutions ended their annual meetings uncertain about their quests for further funds. 

The respective roles of the two international agencies, the new U.S.-led international debt strategy, and the troubled economies of Poland, Brazil and Argentina also provided major focuses for the meetings, which ended yesterday.
Meanwhile, China's attempts to regain access to World Bank loans didn't make headway, although World Bank President Barber Conable said he hoped the institution soon would be able to resume lending to that country.
The World Bank cut off lending to China in June, after the Beijing government cracked down on pro-democracy demonstrators. 

The World Bank is campaigning for a $14.5 billion increase in the resources of its International Development Association unit, which lends to the world's poorest countries.
Most member countries have agreed to contribute their share of the increase, but they still are waiting for agreement from the U.S., which is stalling.
The U.S. contribution would be just over $1 billion a year for three years, or about 22% of the total. 

Mr. Conable said that if the U.S. doesn't agree to join in increasing IDA's funds by the time of a forthcoming meeting of the World Bank affiliate in Kyoto, Japan, in November, "it'll be a serious blow to support for the poorest people in the world." "The U.S. should consider whether it wants to reduce its influence in the poorest countries in the world," Mr. Conable said in an interview. 

President Bush said Wednesday that the IDA "will continue to have the support of the U.S." In negotiations on the IDA replenishment, Bush administration officials have cited difficulties in Congress for their slowness in agreeing on funds for the unit. 

But Mr. Conable, a former senior congressman himself, said, "I am really not concerned about Congress." There's a "completely different" and more favorable attitude in Congress to the IDA than there is toward the World Bank as a whole, Mr. Conable said. 

The IMF also is looking for funds.
Its managing director, Michel Camdessus, is seeking a 100% increase in resources -- about $120 billion -- from member countries.
The Bush administration has agreed to consider an increase by the end of the year.
But unlike most members, the U.S. contends that a strong case hasn't yet been made for an increase.
The U.S., which effectively holds a veto in the fund, also wants the IMF to clear up its arrears and define its role more sharply. 

Mr. Camdessus said that he believed the annual meetings "have established an important consensus on the need to strengthen the fund's resources." At a news conference yesterday, he said that 70% of the voting membership "is for an increase of 67% or more" in the IMF's resources.
He obliquely referred to the U.S., Britain and Saudi Arabia -- the three countries that don't back such an increase -- when he asked, "will the three countries veto the increase?" 

Unlike the IDA, the IMF may face opposition in Congress. "There's going to be some trouble up here on the IMF quota increase," said a staffer for Walter Fauntroy, chairman of a House subcommittee on international development, finance, trade and monetary policy. "The IMF would be well advised to differentiate its role more clearly," he added. 

Traditionally, there still is confusion over the two institutions' respective roles despite an agreement between them earlier this year. "It's procedural," Mr. Conable said, discussing the frictions between the two agencies.
The IMF "is getting into some of the longer-term stuff that was traditionally ours," Mr. Conable said.
In the past, the IMF has concentrated more on making short-term loans and devising economic reform programs to help nations with balance-of-payments difficulties, while the World Bank generally has made longer-term loans to foster economic development. 

Mr. Conable said the recent agreement gives the IMF primacy in matters regarding macroeconomic policy, while the World Bank "in return," gets "primacy" in longer-term lending. 

Meanwhile, the two institutions seem to have switched roles this year in their approach to Argentina.
The IMF this week agreed to a $1.4 billion loan accord with that troubled country, while Mr. Conable merely pledged to support the country's planned economic adjustment efforts.
In a controversial move at last year's annual meetings, the World Bank lent to Argentina while the IMF issued a statement of support for the nation.
At the time, the World Bank was criticized for lending before the IMF had. 

