.START 

Football, we've heard, is a metaphor for life.
It must be true.
Conflict, triumph, tragedy, pain, grace under pressure, anxiety -- rules. 

Especially rules.
Football clearly is keeping step with the modern explosion in regulation and "dispute adjustment." Whether this trend enhances public enjoyment of the game is just as open to question as whether plaintiff lawyers are, as they claim, a boon to mankind. 

During Monday's night's Bengals-Browns game at Cincinnati's Riverfront Stadium six men in striped shirts stopped action for an interminable caucus at midfield.
There seemed to be a lot of animated discussion about whether or not a Bengal or Brown had been guilty of a misdemeanor.
ABC's Frank Gifford, as mystified as several million other watchers, complained that ABC could have run in three commercials if it had only known how long this would take.
Network money men were no doubt squirming.
Finally, a referee confronted the cameras, crowd and official scorekeepers, pressed the little button on his belt that cued him into the P.A. system, and uttered these words: "There was no infraction." 

Another fine point of football law later arose over whether the Browns' Bernie Kosar had trespassed the line of scrimmage while scrambling out of the pocket and firing a completion.
ABC's crew didn't think his foot had crossed the line, but maybe his hand did before he released the ball.
Mr. Kosar was found guilty as charged. 

A law of bureaucracy comes into play.
All those men in striped shirts have to justify their presence and paychecks, and that means throwing a yellow flag now and then.
Is it easier for six men to agree than two?
Seemingly not, judging from game delays. 

Some might argue that penalties enliven the game.
Sportscasters can debate endlessly, aided by instant replays, whether a 15-yard sentence was just or unjust.
Riverfront Stadium comes to resemble New York's Southern District Federal Court, where an eager press camped out for days to learn whether Leona had stepped out of bounds in sending a company work crew upfield to her Greenwich mansion. 

But for some of us, crime and punishment is less exciting than the exploits of gifted athletes soaring through the air to catch or block passes or threading through a valley of angry giants in search of running room and glory.
Do Joe Montana's honor guards deserve to be treated like common criminals for occasionally catching their cuff links in charging linebackers' shirts?
Is the instant-replay court of appeals, second-guessing those six gentlemen on the field, a case of taking justice too seriously? 

Finally, could it possibly be that all this regulation and arbitration are sowing the seeds for destruction of that incredibly successful enterprise called the NFL?
If so, maybe that too is a metaphor for modern economic life. 

