.START 

Eastman Kodak Co., elaborating on its latest restructuring proposal, reshuffled some existing business units and created a few new ones. 

The photographic, chemical and pharmaceutical concern didn't, however, specify which businesses it planned to shed to reduce costs. 

Last month, after its second-quarter profit fell 85%, Kodak said it would cut its work force by 4,500 and sell or consolidate about 20 ailing businesses with revenue totaling $1.25 billion.
But its latest announcement didn't indicate exactly how those cost savings would be achieved. 

The Rochester, N.Y.-based company said it will split its information systems group, which posted a 93% drop in second-quarter profit, into two separate groups.
One, an imaging information systems group, will concentrate on software, sensors and scanners; the other, the commercial systems group, will manufacture printing and publishing products. 

Kodak's three other major divisions, however -- imaging, chemicals and health -- will remain essentially intact, although some units will be reorganized.
For example, Kodak's health business will consist of four separate units -- Sterling Drug, health sciences, clinical products and household products.
Until now, household products, which manufactures Lysol disinfectant, reported to Sterling Drug, while health sciences and clinical products were grouped separately. 

Analysts said Kodak may be positioning certain businesses, like household products, for the auction block. "Household products just doesn't fit with Kodak's other businesses," said Brenda Lee Landry of Morgan Stanley & Co.
A Kodak spokesman, however, said its repositioning of certain businesses doesn't mean the company plans to shed them. 

Kodak observers were unimpressed by the outlined changes. "These (organization) changes aren't going to alter Kodak's fundamental difficulties," said Alex Henderson, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities, Inc. "This isn't the major restructuring Wall Street is looking for." 

Kodak's announcement came after the close of trading.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, its shares closed at $46.75, unchanged. 

Kodak announced several management changes as part of its business realignment.
Lawrence J. Matteson, currently a company group vice president and general manager, commercial and information systems, was named general manager of the new imaging information systems group.
Frank P. Strong, general manager of diversified technologies/life science, was named general manager of the newly formed commercial systems group. 

Leo J. Thomas, chairman of Kodak's Sterling Drug unit, was named general manager of the health division.
In addition, John P. White, a general manager in software, was named general manager and vice president of the newly formed integration and systems product division, a part of Kodak's imaging business. 

