.START 

FRICTION GROWS between Brady and Greenspan over the strong dollar. 

Brady and his lieutenant David Mulford believe the Federal Reserve should lower interest rates, which would make U.S. investments less attractive and bring down the dollar.
But Greenspan and other Fed officials say repeatedly that interest-rate policy should focus on the U.S. economy and inflation, not the dollar. 

Greenspan privately chafes at the entire G-7 process for coordinating international economic policies.
It was a mistake, he believes, to put so much emphasis on the dollar.
And even Fed officials who favor lower rates, like Vice Chairman Johnson, are irritated by what they see as Mulford's high-handed tactics. 

Participants in this week's finance-minister meetings say privately that tension between the Treasury and the Fed was "in the air" throughout discussions of the dollar. 

MUBARAK'S PLAN puts Shamir in a box and creates a dilemma for Bush. 

The Egyptian leader, who meets Bush Monday, is expected to tell him that Arafat approves Mubarak's U.S.-endorsed plan, which includes a Cairo meeting of Israelis and Palestinians.
The U.S. mistakenly thought Israeli Defense Minister Rabin, who has expressed support for the idea, could get Prime Minister Shamir to go along. 

Now, if the U.S. pushes too hard for Mubarak's plan, it could precipitate a political crisis in Israel.
But backing away from Mubarak's plan could damage Arab ties.
Israeli Foreign Minister Arens, who also meets Bush Monday, will avoid being pinned down on the plan.
Instead, he'll complain that Mubarak, who wants to play the role of peace broker, refuses to meet with Shamir. 

HIGH MARKS in Bush's Cabinet go to Baker, Cheney and Agriculture's Yeutter. 

White House aides say the secretary of state got a big dose of credibility with his successful meetings with Shevardnadze.
Though Cheney's defense budget got sliced up in the House, he's viewed as a "smart guy" who may have the Cabinet's toughest assignment.
Yeutter gets top grades for his expertise on a variety of issues. 

But conservatives rap Transportation's Skinner for his talk of a Democratic-sounding national transportation policy and for refusing to loosen fuel-economy standards.
White House aides worry about Attorney General Thornburgh's poor press relations.
Trade rep Hills, though a policy heavyweight, puts off some with her icy style. 

Bush aides speculate that Labor's Dole, who's had little impact, may run for the Senate if Jesse Helms retires. 

NORIEGA HELPS reduce the U.S. deficit, according to Congress.
The House counts as revenue the interest from the escrow account into which U.S. Panama Canal fees are being placed during the struggle to get the Panamanian dictator to quit.
Next year's estimated benefit: $23 million.
If Noriega holds on through 1994, the U.S. could make $153 million. 

IRAN ATTRACTS investment from U.S. allies, despite American hostility.
Finance Minister Nourbakhsh says South Korean and Japanese investors have agreed to pour over $1 billion into industrial projects.
He boasts that French officials told him during this week's IMF meeting they won't stand in the way of similar French funding. 

BAHAMIAN LEADER PINDLING, who has filed a libel suit against a report he had drug ties, applauds Bush's drug plan but warns that success could bring other perils.
In recent years, cocaine routes have shifted away from the Bahamas.
As the business dwindles, he says, violence has increased as criminals battle for pieces of the shrinking pie and addicts are forced to pay more for a scarcer commodity. 

ANIMAL-RIGHTS RULES worry HHS Secretary Sullivan and other officials.
Frederick Goodwin, who directs the nation's drug-abuse research efforts, says complying with the new federal regulations on use of animals in medical research will drain 17% of the money from National Institutes of Health research funds.
Goodwin applauds the new Miss America for stressing the importance of animals in medical research. 

DEMOCRATS HOPE to salvage something from their capital gains defeat. 

Though Bush's plan won, they hope his victory will reinforce the GOP's image as the party of the wealthy. "Democrats made the valiant fight," says House Budget Chairman Panetta. "Now it's George Bush's issue." Democratic Party leaders talk of extracting a big price from the administration in any future budget or tax deal. 

But party divisions linger.
Liberal Democrats are impatient with the House leaders, whom they see as too eager for negotiation instead of principled confrontation. "We ought to let Democrats be Democrats," says Montana Rep. Williams.
Republicans hope to use the Democrats they attracted in the capital gains fight to form other coalitions, notably on next week's child care vote. 

House Majority Leader Gephardt begs for patience: "We haven't been at this very long.
Give us a chance." 

MINOR MEMOS: The Korean education minister warns universities there to restrain students from burning the U.S. flag.
Although it's legal to burn the flag in the U.S., it isn't in Korea. . . . As Bush draws fire for providing inadequate aid to Poland, new banners hanging from the Treasury boast, "Financing Freedom for 200 Years." . . . The SEC, which penalizes firms for tardy annual reports, is about to issue its own -- for the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, 1988. 

