.START 

If you work on your feet or don't know how to type, much of the computer revolution has swept right by you.
Tandy Corp. thinks it has a machine that can change that. 

It's a hand-held computer called GRiDPad introduced here by Tandy's GRiD Systems Corp. subsidiary.
Touted as the computer industry's answer to paper and pen, the clipboard-size GRiDPad, which will list for $2,395, is less than 1 1/2 inches thick and weighs just 4 1/2 pounds.
It has a large glass writing surface, an electronic pen -- and no keyboard. 

"What we've got here is the ultimate Etch-a-Sketch," said product manager Kenneth Dulaney, who added that GRiDPad is not a toy but a practical tool for census takers, insurance adjusters, ticket-writing police officers or anyone else who fills out forms outside an office. 

Analysts see a potentially large market for GRiDPad.
While most of the estimated $20 billion in sales of hand-held computers comes from "data-capture" devices that read bar codes or radio frequencies, E. Gray Glass, senior analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities, thinks devices such as GRiDPad could capture up to 15% of that market. 

GRiDPad's new wrinkle is its ability to "read" handwritten block letters and convert them into type.
It also digitizes the letters, which means the information is stored in the computer just as if it had been entered on a keyboard.
Plug-in storage cards can be programmed to display forms, traffic tickets or calculator keypads that look exactly like the paper version.
And with the addition of an optional 20-megabyte hard disk drive and keyboard, the core unit can be transformed into an IBM-compatible personal computer.
Voice or handwriting recognition are all the rage in computer research these days, as engineers search for alternatives to the keyboard.
But both technologies have encountered sizable obstacles.
Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corp., an Austin, Texas, research group, has worked for several years on a "neural net" -- an approach analogous to the ways humans absorb information. 

But a reliable system is years from perfection.
The alternative to neural nets -- and the path chosen by GRiD -- is called pattern recognition: computer programs that recognize certain shapes as corresponding to specific letters.
But such programs, says MCC researcher Gale Martin, tend to have little discretion, or judgment, and may for instance read a carelessly drawn "B" as an "8" when a human would have rejected such an interpretation based on the context. 

