.START 

It has been a week to remember.
We have seen Section 89 repealed, most of the catastrophic-health act and its surtax heading for repeal, and yesterday's dramatic vote on capital gains in which President Bush beat the House leadership.
What all this means is that votes in Congress are finally starting to reflect the voting in presidential elections. 

"Read my lips," Mr. Bush said last year, making his opposition to any tax increase a central issue of the 1988 election.
He won, just as his predecessor had also won with promises to relieve the nation's burden of taxation.
Prior to November's vote, Mr. Bush also promised explicitly to work for a reduction in the tax on capital gains.
With yesterday's 49-vote victory, the Bush presidency consolidates its mandate. 

The defection yesterday of 64 Democrats, led by Georgia's Ed Jenkins, indicates that the party indeed contains individuals who understand the country's desires on taxes and the economy.
At least 24 Northern Democrats -- from Massachusetts, Ohio, Michigan and Oregon -- opposed the leadership's position.
Three Californians also went over.
Freshman Democratic Senator Joseph Lieberman has been pressing the same pro-growth message from Connecticut: Policies such as the capital-gains rate cut aren't about enriching the few but about creating jobs and opportunity for the many.
We wonder how much longer the Democratic leadership that lost yesterday's crucial vote can allow the party's most liberal wing to paralyze its participation in the future. 

There is a more general point to be made about this week's votes.
They suggest how disconnected political Washington has become from political America.
The extraordinary history of the ill-fated Section 89 fringe-benefit tax is described below.
While Section 89 is a tale of Congressmen turning over their constitutional responsibilities to unelected staffers, catastrophic health was legislated in full view.
Both created a firestorm of public retribution.
How else can such colossal miscalculations of what Americans need or want be explained other than in terms of the Beltway's isolation? 

For years now, a simple message has been trying to penetrate Capitol Hill: Don't burden us with new costs, don't raise our taxes.
Do, however, enact policies, such as a capital-gains cut, that will continue the economic growth of the past seven years. 

In short, Congress, read America's lips. 

