.START 

The Mall at Short Hills, N.J., nestled in one of the country's most affluent suburbs, is a posh bazaar of the top names in retailing.
Paved in an expanse of white marble, it is studded with such stores as Abercrombie & Fitch, Fendi, Laura Ashley and Polo/Ralph Lauren. 

Yet amid this self-assured opulence, all four of the mall's anchor stores, its star attractions, face uncertain futures.
Bloomingdale's is on the auction block.
Sister chain Abraham & Straus may soon join it there because of parent Campeau Corp. 's financial problems.
B. Altman and Bonwit Teller are in bankruptcy proceedings and may be sold, too. 

These are tumultuous times in the retailing business.
Across the country, once solid names including Seaman Furniture Co., Dart Drug Stores Inc., Miller & Rhoads Inc. and preppy Jos.
A. Bank Clothiers Inc. are suffering serious financial problems.
Frost Bros.
Inc., once a leading specialty retailer in the Southwest, is out of business.
A seemingly unprecedented number of stores are up for sale, including such chains as Marshall Field's and Saks Fifth Avenue, both units of B.A.T Industries PLC. 

"It's the end of an era," says Kurt Barnard, publisher of Barnard's Retail Marketing Report. "Enormous changes are ahead in how these companies are owned and managed." 

B.A.T has put its U.S. retail group on the block to fend off a takeover bid from corporate raider Sir James Goldsmith.
With that exception, the turmoil in retailing is largely the result of a frenzy of highly leveraged acquisitions in the industry over the past five years.
The debt incurred in those buy-outs, and the rosy assumptions about how it would all be paid off, have come home to roost. 

Industry executives say the likely long-term outcome gives shoppers little reason to cheer.
The markdown racks may well bulge this Christmas as cash-strapped chains try to boost revenues, but things will change as those stores are sold.
Many retail specialists predict new owners will cut back on service as part of an effort to reduce overhead.
And the chains will probably reduce the number of stores, meaning less competition, higher prices and blander selections of merchandise. 

The problems in the retailing industry may well be a bellwether for many of the leveraged buy-outs that have drastically rearranged the nation's business landscape in recent years.
The $38 billion in retailing LBOs since 1985 account for only 17% of the total $214 billion in LBOs during that time, according to Securities Data Co., a provider of financial information.
What's happening in retailing is "just the start," says Wilbur Ross, senior managing director at Rothschild Inc., an investment-banking firm in New York. "Too many LBOs didn't leave any room for mistakes." 

The turmoil in retailing is taking place when revenues have been stronger than many analysts had predicted.
Sales so far this year have risen about 5% from 1988 levels, and consumer spending on apparel, which constitutes the bulk of department and specialty-store business, is particularly strong. 

But the gains haven't been enough to overcome the big debt loads.
Though many chains that have filed for bankruptcy protection or been forced to restructure were modestly profitable when acquired, they couldn't support 17% interest payments and repay bridge loans while preserving operating capital.
Campeau, for example, is being forced to sell Bloomingdale's despite boosting sales and cutting costs. 

Until a few years ago, most lenders stayed clear of leveraged buy-outs in retailing, figuring that stores' large fixed costs left little leeway for cutting expenses to take on extra debt.
Such concerns all but vanished following a $135 million management buy-out of Tiffany & Co. in 1984 and a $3.7 billion management buy-out of R.H. Macy & Co. in July 1986.
In 1988, the buy-out boom reached its height when Campeau paid a whopping $6.6 billion for Federated Department Stores Inc. 

"A fever started on the basis that somehow retailers had undervalued assets, primarily real estate," says Howard Davidowitz. a New York retail consultant. "As a result, there were tremendous miscalculations regarding cash flow and future earnings.
Investors didn't realize retailing is a mature industry.
You can't install new robots and automatically increase profits." 

A case in point is Jos.
A. Bank Clothiers, the preppy clothing retailer based in Owings Mills, Md.
Toward the end of 1986, management bought the company from Quaker Oats Co. for $115 million, including $56 million of junk bonds and a $40 million bank loan.
Although the company was profitable before the transaction, its debt load proved unworkable. 

"The merchandising concepts were good, but we were standing on a financial precipice," says David Waters, who joined the company as its new chief executive in March 1988. 

In hindsight, the LBO couldn't have come at a worse time.
Women were confused about hemlines over the next 18 months, and many decided their closets were already full.
Those close to the situation say the buy-out left almost no room for any setbacks. 

"The annual interest payments were $11 million," says Mr. Waters. "That might not sound like much, but it is a heck of a lot when your annual sales are only $130 million." The company was forced to restructure earlier this year. 

"If this deal could be done again, we would have asked for more equity funding instead of all the debt," adds Mr. Waters. "More equity would have meant smaller interest payments, and would have provided cushioning to meet the downturns." 

Such wisdom is already too late for many retailers.
In fact, with the exception of Investcorp International Inc., a closely held company that led the successful buy-outs of Tiffany and Peebles Department Stores Inc., a regional chain based in South Hill, Va., most of the retail buy-outs of the 1980s now appear to be dismal failures. 

Those failures will have an enormous influence on the sale of both troubled and healthy stores.
Even though chains such as Saks, Marshall Field's and Bloomingdale's are profitable, they won't fetch as much now as in the past two years.
Analysts expect purchase prices of roughly 80% to 100% of sales.
Earlier this year, Campeau sold specialty retailer Ann Taylor for over 150% of sales to a group led by Merrill Lynch & Co. 

"Everybody used to take the old ruler out and project {sales and profits} straight up," says Andrew Decker, an investment banker with Ocean Capital Corp. "That's not going to work anymore.
People have learned.
The junk bond market has disappeared, and players like Campeau and Hooker are leaving the industry.
The magic is over." L.J. Hooker Corp., a unit of Hooker Corp. of Australia, is the parent of B. Altman and Bonwit Teller. 

Retailers that aren't already saddled with debt are considered the most likely bidders for the stores up for sale.
But there aren't many of them.
Analysts most often cite May Department Stores Co., Limited Inc., and Dillard Department Stores Inc. Foreign bidders may emerge, and the managements of Bloomingdale's, Marshall Field's and Saks are trying to make their own bids.
But management buy-outs will be a tough sell with lenders in the current environment. 

With so many stores in trouble, shoppers already sense a bargain atmosphere for Christmas, with retailers offering big discounts to boost sales. "I've heard noise that there are going to be sales to raise cash," says Ray Purkis, a Basking Ridge, N.J., resident shopping at the Short Hills mall. 

But retailing analysts say the good news may be short-lived because new owners will be forced to cut expenses. "Consumers will suffer in the area of service, which is already a problem, and in the area of identity," says Judith Langer, president of Langer Associates Inc., a market-research company in New York. "When you go to Bloomingdale's, you expect a certain experience, not just apparel.
There's a real chance that the special atmosphere could be blown as different owners come and go.
This is especially important today because consumers know they can find the same merchandise almost anywhere." 

Apparel makers worry that stores will be less willing to take risks on new merchandise. "You're going to see big retailers become more conservative," says Alan Flusser, a designer in New York. "It'd definitely be a negative development for shoppers.
And in the end, it will also hurt the stores." 

The head of another top design firm, who asks not to be identified, also suggests that manufacturers will be squeezed by retailers eager to cut expenses.
Department stores "are going to have to go for the throat," this designer says. "They'll demand more markdown dollars, easier return policies, and even help with hiring people on the sales floor, much the way they do with the perfume industry." 

At the Short Hills mall, smaller retailers are worried, too. "It's a little scary," says Kent Wellington, sales manager at Wallach's clothing store, when asked about the uncertainty at the mall's anchors. "We get a lot of customers from the traffic those four stores generate." 

Retailing chains that are -- or might be -- for sale because of the parent company's restructuring or financial problems 

