.START 

Forty years ago this Sunday, a triumphant Mao Tse-tung strode to the rostrum overlooking Tiananmen Square to proclaim the founding of the People's Republic of China.
In the adoring crowd gazing up at him was a young intellectual named Fu Weici. 

For Mr. Fu, the birth of Communist China was a personal, as well as a national, triumph.
As a student, he had demonstrated against the corrupt Nationalist regime.
The new government, promising progressive change, offered hope. 

But from that day, the luster of the new China began to fade for him. "As an intellectual I had been used to much more freedom," Mr. Fu says.
So had millions of other intellectuals. 

As he grew older, Mr. Fu's interest in politics faded.
But in modern China, no one is free from struggle.
The party has mobilized the masses to take part in one movement after another, as it tries to impose new order on an old civilization.
Mr. Fu's life story reflects the cycle of reform and repression that has characterized Communist China. 

"The Chinese revolution succeeded in restoring dignity to the great masses of the Chinese people," says Mr. Fu. "But our intellectuals have paid dearly." 

Today, at 66 years old, Mr. Fu is one of China's most skilled linguists.
Fluent in English and German, he has translated works by authors Graham Greene, Thomas Mann, Kurt Vonnegut and others. 

Mr. Fu is a beneficiary of the relaxed atmosphere of the past 10 years, known as the Deng decade after Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping.
But even now, the retired professor must tread carefully, as the latest cycle of repression follows the crushing of the spring pro-democracy protests. 

"For most of my life, I have tried to escape -- to my classical music or my translating," says Mr. Fu. "But no one can escape from reality.
For 40 years I've felt that there is something hanging overhead, that I could be hit any time in any political movement." In 1945, he left school to put his language skills to use as an interpreter for U.S. soldiers assisting the Nationalist army.
To the Communists, that put a permanent black mark in Mr. Fu's dossier.
During the past 40 years, the few months he spent with American soldiers have often come back to haunt him. 

After World War II ended, Mr. Fu, disillusioned by the poverty and corruption he had seen, took part in student demonstrations against Nationalist rule.
Like the student protesters of 1989 who tuned into Voice of America for information, Mr. Fu got his inspiration from the banned Communist radio station.
His wife sold her gold ring to buy contraband radio equipment. 

"We all were leftists because the Kuomintang {Nationalists} were so corrupt," says Mr. Fu in his home.
He pauses to reflect on the demonstrations of 1989, when millions took to the streets protesting offical corruption. "History repeats itself, I suppose." 

His background first aroused suspicion when he applied for a teaching job at Beijing's Qinghua University.
Only after months of waiting was he approved. 

Then, in 1955, the party roused the masses "to uproot hidden counterrevolutionaries." Mr. Fu was a target.
For two months, investigators examined his ties to the U.S. military, then cleared him. 

Two years later, Mao launched the anti-rightist campaign, in which hundreds of thousands of intellectuals were imprisoned.
Mr. Fu escaped punishment by keeping his head down and because he was protected by a key party official. 

In 1958 Mao launched the Great Leap Forward, a manic campaign to speed the revolution and achieve miracles in production.
In between the required manual labor and political meetings, party officials once took Mr. Fu and his colleagues to a "model commune" which, they said, had entered the communist stage of development. "We were disgusted by what we saw," says Mr. Fu. "The food was lousy, there were flies everywhere.
If this was a picture of communist society. . . ." 

At the same time, the party was mobilizing the masses to wipe out flies, sparrows and other "pests." Mr. Fu spent hours banging on pots and pans to scare sparrows, deemed undesirable because they ate seeds.
The theory was that the noise would force the birds to keep flying, until they became exhausted and died.
Mr. Fu shakes his head. "The highest leader says one word -- and it gets exaggerated to a fantastic, unbelievable scale." 

In 1964, Mr. Fu translated some 19th-century German poems for a Shanghai publishing house.
One day he lost his notebook with the draft translations.
They were picked up by the authorities, who thought they were his own dissident creations. 

The authorities didn't inform him of their suspicion, but returned the book and began to watch him closely.
He was inexplicably barred from contact with foreigners.
He lost his teaching job and was demoted to a lowly library assignment.
For years, he didn't know why. 

When the Cultural Revolution erupted on the campuses in 1966, posters at the Beijing Foreign Languages Institute, where he had moved a few years earlier, targeted Mr. Fu. "It was a nightmare," he says. "Overnight I had been transformed into the enemy of the people." The posters, some written by former friends and colleagues, listed his "crime" -- writing counterrevolutionary poems. 

Again, he cleared himself.
But suspicion lingered because of his work for the "U.S. imperialists" during the war.
He became a non-person, unable to participate in campus affairs.
For three years he did manual and farm labor. 

At the end of 1969, Mr. Fu and other faculty members were sent to a "May 7 Cadre School" in the countryside, where he underwent hard labor and political meetings.
In 1972, he was allowed to return to campus, but not to teach. 

In 1976, the Cultural Revolution came to a close and change was in the air. 

The next "excitement," as Mr. Fu calls it, was the Democracy Wall period, in 1978.
On a gray brick wall in Beijing, activists pasted up posters criticizing the leftist leaders and calling for the return to power of the reformist Mr. Deng.
The wall helped Mr. Deng wrest control of the country from Mao's successor, Hua Guofeng. 

But once Mr. Deng's position was secured, he had the wall activity stopped and a number of dissidents arrested. 

For Mr. Fu, the dawning of the Deng era was a gift from heaven.
Things loosened up, in politics and the economy, albeit in fits and starts.
Mr. Fu regained his teaching position.
And he was allowed to translate works by Western writers. 

In 1981, he was invited to go overseas for the first time, for a two-year stint at a language center in West Germany.
But he was called back after a few months by a party official still concerned about his past. "I couldn't ignore their orders," he says. "I have children here who have to get on with their lives." 

Mr. Fu settled into a quiet retirement, where he has remained for most of the past decade.
The Tiananmen incident June 4, when the army massacred pro-democracy demonstrators, is too fresh a topic to talk much about.
Many intellectuals won't even meet with foreigners in the current repressive climate, and Mr. Fu chooses his words carefully. "It is easy to inflict a wound," he says, "but it can take a long, long time for the scars to heal." 

He drags on a cigarette, considering whether to speak further.
Finally, he says: "History does seem to move in a circular way, but in the long run I believe there can only be progress.
That's how I console myself." 

