.START 

The European Community Commission adopted a "charter of fundamental social rights" that threatens to deepen a rift between Britain and other EC countries over how to achieve economic and political unity. 

Social Affairs Commissioner Vasso Papandreou emphasized that the charter, on which EC heads of state are scheduled to vote in early December, "cannot be anything but a formal declaration" with no binding effects.
The charter aims to define basic rights, including minimum-wage guarantees and worker participation in corporate decision-making, for all EC workers. 

Ms. Papandreou said the commission would speed up its work on designing an "action program" of EC legislation to ensure that the rights enshrined in the charter are put into effect at the "national, regional or local level." The action program will be ready by year end, she said. 

Britain, however, is expected to strongly -- and single-handedly -- resist what it perceives as meddling in its internal social affairs.
The final version of the charter approved by the commission isn't much different from a preliminary version presented in May and already rejected by Britain.
The document "continues to focus on areas that are best dealt with at the national level," a U.K. official said. 

Commission President Jacques Delors has been pushing hard for the charter.
He sees it as a political litmus test of whether all 12 EC countries share the same conception of what a European society should be like. 

But British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher doesn't share the prevalent view on the Continent that minimum EC-wide standards on social policy are needed to ensure the success of the 1992 single-market program.
Mrs. Thatcher, who during her 10 years in power has succeeded in reducing the unions' clout in Britain, fears that the charter would centralize control over the community's social policy in a few hands in Brussels. 

Underscoring these differences, the commission's decision wasn't unanimous.
Although a vote count wasn't disclosed, Competition Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan, a strong free-marketer, was said to have voted against the charter.
Mr. Delors was disappointed by the lack of unanimity among the commissioners, one EC official said.
The commission president had hoped a consensus could be reached on a somewhat less far-reaching charter, but his peacemaking bid apparently failed because of pressure from the hard-liners on the panel.
This lack of unanimity makes a consensus at the Council of Ministers even less likely. 

Ms. Papandreou, however, said that Britain's approval isn't indispensable.
If Britain refuses to go along, she said, the commission will seek to have as many measures as possible under the social-action program cleared by a majority vote -- as opposed to a unanimous vote -- in the Council of Ministers. 

The rights defined by the charter aren't likely to be controversial in most EC countries, which already have extensive labor legislation.
The charter is vague enough to allow for national differences in labor law, although it isn't intended to be without effects. "Doubtless, some measures {to be adopted under the charter} will mean higher {labor} costs," Ms. Papandreou said, but "the purpose is to achieve health and safety for our citizens." 

The charter spells out these basic rights and obligations: 

-- The establishment of a "decent wage" and of "a maximum duration of working time." The commission won't propose an EC-wide minimum wage or a maximum work week, but will leave these points to be decided at the national level. 

-- The right for workers to "information, consultation and participation" in major corporate decisions affecting the work force, including technological changes, restructurings, mergers, collective layoffs and bankruptcies. 

-- The right for workers to strike and join the union of their choice, and the right of unions to engage in collective bargaining. 

-- The right to freedom of movement for workers, which "shall imply entitlement to equal treatment with nationals of the host country in all fields, including social advantages and taxation." 

