.START 

Scandinavian Airlines System and Swissair announced plans to swap stakes of 5% to 10% in each other under a broad air-traffic and travel-services alliance. 

The two carriers said the planned partnership will give them sufficient critical mass to be among five surviving Europe-based intercontinental carriers in a deregulated air industry of the 1990s.
They said planned coordination of their traffic-systems, marketing and other functions would save about 200 million Swedish kronor ($31 million) a year.
The gains are expected to multiply as cooperation evolves -- with resulting profits shared equally. 

The plan, which was announced simultaneously in Zurich, Switzerland, and Stockholm, also is intended to include areas such as catering, hotels, fleet planning and product development.
But most of the details remain to be worked out. 

SAS Chief Executive Officer Jan Carlzon said that if the Swissair alliance develops according to plan, the level of cross-ownership will increase in the future.
Swissair said representation on each other's boards may occur.
Mr. Carlzon said existing partners such as Airlines of Britain PLC and Austrian Airlines could be included in the coordinated air-traffic scheme.
In addition, he proposed that Finnair join the group. 

Mr. Carlzon called Swissair "an ideal partner" with a similar strategy focused on business travelers and high-quality service.
He said Swissair boasts the extensive long-haul network in Africa and the Middle East, places where SAS is weak. 

Swissair said the two airlines initially will increase seat capacity on their flights linking Zurich and Geneva with the three Nordic capitals.
Travelers from Scandinavia would then be able to fly to Switzerland and connect onto Swissair flights to, say, India or South Africa, while passengers from central Europe could fly to Copenhagen to connect to SAS flights to China and Japan.
The two airlines could operate joint flights, split up frequencies by time or day or simply harmonize their existing schedules in Europe, Swissair said. 

But the SAS chief acknowledged that Swissair's Zurich hub is less attractive than Brussels or other European capitals which SAS earlier considered as possible gateways for intercontinental routes.
A couple of years ago, SAS tried very hard to arrange a merger with Sabena.
Further, since SAS and Swissair have different partners in the U.S., the new alliance probably won't have much impact on North Atlantic traffic, SAS officials said. 

SAS last year bought 10% of Texas Air Corp. as a way of cementing a marketing alliance with the U.S. concern's Continental Airlines unit.
Recently, SAS had been talking to Texas Air about buying more or all of Continental, with U.S. partners.
Swissair, meanwhile, in March signed a marketing deal with Delta Air Lines.
Four months later, the two swapped 5% stakes, Swissair paying about $193 million and Delta about $77 million. 

Swissair Chairman Armin Baltensweiler said the Delta tie-up gave his company extra incentive to reach an agreement with SAS.
Between SAS and Delta, Swissair is closer to its goal of safeguarding its long-term competitiveness. 

The agreement, approved by Swissair's board Wednesday and SAS directors yesterday, calls for an exchange of shares, but the exact size of the respective shareholdings will be the subject of further negotiations.
So will the composition of the joint executive board that will steer the partnership. 

SAS and Swissair intend to complete the share swap by the summer.
But executives admit they haven't agreed on a method of valuation.
SAS's complex ownership is another potential pitfall.
Scandinavia's airline is half-owned by the Danish, Norwegian and Swedish governments with the remaining 50% split among publicly traded holding companies in each of the three Nordic countries.
Swissair is 23% owned by federal and cantonal authorities. 

SAS and Swissair also said they intend to integrate their hotels under a global travel-service system.
SAS owns 23 hotels directly and holds interests in 105 more through its 40% stake in Intercontinental Hotel Corp. acquired earlier this year. 

