.START 

Investors will soon be offered a new way to make money from the savings-and-loan debacle. 

Sometime in the next few weeks, Resolution Funding Corp. -- created by Congress to help finance the massive thrift rescue -- is expected to launch the first of several bond offerings that will eventually total as much as $30 billion.
The bailout bonds are already being hailed by many professional investment managers as an easy, risk-free way to earn higher yields than on plain-vanilla Treasury bonds. 

But although details have yet to be announced, individual investors may have reason to be less enthusiastic.
Bond specialists say the Refcorp securities are likely to offer only a small fraction of a percentage point more in yield than Treasury bonds.
For many conservative investors, the difference probably won't be enough to make the bonds worthwhile. 

Even some investors who are attracted by the slight yield advantage may back off because of fears about how the bonds will trade in the secondary, or resale, markets. 

For years, yield-hungry investors earned extra interest by making federally insured deposits in troubled S&Ls that had to pay above-market rates to attract funds.
More recently, investors snapped up limited partnerships that aimed to profit by resuscitating sick thrifts with federal assistance.
Investors were also quick to bid up the stock prices of S&Ls expected to benefit after the government rescue package was passed last summer. 

The coming bailout bonds, which will probably require a minimum investment of $1,000, represent yet another opportunity to profit from the thrift mess.
Because the securities won't be direct obligations of the government, backed by the country's "full faith and credit," Refcorp will have to pay investors a higher yield than that offered on standard-issue government securities sold by the Treasury. 

The central question for investors is just how big that yield premium turns out to be.
Some long-term bonds of other government agencies and government-sponsored entities are currently yielding about half of a percentage point more than comparable Treasury securities.
When a new security is first offered to the public, the spread can be even greater. 

That's what happened with bonds sold by Financing Corp., or FICO, set up by Congress to bail out the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. When FICO bonds were introduced in 1987, many investors shied away, saying they didn't want to be guinea pigs.
So, at one point, some FICO bonds yielded more than 1.125 percentage points over Treasury bonds.
Today, with greater public understanding and market acceptance, the spread has narrowed to less than half that amount. 

"Any time you bring out a new issue, you have an issue that comes a little cheap to the market, and it usually stays that way until people have time to understand it and develop a secondary market in it," says E. Craig Coats Jr., vice chairman of Voute Coats Stuart & O'Grady in Greenwich, Conn. 

Bond specialists say, however, that they don't expect the coming Refcorp securities to yield even half a percentage point more than Treasurys.
They estimate, for instance, that a 30-year Refcorp bond would initially pay only about 0.20 percentage point to 0.35 percentage point more than similar 30-year Treasury bonds. 

The reason for the slim spread is the way the securities will be backed.
The principal will be backed by zero-coupon Treasury bonds, and the Treasury is required by law to pay the interest on the securities if there ever are insufficient funds from other sources.
Other so-called "agency securities," while by no means risky, don't have so strong a backing. 

In the intensely competitive world of mutual funds, insurance companies and other institutional investors, even a quarter of a percentage point can make a tremendous difference. "If you're an institutional investor, why own Treasurys at 8.25% when you can own Refcorp at 8.40% or 8.45%?" says David Ellison, an analyst and portfolio manager at Fidelity Management & Research in Boston.
That spread "could make all the difference between mediocrity and excellence.
So it's an easy decision.
It's a slam dunk." 

Marginal yield differences, however, aren't usually so significant for individual investors.
On a $10,000 investment, for example, a difference of a quarter of a percentage point amounts to only $25 a year. 

"If you're talking about a guy with $60,000" in a certificate of deposit who may be thinking about Refcorp, says Mr. Ellison, "forget it.
It's a waste of time.
It's not worth it." 

He and other analysts also note that government-agency securities aren't as "liquid" as Treasury securities.
That means they aren't quite so easy for investors to sell as Treasury securities. 

For investors willing to do without the iron-clad backing and liquidity of Treasurys, the analysts say, some other agency securities are more attractive for individuals because they offer better returns. "I'd rather own FICOs and pick up the additional yield," says William M. Brachfeld, executive vice president at Daiwa Securities America Inc. 

Morgan B. Stark, president and chief executive officer of Chemical Securities Inc., a unit of Chemical Banking Corp., also likes FICO bonds and owns zero-coupon FICOs for his individual retirement account.
He says FICO bonds may not be quite as liquid as Refcorp bonds because there will be more Refcorps than FICOs, but that doesn't matter to him. "I'm not going to trade them," he says. "I'm willing to give up a little more liquidity because I can gain a higher yield." 

Treasury, Refcorp and FICO bonds all have an important advantage over CDs.
The interest they pay is exempt from state and local income taxes.
That's especially significant for investors in high-tax states, such as New York, California and Massachusetts. 

One thing investors should watch for when Refcorp announces details of the new securities is "call protection." It is widely expected that the Refcorp bonds will be modeled after Treasury bonds, which generally protect investors from the risk of having a bond called, or redeemed, before the scheduled maturity date.
Corporate and municipal bonds typically can be called early -- presenting investors with the unhappy chore of reinvesting their principal at a lower interest rate than they had on the bond that was called. 

Other details yet to be disclosed include the timing of the first bond sale, how many will be sold, what maturities will be offered and how investors can buy them. 

A sampling of current yields on 30-year bonds issued by the Treasury, government-sponsored enterprises and agencies. 

