.START 

With little hope for immediate resolution of tax and budget disputes outstanding, the specter of sequestration increases.
If the projected 1990 deficit on Oct. 16 is higher than $110 billion, a sequester under Gramm-Rudman-Hollings would automatically reduce next year's spending levels to the extent necessary to reduce the estimated deficit to $100 billion. 

It is nearly certain that a sequester would be accompanied by partisan finger-pointing and a widespread desire to do whatever it takes to cancel the sequester, even if it means higher taxes.
While a sequester is certainly not the ideal way to resolve the current budget dispute, there are reasons to believe that the fiscal discipline of a sequester is the medicine we need to cure the budget process. 

For all its drawbacks, a sequester is real deficit reduction.
Instead of budget gimmicks, accounting tricks, phony cuts, and "revenue enhancements," a sequester would reduce spending levels by a fixed percentage in eligible spending programs.
In other words, unlike most deficit-reduction packages, sequestration would actually reduce the deficit. 

Yes, a sequester would be bitter medicine.
According to current estimates, a sequester would reduce 1990 spending levels for eligible non-defense programs by 5.3% and for defense by 4.3%.
In terms of the overall budget, a sequester would limit 1990 spending to $1.174 trillion, an increase of only 2.6% over 1989 levels. 

Many programs would receive no increase in their budgets whatsoever.
In a town where regular spending increases are thought of as a constitutional right, not receiving an increase is equated with having your budget cut.
Some programs would actually receive less money in 1990 than they got in 1989.
Defense spending, for instance, would decline. 

Perhaps the greatest objection to a sequester will result from how certain politically popular programs are affected.
Reductions in proposed spending levels for drug enforcement, AIDS research, air traffic control, and military manpower will doubtlessly generate concern among policy makers.
Fortunately, however, the G-R-H law gives legislators and the president opportunities to adjust a sequester.
As such, if we can avoid excessive partisanship, we can increase spending levels in high-priority areas so long as we are willing to reduce spending in less important parts of the budget. 

Notwithstanding the drawbacks of a sequester, we should not overlook the benefits.
Assuming the economy maintains its strength, we will bring the deficit down to $100 billion, the lowest level since 1981 and less than half the level it was as recently as 1986.
Perhaps more important, a sequester this year will dramatically assist future deficit-reduction efforts, since it would lower the baseline growth of federal spending.
For instance, a $16 billion sequester this year would save taxpayers $22 billion next year. 

The future savings of a sequester are important because G-R-H requires that the budget be balanced by 1993.
Budget gimmicks and accounting tricks, on the other hand, yield little, if any, long-term savings.
A sequester won't produce all the savings needed to reach the $64 billion deficit target for fiscal 1991, but it'd bring us close enough to make any talk of economically destructive tax hikes unnecessary. 

Perhaps the president and Congress will resolve all their differences and pass legislation sufficient to bring the estimated 1990 deficit below $110 billion before the Oct. 16 G-R-H deficit estimate is conducted.
Should we fail to achieve the needed savings by that time, however, sequestration will occur. 

While a sequester would signal a failure of the budget process, we should hesitate before rushing to somehow nullify the procedure.
The authority already exists to make needed adjustments to protect vital programs.
Because real deficit reduction is so important, however, it may be time to grit our teeth and let the bulk of the sequester stand. 

Sen. Packwood (R., Ore.) is the ranking minority member of the Senate Finance Committee. 

