.START 

In remarks that will raise expectations for his first superpower summit, President Bush said there's a "good likelihood" a strategic-arms treaty will be finished when he meets Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev next year. 

Asked in a meeting with reporters whether he agreed with a Soviet assertion that there's a good chance a treaty will be finished in time for the summit in late spring or early summer, Mr. Bush replied: "Yes, I do. . . . It's not absolutely certain that that's what's going to happen.
But I would agree that we have a good likelihood that might happen." 

Mr. Bush's statement was unusual in two respects.
It was a far more upbeat appraisal than he has given previously of the prospects for a historic treaty cutting superpower arsenals of intercontinental nuclear arms by 50%.
Beyond that, U.S. leaders usually are reluctant to give such firm forecasts of achievements they expect in summit meetings.
Failure to fulfill such a forecast virtually ensures that a meeting will be declared a failure. 

Meanwhile, in another indication of the changing tenor of U.S.-Soviet relations, the U.S. released its annual compilation of the Russian military threat.
The publication, called "Soviet Military Power," suggested that Moscow's peace efforts finally have gained some converts in the Pentagon. 

Instead of the usual photos of soldiers goose-stepping beside fearsome missiles being trundled through Red Square, the Pentagon included in its new edition pictures of Soviet army units retreating from Aghanistan and a former SS-20 missile launcher that has been converted into a construction crane. 

To be sure, the Pentagon isn't completely won over yet. "While we are witnessing what may be the beginning of a significant reduction in Soviet forces, we should note several realities," said Defense Secretary Dick Cheney at a news conference.
He cited a continuing increase in Soviet defense spending, a large Soviet lead in mobile, land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles, and an expanding effort by the Russians to convert submarines to use sea-launched cruise missiles. 

Still, there is evidence that some of the Pentagon's heretofore hard-nosed analysts are being swayed.
Referring to the Soviet defense budget, which in past years has been portrayed as an almost limitless, hidden font of money for armaments, one section of the new report says: "Western estimates could simply be too high." 

The book, originally intended as an outlet for some of the Pentagon's bulging library of intelligence information about the Soviet threat, says this year that "Moscow's unilateral troop reductions now under way represent a significant and substantial cut in Warsaw Pact military capability." 

Some of the most threatening items cited in last year's assessment of the Soviet arsenal have become inconsequential in the new report.
One is a missile facility at Sary Shagan where the 1988 book said the Soviets "are believed to be developing" a laser large enough to destroy space satellites.
This summer, U.S. scientists visiting the site found a substantially smaller laser, which seemed incapable of tracking, let alone hitting, a satellite. 

In his remarks about prospects for a U.S.-Soviet treaty, Mr. Bush said the decision last week to set a time frame for his first summit meeting with Mr. Gorbachev "perhaps will serve as a catalyst" for resolving remaining obstacles to a strategicarms pact. 

The broad outlines of a strategic-arms treaty were set during the Reagan administration.
Last week, the Soviets took steps to remove two significant remaining obstacles.
They agreed to complete a treaty without demanding limits on the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative, also known as the "Star Wars" program.
And they agreed that the two sides can defer a decision on limiting sea-launched cruise missiles, a nettlesome category of weapons that the U.S. has been reluctant to limit but that the Soviets have insisted on curbing. 

Mr. Bush also said he isn't prepared to accept a proposal by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze that both superpowers eliminate their entire stockpiles of chemical weapons.
The president said he is sticking with his earlier proposal that the superpowers cut their stockpiles by 80% now, and eliminate them entirely after all nations capable of producing such arms agree to ban them. 

