.START 

The dollar faced more central-bank intervention but managed to end higher compared with its levels here on Wednesday. 

For the first time in four days, the major central banks desisted from launching coordinated intervention against the dollar during Asian trading, but they laid into the U.S. currency repeatedly in the European and U.S. arenas. 

But foreign-exchange dealers said the central banks may have been purposefully gentler with the market.
The dollar's intervention-speeded declines since last Friday have sent most corporate and fund participants to the sidelines, traders said, and remaining participants have accumulated heavy short-dollar positions during the tumble. 

The central banks saw the market needed some respite to coax participants to take profits on short positions, leaving them with more balanced books and prepared to sell again when intervention resumed, traders said. 

"Intervention is going to be more efficient when the market is a little long of dollars," said Dennis Pettit, vice president at PaineWebber International Ltd., New York. "I think it's part of the central bank policy of keeping the market off balance." 

In late afternoon New York trading, the dollar was at 1.8823 marks, up from 1.8794 marks Wednesday, and at 140.65 yen, up from 140.15 yen.
Sterling was at $1.6105, down from $1.6173. 

In Tokyo Friday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 140.60 yen, down from Thursday's Tokyo close of 140.85 yen. 

The dollar climbed cautiously in Asian trading Thursday, as the absence of coordinated central-bank intervention emboldened the market.
When the European day began and only the Bank of England surfaced, protecting the flagging pound, the dollar nipped to its peak of 1.8930 marks.
But the quiet was broken shortly after with the first of three major rounds of concerted central-bank dollar sales that would continue until midday in New York.
The time between the rounds was punctuated with scattered sales by individual central banks, with the Bank of Japan making an unusual appearance in Frankfurt, West Germany, dealings. 

The central-bank sales, which included the Bank of Canada, the West German Bundesbank and the New York Federal Reserve bank, eventually pushed the dollar lower.
But active short-covering interest stopped the currency from sliding below Wednesday's late afternoon levels. 

Whatever else the central banks may be trying to achieve with their approach this week, they have succeeded in keeping the market guessing about their tactics and specific goal.
Although the interventions haven't cost inordinate amounts of money, traders reported, the central banks have kept up a dizzying array of coordinated interventions, acting in each other's markets and usually allowing little breathing room between waves. 

The central banks' unfaltering cooperation and increased concentration on extracting the maximum effect from their actions indicate that they may be digging in for a protracted campaign, dealers said.
But the dealers predicted the chances of central banks restraining the dollar will diminish over time without a change in world interest rates. 

West Germany is generally seen as the most likely candidate for an interest-rate boost following Thursday's central-bank council meeting.
Some analysts say West Germany is preparing to boost rates one-half point following that meeting.
Uncomfortably high domestic inflation combined with the desire to bolster the mark give the council about a 50-50 chance of lifting key rates, said Kevin Logan, chief economist at Swiss Bank Corp., in New York.
Mr. Pettit called the likelihood about 70% in favor of a rate shift. 

Other major nations seem more reluctant to raise rates, and without a realignment to draw money away from the dollar, the central banks may have to dedicate a lot of time and money to protect the other currencies, traders said. 

On New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery settled at $368.10 an ounce, up 20 cents.
Estimated volume was a moderate 3.3 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Friday, gold was quoted at about $367.80 an ounce. 

