.START 

The Democrats are back on the attack, with General Richard Gephardt leading the charge up what he insists will be San Juan Hill.
Yesterday it looked more like Cemetery Ridge. 

The Pickett's Charge by the House leadership on capital gains can be understood only as part of a new effort to mount an activist opposition to George Bush.
Frustrated by a popular president who has pre-empted their issues (drugs, the environment), they want to fight.
They may have lost this time, but (they believe) they bathed themselves in populist glory, and the war's not over.
On the other hand, the defections by 64 rank-and-file Democrats suggest the war plan needs revision. 

The vote in particular was a test of Richard Gephardt, the new House majority leader and heir-apparent to the legacy of Tony Coelho partisanship.
While he could have retreated on capital gains and struck a compromise, he sided with the Caucus's majority liberal wing and decided to charge.
The decision fits both his reputation for determination and his desire to win over liberals who have only lately come to trust him. 

In a city of chameleons, no politician has remade himself as thoroughly as Dick Gephardt.
A product of the St. Louis machine, he came to Congress at age 35 in 1977 as a social and defense conservative.
He's since become reliably liberal on every issue of consequence to party activists. 

Once in favor of an anti-abortion amendment, he now oppposes it.
He once voted for the MX missile, the B-1 bomber, SDI; this year he was one of only 80 House members who voted for the Congressional Black Caucus budget slashing defense spending.
Once against the minimum wage, he now votes down-the-line with organized labor.
A founder of the tax reform drive in the mid-1980s, Mr. Gephardt nearly abandoned it when the top tax rate fell too low for his neo-populist tastes. 

The makeover was complete by his 1988 presidential campaign, when he emerged as the Korea-basher of the $48,000 Hyundai ads.
Robert Shrum, the gifted Ted Kennedy-wordsmith, was enlisted to give his speeches the soak-the-rich edge that has now become a trademark.
A Gatsby-in-reverse, he's remade himself as a man of "the little people." 

Some attribute all this to opportunism, but that may not be fair.
By the account of his friends, this is now the real Dick Gephardt.
He's a convinced class warrior.
Republicans, Mr. Gephardt says now, favor "the super-rich." A capital gains cut would "fulfill Leona Helmsley's dream." 

The rhetoric is part of a broader Gephardt vision that populist economics is the only path to Democratic ascendancy.
When a liberal think-tank introduced a study this week promoting "managed trade," Mr. Gephardt hosted a lunch to educate his colleagues.
At a Democratic forum this spring, he asserted that Michael Dukakis would have won if only he'd used Mr. Gephardt's populist themes earlier. 

Mr. Gephardt is so convinced that he resists more moderate proposals that bow to economic growth.
He rejected a proposal from the moderate Democratic Leadership Council for an innovative IRA designed to spur economic growth.
Mr. Gephardt went instead with the liberal shibboleth of raising income tax rates.
Oklahoma Sen. David Boren let it be known that 15 Senate Democrats, including liberals Alan Cranston (D., Calif.) and John Kerry (D., Mass.), preferred to combine a capital gains cut with a new IRA. Mr. Gephardt stuck with soak-the-rich, with resentment over aspiration. 

Only such ideological conviction could explain his crusade this week.
The leadership lobbied in ways not seen since Jim Wright's salad days.
Prize committee seats were dangled, with at least three Democrats pursuing just one opening on Ways and Means.
Members from tobacco-growing states were told they might get help in defeating the Senate's bill banning smoking on airline flights.
The soybean lobby kept quiet, lest a pet bill already passed by the Senate not make it to the House floor. 

Their most adept move was dividing Democratic conservatives.
Charlie Stenholm, erstwhile boll weevil, was seduced with schmoozing and the hint of a leadership post. (He's also a chameleon: Only a month earlier, Mr. Stenholm had declared for the tax cut.) The leadership also rigged the "rule" for the House vote, so that members would technically never have to vote against the tax cut.
They'd simply get to vote for Mr. Gephardt's substitute. 

In the end, none of it worked, for reasons that can be summed up in the House-floor anxiety of Indiana Democrat Jill Long.
She had won election earlier this year with 51% of the vote by promising not to raise taxes.
She openly agonized on the floor this week that she'd be in jeopardy if she sided with the leadership.
Jimmy Hayes, a Louisiana Democrat who supported Mr. Gephardt for president, also joined the defectors. "We have to face the fact that the national Democratic party is sending a message that nobody wants to hear," Mr. Hayes said after the vote. 

Before he mounts another attack, Mr. Gephardt will also want to tend to his newest recruits.
The Democrat who this year replaced Jim Wright voted for the tax cut, while the one who replaced Tony Coelho decided against it only under pressure.
Any tax increase is now dead until 1992 unless George Bush proposes it.
Pickett's Charge may have been glorious, but no one volunteered for a rerun. 

