.START 

Emerson Electric Co. said it and Robert Bosch G.m.b.
H. reached an agreement with Vermont American Corp. under which they will jointly acquire the Louisville, Ky., concern for $40 a share, or about $440 million. 

The bid has the appearance of a sure thing: The company Emerson and West Germany's Bosch have formed to make the purchase already has reached agreements with major Vermont shareholders holding 55% of the company's common stock outstanding, granting the right to buy that controlling stake at the tender price. 

The tender offer, which will be begun shortly, will be predicated on receipt of a simple majority of the 10.9 million Vermont common shares outstanding, an Emerson spokesman said. 

Although the news was disclosed after the close of the market yesterday, Vermont's Class A shares climbed $1.25 in American Stock Exchange trading, closing at $37.50. 

Both Emerson and Bosch, based in Stuttgart, make electrical and electronic products, including power tools.
Yesterday they said they want to acquire Vermont, which also makes such tools as well as related parts, to enhance their ability to "participate in the rapidly growing accessories portion of the power tool industry." 

Vermont American's board put the company on the block in mid-July, saying it wanted "to explore the possibility of a transaction that will enable all stockholders to better realize the value accumulated in the company." Vermont shares were trading at about $26.50 before the company announced it would begin seeking bids. 

For the six months ended June 30, Vermont had net income of $10.5 million, or 95 cents a share, on sales of $198.3 million. 

The $40-a-share price at which shareholders will be asked to tender their stock could be raised to as much as $41, depending on how Vermont fares in certain litigation in which it's entangled.
If the litigation isn't settled before the tender offer expires, the potential extra dollar a share will be put in escrow, said an Emerson spokesman.
The money will be available to shareholders if it isn't required to be used as settlement of the litigation. 

After conclusion of the deal, which is subject to regulatory approval, the two companies said Vermont will be "equally and jointly controlled by Emerson and Bosch." The companies also said that Sears, Roebuck & Co. "will be a minority investor," but declined to elaborate.
A Sears spokesman declined to comment.
Vermont is a major supplier of parts for Sears's line of tools. 

