.START 

A consortium led by Morrison Knudsen Corp. has proposed to Texas regulators to build a $2.2 billion high-speed rail link that would zip passengers between Houston and Dallas in a mere 1 hour and 45 minutes. 

The 225-mile ride, on a French train traveling 186 miles an hour, would cost about 30% less than the average one-way air fare between the cities, planners say. 

Assuming the link is successful, bullet train routes could eventually be extended to link other major Texas cities, including Austin and San Antonio, consortium officials say.
The proposal faces numerous hurdles, including an expected competing application to the Texas High Speed Rail Authority by a West German consortium. 

The newly created rail authority, charged with licensing high-speed rail projects in the state, is expected to make a decision on the competing bids by the spring of 1990.
The agency also has decreed that financing such projects will be left to the private sector, thus leaving the job of raising enormous amounts of capital to consortium members. 

While sounding futuristic, the proposal is hardly pie-in-the-sky.
Japan and France have highly profitable high-speed rail systems in operation.
In the U.S., California, Ohio, Nevada, Florida and Pennsylvania and numerous major cities are in various stages of considering high-speed rail plans. 

Earlier this year, a U.S. Energy Department-sponsored study said that replacing a number of the nation's short-haul airline routes with high-speed rail links could result in substantial energy savings and alleviate growing congestion and delays at major airports.
Between Houston and Dallas alone, for example, about 12,000 passengers jam 130 daily flights. 

The Morrison Knudsen consortium is spearheaded by the company's high-profile chairman William M. Agee and includes GEC Alsthom Inc., the French train maker, and Ben Barnes, a former Texas lieutenant governor.
As proposed, the Houston-Dallas link would employ GEC Alsthom technology in which electric trains, traveling along specially constructed tracks, are able to attain speeds much higher than speeds allowed by traditional train technology. 

Morrison Knudsen, Boise, Idaho, is an engineering and construction concern with annual revenue of about $2 billion. 

