.START 

Anheuser-Busch Cos., angling to triple its theme park business, landed Shamu the killer whale and six parks from Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. through a definitive accord valued at $1.1 billion. 

The St. Louis-based brewing giant, which operates Busch Gardens theme parks in Tampa, Fla., and Williamsburg, Va., had emerged in recent weeks as the most likely buyer of the Sea World and other theme parks that the financially ailing publisher and insurance company put on the block last June.
The sale is expected to be completed in November, Anheuser-Busch said. 

Although Harcourt, based in Orlando, Fla., reportedly was flooded with bids for the parks, the purchase price came in on the low end of estimates that ranged as high as $2 billion. 

In part because of the low purchase price, Wall Street analysts are paring their 1990 earnings estimate only slightly for Anheuser-Busch.
Emanuel Goldman, an analyst for PaineWebber in San Francisco, said the purchase would probably dilute 1990 earnings about 3%. 

Accordingly, Mr. Goldman lowered his earnings estimate yesterday for 1990 to $3.13 a share from $3.20 a share. 

In trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Anheuser-Busch common stock closed up 62.5 cents, at $42.25.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich also closed up 62.5 cents, at $16.25. 

Although Harcourt is selling the theme parks for less than expected, the sale should significantly improve its financial position.
Harcourt said it would use $930 million of initial net proceeds to pay some of its $1.12 billion of long-term bank debt. 

That lump payment should lower Harcourt's interest bill by roughly $115 million a year, said John Berardi, Harcourt's senior vice president and treasurer.
In contrast, after annual capital expenditures, the parks had generated only about $75 million of cash for debt service, said Mr. Berardi. 

"It will free us of a whole lot of debt, and allow management to have both the time and resources to dedicate to our primary publishing business," he said. 

Although theme parks are a small part of Anheuser-Busch's business, the acquisition was attractive because it allows the nation's biggest beer producer to combine the marketing of its Tampa Busch Gardens theme park with three Harcourt parks near Orlando. 

What's more, beverage industry analysts figure that Anheuser-Busch has the marketing talent and advertising muscle to exploit here and overseas the recognition value of each Sea World's Shamu the killer whale. 

In addition to Anheuser-Busch, other bidders for Harcourt's theme parks were said to have included MCA Inc. and Walt Disney Co. 

Industry analysts estimate that the acquisition will triple the size of Anheuser-Busch's theme park business, which generated 1988 revenue of about $175 million.
The Harcourt theme parks generated revenue last year of $388 million.
In addition to Orlando, Harcourt operated Sea World parks in San Antonio, Texas, Aurora, Ohio, and San Diego, Calif.
The sale also includes its Boardwalk and Baseball park in Orlando and its Cypress Gardens park in Winter Haven, Fla. 

Anheuser-Busch paid $975 million for the six theme parks, which had 14 million vistors last year, and about $125 million for land surrounding some of the parks.
Analysts expect Anheuser-Busch to sell some of that land. 

Under terms of the purchase accord, Harcourt is entitled to some of the profit from any sales of undeveloped land in certain circumstances over the next 10 years. 

About six million people attended Anheuser-Busch's theme parks last year.
In addition to the two Busch Gardens parks, it operates a Tampa water park called Adventure Island and Sesame Place, a child-oriented park near Philadelphia.
Anheuser-Busch is also building a theme park and resort in Spain. 

The theme park sale is the bitter pill Harcourt has to swallow because of the expensive manner in which it fended off a hostile takover bid by British publishing giant Robert Maxwell two years ago.
William Jovanovich, Harcourt's chairman, engineered a $2.9 billion recapitalization by borrowing more than $2 billion. 

The company said after that maneuver that it would need more cash to cover debts, but, until it put the parks up for sale in June, it promised it wouldn't sell core assets. 

"All along we said we didn't intend to sell assets," said Mr. Berardi. "When we made those statements, that was our intentions.
But the business world changes." 

Though the sale eases Harcourt's long-term bank obligations, the company still owes about $1.6 billion of junk-bond debt.
Loan covenants require Harcourt to pay the bank debt before the high-yield notes, which, at upwards of 14% interest, are much more weighty than the bank debt, which carries a 12% interest rate. 

Harrison Price, the theme-park consultant who did the original feasibility studies for Walt Disney's parks, said the price Harcourt received was lower than expected because of huge deferred-maintenance costs facing the new owner. 

Mr. Price estimates Anheuser-Busch will have to invest at least $100 million to spruce up the Sea World parks -- which have turned a bit shabby from neglect during Harcourt's financial woes -- and to add new attractions. 

"The parks were deteriorating," he said, "and Disney has put the fear of God in its Orlando competitors" with its popular four-day passes to the recently expanded Walt Disney World. 

