.START 

The Grammar Group, a Chicago-based consulting firm that drills managers in the rudiments of English usage, knows that everybody makes mistakes. 

To drive the point home, it often displays a letter by former President Reagan containing eight errors in grammar and usage. 

"There's such a need for this service," says Grammar Group founder Zacharias Rosner. "All one needs to do is look at actual letters, reports and other corporate communication to understand that." 

He should know.
The three-page press release in which he makes that statement itself contains no fewer than 12 errors in grammar and spelling. 

Sometimes a comma is used before the "and" in a series of words in the release, and sometimes it isn't.
The release promises that "Information can be obtaining by writing The Grammar Group. . . ." The word "represents" is misused.
The word "foresee" is misspelled.
Worse, so is the word "grammar." 

"I'm horrified," says the 54-year-old Mr. Rosner, a former English teacher and school administrator. "Is there anyplace for me to go hide?" 

While Mr. Rosner says he accepts responsibility for the error-laden release, his public-relations firm says it is to blame.
Chris Ruys, head of Chris Ruys Communications, says that Mr. Rosner proofread the original draft that her firm prepared.
And, Mr. Rosner insists, he caught all the mistakes but one -- a minor error involving the use of hyphens. 

But unbeknownst to either of them, it was the uncorrected version that was sent to the printer and then to "fewer than 100" business publications, says Ms. Ruys. 

Ms. Ruys attributes some mistakes to "carelessness" and some to outright error. "This is very unfortunate," she says. "He has an excellent service, and we've been very impressed with his record." 

So are his clients. "We've put 80 people through his program, and they've all raved about it," says Vicki Cohen, assistant personnel manager at the Chicago office of insurance broker Alexander & Alexander Inc. "I would probably be concerned if I saw the release, but Zacharias Rosner is very particular.
I can't imagine him letting anything go with a mistake in it." 

Still, Mr. Rosner calls the mistakes "humiliating." 

