.START 

In the lobby of Gillette Co. 's razor and blade factory, a glass case displays artifacts from shaving over the ages: An Egyptian bronze razor from 1500 B.C., a Turkish crescent razor from 1190, a straight razor from the Franco Prussian War in 1870. 

Then there is the first safety razor, invented by company founder King C. Gillette in 1903, the Gillette Blue Blade (1932), the Trac II twin-blade razor (1971). 

Soon, Sensor, a new razor, will be added to the case.
With twin blades mounted on tiny springs so they can move independently -- the better to reach every nook and cranny on your face -- Sensor is being touted as providing the smoothest and closest shave man has ever known.
Gillette believes the new razor will be snapped up by millions. 

It better be. 

Ten years in the making, Sensor has cost more than $200 million to develop and start manufacturing, and will cost an additional $110 million to advertise it in its first year alone.
Gillette, still recovering from years of turmoil when it was a repeated target of corporate raiders, is placing the biggest bet in its history on Sensor. 

If the new razor is a hit, it will cap the company's recent comeback and vindicate management's defense that its strategies would pay off for shareholders over the long run.
If the razor flops, it undoubtedly will renew charges that Gillette executives entrenched themselves at the expense of stockholders. 

"This is put up or shut up," says William Newbury, an analyst at College Retirement Equities Fund, a major Gillette shareholder that voted against management in a bitter proxy fight that narrowly failed to oust four incumbent directors last year. 

"If we don't get sizable returns" on Sensor, concedes Gillette vice chairman Alfred M. Zeien, "we ought to be criticized for having wasted lots of money." 

To substantially increase Gillette's profits, Sensor must perform a marketing miracle: halt a 15-year trend toward inexpensive disposable razors.
At double the cost of shaving using disposables, Sensor will be a hard sell. 

"Men are strange animals.
They find something they like and stick to it," says Angela Aguiar, a buyer at Brooks Pharmacy, a New England chain. "It's difficult to get men to change their grooming habits.
I've seen a lot of good products go by the wayside or grow slowly because men don't like to change." 

Gillette executives would like nothing more than to prove their critics wrong and score a victory for mainstream, corporate America over Wall Street raiders.
More than a battle over a company, the fight over Gillette in some ways epitomized the takeover wars of recent years.
Takeover artists offered short-term profits.
Management promised a bigger long-term payoffif only shareholders were willing to wait for promising new products. 

More than a few are rooting for Gillette. "What (raiders) are saying is that any time a stock price is below what we can get for it in frothy takeover market, we're entitled to liquidate the business" by selling it to the high bidder, says Louis Lowenstein, a Columbia Law School professor and critic of many takeovers. "That's not good industrial policy." 

A bit stodgy, Gillette became a takeover target because of sluggish growth in the early and mid-1980s.
Though it boasts some of the world's best-known brand names -- among them Foamy shaving cream, Right Guard deodorant, Oral B toothbrushes, Papermate and Flair pens -- earnings and sales stagnated because of lackluster marketing.
Efforts to diversify into such disjointed businesses as computer accessories, eyewear, hearing aids and beauty centers didn't help. 

Revlon Inc. made the first takeover bid in November 1986, but withdrew after being bought off with a $558 million payment for its stock.
Gillette rebuffed two more overtures from Revlon a year later.
In 1988, it fought off Coniston Partners, a New York investment firm, which had sought to oust four directors and sell the company. 

Revlon was trying to buy the company on the cheap, Gillette insisted then -- and now.
In Gillette's defense, adds Colman Mockler Jr., its unassuming and shy chief executive, the rate of return on Gillette stock over the past decade has been 24% annually. "We're in the top 100 of the Fortune 500" over that period, he notes. 

Gillette had made huge investments in new products and manufacturing efficiencies that curtailed earnings in the 1980s, but executives expect those investments to pay off in the 1990s. "I'm not criticizing (Revlon's Ronald) Perelman for perceiving Gillette as an undervalued asset," says Mr. Zeien. "We just said we're not going to let you steal this undervalued asset." 

To the surprise of many on Wall Street, Gillette has fashioned a turnaround.
Energized by its close shave with corporate raiders, it slashed employment 8% and dumped mediocre businesses (taking a $243 million pretax writeoff).
It introduced a number of successful new products and increased ad spending. "Was Gillette a sleepy company beforehand?
Did Perelman trigger change?
Yeah," concedes Mr. Zeien. "But what it didn't do was change the fundamental way we do business." 

The result: 1989 earnings are expected to reach $300 million, up from $181 million (before one-time charges) in 1986, and sales will approach $3.9 billion, up from $2.82 billion three years ago.
Its writing-instruments business and Braun electric shaver and small appliance unit -- which some analysts wanted Gillette to jettison a few years ago -- are growing robustly.
Only its toiletries and cosmetics businesses have remained laggards. 

In fact, the company's stock, after dropping to the low $30s not long after Gillette won the proxy contest and the threat of a takeover diminished, has recovered.
Now hovering in the mid $40s, it closed yesterday at $45.875 a share. 

Many on Wall Street have climbed on the bandwagon. "I think that Gillette will ultimately vindicate itself, and there is some evidence that it already has," says Andrew Shore, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton.
And two of America's savviest investors have loaded up on Gillette stock.
Warren Buffett bought $600 million of preferred stock, which is convertible into an 11% stake.
And Fidelity Investment mutual fund guru Peter Lynch has added to Fidelity's holdings of late. 

But critics remain.
Revlon's last offer of $47 a share would have paid off handsomely for shareholders had they taken the money and reinvested it in the market, which has risen 25% this year. "We aren't too satisfied.
They haven't done better than the market," says Jose Arau, principal investment officer at California Public Employees Retirement System, a Gillette holder that supported Coniston in its proxy fight. "It looks as if there's no value added here, so we can't be too happy." 

So, to deliver on their promise to "maximize shareholder value," Gillette is gambling on Sensor, which will be announced Tuesday at a bash at New York's Pierre Hotel.
Stores will start selling the razor after an ad blitz that kicks into high gear with commercials during the Super Bowl on Jan. 28. 

For all its other businesses, Gillette means one thing to consumers world-wide: shaving.
Gillette dominates the business in the U.S., with a market share of about 64%.
Razors and blades account for just one-third of its sales -- but two-thirds of profits. " Nothing is as good as the razor business," says Derwin Phillips, a vice chairman.
Gillette's operating profit margins from razors are 34% compared with 10.3% in all its other businesses combined. 

Still, the shaving business hasn't been the same since disposable razors were introduced in the mid-1970s.
Disposables, once used by relatively few, now are the razors of choice for more than half of all American shavers.
But profits on them are thin, because they cost more to make yet sell for less than the cartridges used in permanent razors. 

Sensor, Gillette believes, can reverse the trend by providing a better shave.
But the big question isn't so much whether Sensor offers a better shave, but whether that matters to customers.
The razor market isn't growing, so Sensor will have to win over shavers who use other razors, namely disposables, including its own. 

New technology is the key to the Sensor.
A man's face may look smooth to the naked eye.
But magnified, it resembles the streets of New York City: there are potholes and bumps all over. "Current twin edge razors are like a car that doesn't have springs or shock absorbers," explains a research and development executive at Gillette. "They hit the whiskers at different points, so they leave different heights of whiskers.
In some cases, the blades dig into skin" and cause irritation. 

Sensor addresses this with a novel suspension system that allows the two blades to move separately.
Each blade has tiny springs soldered to it.
Thus, the blades move up, down and sideways with the contour of the face.
Springs are attached to a guard below the twin blades.
Because some shavers press too hard and some not hard enough, this feature, "like automatic transmission, will help to automatically adjust the force," the executive says. 

The two blades are farther apart, allowing easier cleaning, and the razor has a mechanism making it easier to change cartridges.
The head is slightly smaller than that of top-of-the-line Atra, so shavers will have to buy new razors to use Sensor blades. 

To test the razor, Gillette has asked a number of employees to come in early every morning and shave at the factory here.
Researchers measure their whiskers by mounting a microscopic camera on the razor that calibrates the shadow of the stub; they also collect the cut whiskers and measure them, using a microscope. 

A prototype for what became the Sensor razor was first developed in 1979.
Gillette had hoped to introduce the new system in 1984 or 1985, but it couldn't figure out how to mass produce the cartridges. (The long delay raised some eyebrows in the company. "It only took five years to fight World War II," grouses one marketing executive.) 

The biggest obstacle was attaching the springs to the blades on a high-speed assembly line that makes 2 1/2 cartridges a second.
No commercial lasers could operate at the speed Gillette needed to weld the springs to the blades, so the company had to develop its own lasers.
A test line in 1986 indicated its technology was feasible.
Gillette spent the next two years -- and $150 million -- to build manufacturing equipment for mass production. 

Though competitors such as Wilkinson, Bic and Schick may get to license the technology in the future, they may be hampered because of the high cost and complexity of setting up manufacturing facilities. "To replicate (Sensor) would be a pretty tough undertaking," says one Gillette source. 

Gillette figures that a portion of the profits will come as shavers who use topof-the-line Atra and Trac II razors trade up to Sensor; they obviously are willing to pay a premium for a better shave.
Sensor might win customers from rivals like Warner-Lambert Co. 's Schick division, Bic Corp. and Swedish Match's Wilkinson Sword unit.
Since Gillette already has a huge market share, further gains won't be easy. 

So the only way to increase profits substantially is to get users of disposables to switch.
Can Sensor do it?
A former Gillette shaving executive is skeptical.
He asks: If products such as Atra already offer a closer shave, yet they haven't wooed a substantial number away from disposables, can Sensor, expecially since its price will be 25% higher than Atra's? 

Yes, insists John W. Symons, president of Gillette's North Atlantic shaving group, who headed Gillette's European business in the mid-1980s.
Upset that disposables were making razors a commodity business in Europe, Mr. Symons mapped a counterattack with cartridge razors.
At sales meetings, he would stand up with a disposable in one hand and a metal Atra razor in the other and demand, "Are you a plastic man or a steel man?" The strategy is working.
In 1988, the unit market share of cartridges in Europe had risen to 36% from 33.8% in 

Emboldened, Gillette stopped advertising disposables in the U.S. Now, it promotes its cartridges as "the best a man can get." In the first six months of this year, cartridges captured 33% of the market, up from an all-time low of 31.7% last year. "That's the first time share has grown since disposables were launched in the mid-1970s," Mr. Symons chortles. 

