.START 

Braniff Inc., seeing $100 million in planned financing evaporate, put itself under bankruptcy court protection for the second time in seven years and made plans to resurrect a small portion of its grounded fleet. 

After a directors meeting that went late into the night Wednesday, the airline made its Chapter 11 filing at 1:35 a.m. yesterday morning in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Orlando, Fla., where the company recently moved its corporate headquarters.
The filing came less than 12 hours after Braniff abruptly began canceling flights and sending workers home. 

Braniff's bankruptcy filing hardly changes the airline industry's competitive balance of power -- the tiny carrier is a distant 13th in a top-heavy field of 22.
But Braniff's first collapse, when it was a much larger company, was seen as a watershed in airline deregulation, illustrating the perils of cocky overexpansion.
This new collapse is an object lesson in the difficulties a small carrier has surviving in today's concentrated airline industry. 

"In the current airline environment, major airlines enjoy a distinct competitive advantage over smaller carriers in the use of their computer reservations systems, frequent flier programs, pricing, and control of facilities and slots at capacity-controlled airports," William G. McGee, Braniff's chairman, said in a statement. 

Yesterday morning, some 2,800 Braniff workers received mailgrams beginning: "We regret to inform you that you are furloughed indefinitely." The reduction cuts the work force by 58%. 

The airline said it flew four flights yesterday.
It plans to have 40 operating by Monday to 11 cities.
Previously it flew to 40 cities.
The airline said it plans to maintain reduced hub operations in Kansas City and Orlando and offered a plan to honor tickets already bought. 

Braniff offered few details on why it suddenly sought the refuge of the bankruptcy court again.
Top executives weren't answering questions and events were moving so quickly and apparently haphazardly that their representatives could offer little elaboration. "We've had 100 calls an hour for the past 24 hours," said a spokeswoman. 

But in its written statement, Braniff said, "The company has suffered a liquidity problem as a result of a delay in completing recently announced financing and a softening of airline traffic and yields in recent months." 

To make it through what it knew would be a tight autumn, when airline traffic normally slows, Braniff had counted on three linked financings.
It planned to get around $70 million from GPA New York Financial Services, a subsidiary of GPA Group Ltd., the giant Irish concern that leases Braniff 30 of its 68 planes.
That cash infusion was part of an intricate transaction in which Braniff would lease 20 new Boeing 737-300 jets valued at about $600 million. 

The airline was attempting to secure another $12 million by posting some of its Kansas City gates as collateral, and was aiming to get the rest of the roughly $100 million through a Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. placement.
All three transactions fell through in the last several days.
The GPA deal was canceled by mutual consent, according to a GPA spokesman, though the reason it and the other transactions failed remains unclear. 

"It's like building a spider web," a Braniff spokesman said. "It's the type of situation where if all the things had worked it would have been glorious.
But now it's the opposite." 

Even senior management was caught off guard by the need to seek bankruptcy protection.
Only Monday night, Mr. McGee assured business leaders at a Rotary Club meeting in Kansas City that Braniff's plans to expand service there were right on track.
Mr. McGee was scheduled to make another such speech yesterday morning to the Civic Council, a group of Kansas City's top 100 business owners.
His office called the organization late Wednesday afternoon to cancel the appearance, just as Braniff started canceling flights. 

Braniff's bankruptcy filing shows the swift decline of available cash as it loaded up on debt to expand.
Between January 31 and July 31, the company's cash position dwindled to $3.6 million from $31.6 million.
During the same period, its long-term liabilities shot up to $177.5 million from $95.5 million. 

Burdened with such debt costs and some inefficient aircraft, Braniff has said it needed to fill 72.4% of its seats to break even, an exceptionally high level by industry standards.
It filled only 64.2% in the six months ended July 31, down from 67.5% a year earlier.
It increased the amount of profit made for every mile it flew in the period to 11.1 cents from 9.1 cents, but that wasn't enough. 

Even before the filing, Braniff was missing payments to certain suppliers.
Kansas City's mayor, Richard L. Berkley, said the carrier was 37 days past due on its rent for gates at Kansas City International Airport, where Braniff had quadrupled flights in the past year.
A city councilman there said Braniff also was late paying bills from a local fuel supplier.
The airline's liquidity problem was so severe that by last week many suppliers began demanding cash payment on delivery, according to a person familiar with Braniff's operations. 

Braniff has insisted all along it had to grow to survive.
Accordingly, Mr. McGee had daring plans to triple the size of the airline's fleet by 1991, increase revenue by 30% and flights by 25%.
Earlier this year, it placed orders and options for 100 new Airbus Industrie A-320s through GPA, an order worth about $3 billion.
Five have been delivered so far this year, and Braniff expected to take delivery of another 11 between now and next June. 

"We had to build," the Braniff spokesman said. "Still do." 

Susan Carey in Brussels contributed to this article. 

