.START 

OPEC's inconclusive and contentious five days of debate here this week again has oil ministers on the brink of a production free-for-all, trying not to slip over. 

The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries' production will almost certainly rise from its already above-target 22 million barrels a day as a result of this week's meeting.
And if that weakens prices much, the fear is that a couple of big Persian Gulf producers could open their spigots to maintain sorely-needed revenues.
That happened as recently as a year ago, pushing OPEC prices to between $10 and $13 a barrel. 

So far, ministers, delegates and others interviewed here in the wake of the meeting contend OPEC can avoid that.
They believe the fourth-quarter increase won't be sufficient to put OPEC production at or beyond the late-1988 peak of 23 million barrels a day.
And because of strong demand, they don't expect OPEC prices to decline much, if at all, from the current average of near $17 a barrel. 

"I am optimistic that this arrangement will work and won't harm prices in the fourth quarter," said Ginandjar Kartasasmita, Indonesia's oil minister who held a leading role in the negotiations.
He predicted relatively stable oil markets until OPEC meets again in November. 

The oil ministers settled on a modest rise in OPEC's official fourth-quarter output ceiling to 20.5 million barrels a day from the current 19.5 million.
They rejected a 21.5-million barrel ceiling that some argued would more realistically reflect actual output and demand. 

Nonetheless, the fact that they delayed action on a proposed restructuring of their antiquated quota system and divided a modest increase among the 13 member states on the existing formula underscores their inability to resolve OPEC's most crucial issue -- quota violations. 

"We have given no pledges," said Ali Khalifa Al-Sabah, the oil minister of Kuwait, which is freely producing almost double its current quota of 1.1 million barrels a day.
In truth, neither Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, nor some other chronic quota violators has the ability to produce a lot more at the moment and thus trigger a price tailspin.
Several other producers are also within quota for the same reason. 

On the other hand, Iraq, with its growing potential, and Saudi Arabia, OPEC's biggest producer, are capable of pouring vast volumes of additional oil into the marketplace if they choose. 

Issam Abdul Raheem Al-Chalabi, the Iraqi oil minister, suggested in an interview that Iraq doesn't plan to do that. "Now that we are agreed on a new ceiling, we, like Saudi Arabia, will abide by our quota and see what happens," he said.
He said Iraq prefers a firm oil price to higher volumes. 

It is understood Saudi Arabia also intends to stay within its new allotment of five million barrels a day -- unless the price of oil plunges.
Then, however, OPEC sources said Saudi Arabia would increase production to maintain its revenues.
That, alone, could lead to a further price drop, prompting still higher Saudi output. 

The kingdom is such a large producer that under the new fourth-quarter ceiling its percentage increase alone will add 245,000 barrels a day to OPEC's legitimate output.
And it has awesome production power, which it has used in the past to penalize OPEC quota-breakers.
Though it has stuck to its quota this year, it led last year's output race. 

