.START 

THE SENATE VOTED to restore funds for a space-based anti-missile project. 

In an effort to slow the erosion of support for Bush's Strategic Defense Initiative, the chamber, voting 53-47, approved $4.3 billion for the project, restoring $600 million that had been cut earlier.
The funding nearly matched a Bush administration request.
The action on an overall $288.1 billion defense-appropriations bill was designed to bolster the Senate's position going into talks with the House, which wants a lower ceiling for Star Wars funding. 

As part of a stopgap spending measure sent to Bush, Congress approved more than $1 billion in emergency aid for the victims of Hurricane Hugo. 

The U.S. announced a plan for the expanded distribution of DDI, an experimental drug that appears to be effective in stopping replication of the AIDS virus.
The plan to make DDI more widely available, announced by the FDA and the National Institutes of Health, was lauded by AIDS activists. 

Dutch scientists have concluded that the antiviral drug AZT may prevent, rather than simply alleviate, a common symptom of AIDS.
The research team in Amsterdam found that the drug appears to prevent dementia, which afflicts about one-third of AIDS patients. 

Bush and the nation's governors agreed to draft educational performance goals aimed at overhauling U.S. schools by the year 2000.
The objectives, discussed at a two-day meeting in Virginia, range from improving the readiness of children to start school to increasing the number of qualified teachers. 

The Ukraine's Communist Party ended the 17-year reign of its leader, Vladimir Shcherbitsky, accepting the resignation of one of the Soviet Union's last old-guard conservatives.
He was ousted from the nation's Politburo last week.
At a meeting attended by Gorbachev, the Kiev rulers named a protege of the Soviet leader as party chief. 

The Soviet Union proposed a European summit late next year to sign a new East-West treaty to reduce conventional military forces on the continent.
In Geneva, U.S. and Soviet negotiators prepared for the start today of talks aimed at cutting the superpowers' long-range nuclear arsenals. 

Shevardnadze offered to act as an intermediary between Israel and the PLO.
The Soviet foreign minister also proposed a meeting between them in the Soviet Union.
The proposal was disclosed at the U.N. following discussions between Shevardnadze and Israeli Foreign Minister Arens. 

Colombia's President Barco arrived in Washington and met with Bush.
Barco praised the U.S. for its recent $65 million in emergency assistance and sought new help on trade issues.
He said Bogota wouldn't seek additional funding for Colombia's crackdown on cocaine traffickers. 

Thousands of Yugoslavs protested Slovenia's adoption of changes to its regional constitution that proclaimed the right to secede from the Communist federation.
In Belgrade, federal authorities asked Yugoslavia's Supreme Court to urgently rule on the small northern republic's amendments. 

Greece's government announced that it would resign by next week and that elections would be held Nov. 5.
The move by the Conservative-Communist coalition followed Wednesday's vote ordering former Socialist Prime Minister Papandreou, 70, to stand trial on charges of corruption related to a $200 million bank-embezzlement scandal. 

An Amtrak train smashed into a fire truck at a crossing in Virginia, killing at least two firefighters and injuring more than 150 people.
Both of the train's engines and 11 of its 16 cars derailed.
The Crescent was bound from New York to New Orleans. 

A mortar shell exploded and killed two soldiers at Fort Stewart in Georgia during a training exercise.
The accident came one day after three soldiers died and 23 others were injured at Fort Sill, Okla., when an artillery shell overshot its target. 

Ferdinand Marcos died in Honolulu, where he fled into exile after being deposed as president of the Philippines in 1986.
He was 72.
Marcos, who for 20 years led an increasingly corrupt government, had been hospitalized with kidney, lung and heart ailments.
In Manila, President Aquino said his body couldn't be returned for burial. 

