.START 

An early scene in the hot new film "Roger and Me" shows a water tower being demolished at an empty General Motors factory in Flint, Mich.
The scene symbolizes the movie's message: GM abandoned and destroyed the town of its birth, committing corporate matricide. 

But in fact the scene is one of rebirth as well as death.
The water tower was part of a Flint factory complex that's been gutted and converted into a new high-tech engineering center.
Next week, top GM executives will travel to Flint to dedicate the center, which will house 1,500 GM engineers.
About half of them are being transferred into Flint from elsewhere. 

So the water tower scene really symbolizes the fundamental flaw with "Roger and Me." Yes, the movie is full of wonderfully clever and caustic comedy that's winning rave reviews from the sort of critics to whom film is a two-syllable word.
But it paints a picture of despair at a time when there's finally some reason for optimism, however guarded, in Flint and factory towns like it.
GM's record is far from perfect, but the company is hardly the Monster that Ate Flint. 

The "Roger" in "Roger and Me" is Roger B. Smith, the controversy-prone chairman of General Motors Corp. "Me" refers to the film's creator, Michael Moore.
A Flint native and former editor of a counter-culture newspaper and Mother Jones magazine, the 35-year-old Mr. Moore also stars in this, his first film.
He pops up time and again, trying to confront Mr. Smith and invite him to Flint to witness the city's woes first-hand.
Mr. Moore carries his search to GM headquarters, to the Detroit Athletic Club and to the Grosse Pointe Yacht Club.
The last quest was bound to be futile, as Detroiters will know, Grosse Pointe is Ford country.
Mr. Smith actually hangs out across town at the Bloomfield Hills Country Club, but that club isn't as photogenic. 

"Roger and Me" played two sellout showings at the 27th New York Film Festival this week, and the film lives up to its dark comedy billing.
It's hard to know whether to laugh at or cry about the impoverished woman who raises rabbits to sell as pets or as meat.
She slaughters and dresses the bunnies herself, but later concludes she wants to be a veterinarian. 

The atmosphere at Lincoln Center after Wednesday's debut was as darkly comic as the film itself.
One fan asked Mr. Moore whether his film had "radicalized" the workers back home.
Then Stewart Mott, left-wing activist heir to the GM fortune, strode to the stage in khaki clothes and a fishing vest to declare his affection for Mr. Moore.
Later, Mr. Mott hugged the young film maker, who explained that the film functioned as Mr. Mott's "own personal release" (presumably from guilt). 

Flint, some 60 miles north of Detroit, is home to 150,000 souls.
In 1978 General Motors employed 72,000 people there, making Flint the consummate company town.
That's what Flint still is, even though the number of GM employees has fallen to about 45,000. 

What happened is no secret.
A haughty, complacent General Motors got hit with the cold new reality of international competition.
GM -- like Ford, Chrysler and other industrial giants -- bears plenty of blame for letting itself get so bloated that it had to discard workers like excess baggage from a sinking ship. 

Flint compounded its troubles with hare-brained civic schemes: a downtown luxury hotel to promote tourism, of all things, an indoor "theme park" called AutoWorld and a downtown shopping complex.
The city fathers paid television evangelist Robert Schuller $20,000 to come to town and pronounce: "Tough times don't last, tough people do." 

In 1984 GM's big Buick assembly plant in Flint was scheduled for extinction.
But the man in charge, a vice president named Lloyd Reuss, persuaded the company to invest $350 million to transform the factory into a cutting-edge body-and-assembly complex called Buick City.
It was a "bet your career" move and it looked to be a losing bet at first. 

The workers couldn't handle the robots, the robots couldn't work with each other, and Buick City's launch in 1985 was a disaster.
By the time the plant was debugged, GM's sales were so low that Buick City needed just one shift of workers.
The second shift was laid off in October 1987.
When GM chose a new president in May 1987, it wasn't Mr. Reuss. 

But then a funny thing happened. "Union and management both realized that they had to work together like heck to pull themselves out of the mess they were in," says Lewis B. Campbell, the GM vice president who now runs Buick City.
Adds Jim Yaklin, president of the local union, "Finally, management is letting our people use their minds as well as their hands." 

Last March, the plant's second shift was recalled.
In June, the Buick LeSabre, built at Buick City, was rated the second highest quality car in America -- foreign or domestic -- by the respected J.D. Power independent survey.
LeSabre sales have surged, and Buick City is now working overtime.
Mr. Campbell, meanwhile, has moved his family out of an exclusive Detroit suburb and into Flint, and his children attend Catholic schools in the city.
In 1987 Flint voters, fed up with civic boondoggles, elected a 29-year-old West Point graduate as mayor.
Mayor Matthew Collier, now a ripe old 31, has balanced the budget and reduced crime.
Mr. Moore may be a social radical, but now he's about to become a rich entrepreneur.
He sold his house, went into debt and held weekly bingo games to finance "Roger and Me." He's entertaining bids for distribution rights to the film, and expects to land $1 million or more. 

In short, Mr. Moore, whose talent is undeniable, is a great American success story.
Just like Flint once was, and, like so many other factory towns across America, is struggling to become again. 

Mr. Ingrassia is the Journal's bureau chief in Detroit. 

