.START 

"Queen of Hearts," an unheralded British film about an Italian immigrant family, may turn out to be the fall's sweetest surprise.
It has a magical pull that brings to mind the Taviani brothers' "The Night of the Shooting Stars," though its subject is infinitely lighter (family life, not war). 

The movie unfolds as a childhood memory so strong that the adult recalling it automatically accepts the mystical assumptions he didn't question as a boy but might as a grown-up.
Screenwriter Tony Grisoni has written a wonderful story -- his first produced screenplay -- that doesn't dilute the imaginative world-view of the boy, Eddie Lucca, with logic or reason.
Yet there's a wryness, too, an acknowledgement that Eddie understood at an early age how reality, like food, can benefit from a little garnish.
And he didn't have to add much, not with a beetle-browed grandma who routinely confessed her son-in-law's sins to the local priest. 

So in the world Eddie remembers with such seductive humor and poignancy, it seemed perfectly reasonable that a father might take advice from the head of a roasted pig, or that dead grandfathers could relay a winning horse's number at a critical moment. ("Thanks to Dad's vision of the pig he became a man of property," Eddie explains somberly.) As owner of The Lucky Cafe, his father could do what he did best: Drink cappuccino and chat up the customers while his family did the work. 

Dad, a good-natured dreamer, naturally favors Eddie, his youngest child and the one most completely immersed in family lore.
Eddie, played by a black-eyed little charmer named Ian Hawkes, is a romantic like his father.
This kid remembers even the hard times as a party, his parents waltzing in the living room and the family setting up tents inside because of a leaky roof.
His brother, Bruno ("Monday's child," Eddie calls his woeful older sibling), remembers only the unpaid bills, the hardship. 

The movie opens with the courtship (as recalled by Eddie) of Danilo and his wife, Rosa, delightfully played by two unknowns, Joseph Long, the British child of Italian immigrants, and Anita Zagaria, an Italian actress.
The hugely talented director, Jon Amiel, best known for the BBC series "The Singing Detective," has staged Danilo's conquest of Rosa, who was engaged to another man, as high-wire melodrama, the way Eddie must have been told the story by his parents. 

But like all Eddie's fantasies, this one had truth enough.
Doesn't his mother's spurned lover -- Barbariccia, the butcher's son -- show up in England years and years later to cause Danilo and Rosa grief?
Eddie didn't invent that.
Or did he? 

Mike Southon, the director of photography, has an imaginative eye and a powerful feel for the interplay between fantasy and reality; just look at "Gothic" and "Paperhouse," two of his recent features.
Like most of the players behind and in front of the camera, he isn't well known yet.
This delightful piece of work should change that. 

Just as she's collecting kudos for her provocative performance in the hit "Sea of Love," Ellen Barkin displays yet another talent in "Johnny Handsome": She can whack a fellow actor across the head as viciously as the most unrepentant thug.
This may or may not be a step toward equality of the sexes.
But it certainly doesn't add much to Ms. Barkin's resume. 

The actress can't be blamed for what she does here.
She's just another prop in a Walter Hill movie, which means she either will brutally kill or be killed -- or both, all in the service of an embittered view of life, miserably executed. (Mr.
Hill's credits include "Extreme Prejudice," "Streets of Fire," "The Warriors," and "48 Hours," where Eddie Murphy's funny mouth relieved the pain.) 

Yet something drew Ms. Barkin -- and other good actors like Morgan Freeman and Forest Whitaker -- to this slag heap.
They must have been intrigued by the philosophical question lurking beneath the corpses: Will a severely deformed person, driven to crime by his deformity, become a model citizen if his face is reconstructed to make him look like Mickey Rourke (who plays him)? 

In Mr. Hill's hands, however, what could (generously) be regarded as a contemporary "Elephant Man" seems a lot like "Death Wish." He lingers over the violence, starting with the first sequence that lands Johnny in jail, again, with a strong urge for revenge.
The director skips through the segments that might have given the picture some interest, especially the doctor's (Mr.
Whitaker) desire to rehabilitate Johnny through plastic surgery.
But Johnny doesn't change.
With Mr. Rourke playing him he still mumbles even after a nun with a Park Avenue accent teaches him how to speak properly.
Ugly or pretty, he's entirely forgettable. 

Elizabeth McGovern plays the saintly, if stupid, girl, a requirement in most Hill pictures.
For her sex scene with Mr. Rourke she appears to have been doused with water, presumably to indicate passion. 

Mr. Freeman pops in and out of the story, usually to express his opinion that a bad egg is a bad egg, no matter what he looks like.
The actor has such screen presence these brief appearances become pockets of relief in this pounding migraine of a movie. 

Video Tip: David Lynch's hypnotic 1980 vision of "The Elephant Man" is an eerie, beautiful movie, shot in black and white, about a deformed person's search for love and acceptance -- and much more.
John Hurt, Anthony Hopkins and Wendy Hiller play their parts eloquently. 

