.START 

The House, in a stunning victory for President Bush, agreed to cut the tax on capital gains, soundly rejecting an alternative proposed by Democratic leaders. 

After weeks of intense lobbying by both sides, the leadership's plan was defeated by a larger-than-expected 239-190 vote.
The convincing margin increases the likelihood that a capital gains cut of some sort could become law this year. 

The vote was a blow to the House's newly elected Democratic leadership, particularly Speaker Thomas Foley of Washington and Majority Leader Richard Gephardt of Missouri.
Both had put their personal prestige on the line to defeat the tax-cut measure, which represented their first major showdown with the Bush administration. 

Still, fully one-quarter of their membership -- 64 Democrats -- deserted them and sided with a near-solid phalanx of Republicans.
Only one Republican, Doug Bereuter of Nebraska, broke ranks and voted, against the wishes of President Bush, for the Democratic alternative. 

"This was a watershed for us," glowed House Republican Leader Robert Michel of Illinois. 

President Bush said the tax cut will help "make us more successful in the increasingly competitive international marketplace, creating more jobs and better living standards for Americans." He pledged to begin "working cooperatively with the Senate to give swift attention to this tax cut." 

Last night, Lloyd Bentsen (D.,Texas), chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, began floating a proposal to raise more than $5.4 billion in taxes for fiscal 1990 without resorting to a cut in the capital gains tax or an increase in the top individual tax rate.
The proposal also would broaden tax benefits for individual retirement accounts. 

The capital gains provision approved by the House would reduce the tax rate for 2 1/2 years to 19.6%; it currently is as high as 33%.
Afterward, the rate would be set at 28% and the gains from newly acquired assets would be indexed to inflation.
The provision is part of a much larger bill that cuts spending and raises taxes, and could clear the House as early as next week.
Yesterday's vote against the Democrats' proposal was the only direct test of sentiment on capital gains. 

The Democrats' plan would have increased the top tax rate on the nation's wealthiest citizens and expanded the deduction for individual retirement accounts.
The Democrats reasoned that the proposal would give a tax break to mostly middle-income people at the expense of the most well-off.
They tried to paint the capital gains cut as a giveaway to the rich. 

But the message was muddled by the fact that their plan raised substantial amounts of revenue -- $25 billion over five years.
Republicans battered the Democrats for proposing a tax increase in the face of a veto threat by the president.
The Republicans' House campaign committee vowed to use a vote for the "tax hike" against incumbent Democrats in the 1990 elections. 

Proponents of the capital gains cut claimed that the tax change would spur economic growth and also increase government receipts. "It's indeed a tax reduction and a revenue raiser," Rep. Michel said.
Rep. Guy Vander Jagt (R., Mich.) called it "almost too good to be true," and the Democrats heartily agreed.
They emphasized that though the provision would raise revenue in the short run because of an increase in asset sales, over the long haul it would cost the Treasury billions of dollars. 

Rep. Richard Lehman (D., Calif.) called the capital gains cut "a fraud" that fit well with "the spend-now pay-later orgy that epitomized the 1980s." And because 80% of the cut's benefit would go to individuals who earn more than $100,000 a year, Rep. Marty Russo (D., Ill.) labeled it "disgusting greed." 

In defense of the cut, Rep. Michel said, "The Democratic leadership believes in redistributing the wealth.
The bipartisan coalition believes in creating wealth." He decried the "rancid rhetoric of class warfare" being used against a proposal that he said would mean "more growth, more jobs, and help us all be more competitive in an increasingly competitive world." 

The debate on the merits was only part of the process.
Partisanship and parochial politics also played major roles.
Pressure was applied from all quarters.
President Bush made numerous telephone calls to wavering lawmakers from both parties, and Bush aides met with many of them in the White House during the week.
Democratic leaders delivered thinly veiled warnings to fearful freshmen about committee assignments, and Speaker Foley made many personal appeals to win support on this early and important vote. 

In the end, Southern conservatives abandoned the leadership in droves; a majority of the Democrats in seven border and Southern states voted against the leadership package.
The Democrats in Maryland and Texas were evenly split.
In addition, the chairmen of five committees voted against the leadership, including Appropriations Chairman Jamie Whitten of Mississippi, Judiciary Chairman Jack Brooks of Texas and Public Works Chairman Glenn Anderson of California.
The chairman of the House Democrats' fundraising committee, Beryl Anthony of Arkansas, also sided with the president. 

The next stop for the capital gains proposal is the Senate, where Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) and Sen. Bentsen hope to block the cut.
They are meeting resistance in their own ranks, however.
Some 10 to 15 Democratic senators have been quietly discussing their united view that a capital gains reduction of some sort is a good idea.
Meetings with the leadership are being planned in the hopes of working out a compromise position. 

"This {the House vote} is going to put tremendous pressure on the Senate for passage of capital gains," said Rep. William Gray of Pennsylvania, the third-ranking Democrat in the House. "I wouldn't be surprised if we get both" a cut in the capital gains tax and an expansion of IRA tax benefits. 

Sen. Bentsen's proposal, with the exception of capital gains, in many ways echoes the one approved by the House Ways and Means Committee.
It, too, would extend various soon-to-expire tax breaks, though only for one year.
It would repeal a nondiscrimination law, called Section 89, dealing with health fringe benefits.
Unlike the Ways and Means proposal, it includes a Bentsen plan that, starting in 1991, would give a 50% deduction for IRA contributions to those who don't currently qualify, and, starting next year, would allow withdrawal without penalty for retirement, a first-home purchase and higher education. 

The proposal also would repeal a 50% exclusion on interest on bank loans for making stock purchases for employee stock ownership plans, repeal an automatic reduction in airport and airway taxes, impose a tax on ozone-depleting chemicals, and put limits on refunds to companies that are involved in leveraged buy-outs.
It wouldn't end a tax subsidy to big banks that encourages them to lend to developing nations, and would begin a speedup of the collection of payroll taxes from big companies starting next August. 

Other items include a small increase in the international air passenger departure tax, a new $3-a-passenger tax on international departures by commercial ships, and the speedup in the collection of gasoline excise taxes. 

In an interview, Sen. Bentsen said he hasn't made any final decisions.
Some senators are lobbying him to include a capital gains component.
He plans to meet with Democratic members of his committee today, and begin drafting sessions next week. 

Under the House plan approved yesterday, individuals initially could exclude from income 30% of any gain from the sale or exchange of capital assets held for more than one year.
The exclusion works out to a maximum tax rate of 19.6%.
Nearly all capital assets would be covered, including securities, commercial and residential real estate and timber.
Collectibles, such as artwork and antiques, wouldn't be covered, however. 

As written, the exclusion would apply to assets sold from Sept. 14, 1989, through Dec. 31, 1991.
But the effective dates could change as the legislation moves through Congress. 

Starting in 1992, the maximum effective rate would jump to 28%.
But for assets acquired after Dec. 31, 1991, and held for more than a year, individuals could exclude from taxation any gain attributable to inflation. 

According to congressional estimates, the capital gains tax reduction would raise $2.9 billion in government revenue in the fiscal year ending Sept. 30, 1990, and would raise $3.8 billion in fiscal 1991 and $2.7 billion in fiscal 1992.
That's because the lower tax is expected to increase the turnover of assets, particularly in light of the subsequent rise to 28%. 

But starting in fiscal 1993, the plan would lose revenue, compared with current law.
In fiscal 1993 it would cost the Treasury $5.7 billion and in fiscal 1994 $5.2 billion.
Over the five years, the capital gains tax reduction would cost the government $1.5 billion.
Over 10 years it would cost $21 billion. 

John E. Yang contributed to this article. 

