.START 

The chairman and four other top officers of NWA Inc., parent of Northwest Airlines, resigned abruptly in a management shakeout that places the airline's new owner, Alfred Checchi, at its helm. 

Steven G. Rothmeier, whose iron-willed approach to running Northwest triggered controversy during much of his three-year term as chairman, submitted his resignation at a meeting late Wednesday with Mr. Checchi, who will succeed him.
His decision to quit prompted four other executives to depart as well, including John Horn, president and chief operating officer. 

The moves come only three months after St. Paul, Minn.-based NWA ended a takeover siege by agreeing to a $3.65 billion offer from a group led by Mr. Checchi, a Los Angeles investor.
One of that group's principal investors, Frederic Malek, yesterday was named president of NWA. 

The moves are likely to have a significant influence on the nation's fourth-largest carrier.
Mr. Rothmeier's tough style helped make Northwest an aggressive competitor, but it also created tensions among employees that contributed to service problems.
Mr. Checchi's goals include raising morale at the airline and improving customer service. 

People familiar with Northwest said that there have been indications over the past several weeks that Mr. Checchi was becoming increasingly dissatisfied with management at the airline.
Among other things, there were rumblings that Mr. Checchi considered Mr. Rothmeier's management style too autocratic. 

"Checchi wants to change the direction of the company and obviously wants to run it himself," said William Kutzke, a former vice president, airline planning, at Northwest. 

Mr. Rothmeier and the other departing executives couldn't be reached for comment. 

An NWA spokesman denied there is any animosity between Mr. Checchi and Mr. Rothmeier. "Mr.
Checchi wanted Mr. Rothmeier to stay on," he said. "It was strictly Mr. Rothmeier's decision." At one point during the takeover battle, Mr. Rothmeier characterized the Checchi group as "totally friendly." In fact, some people involved in the takeover battle said that characterization may have helped Mr. Checchi gain the financial backing of KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, which was crucial to his winning the bidding battle.
At the time, Mr. Checchi said he didn't plan a management shakeout at Northwest. 

Nevertheless, one Northwest executive said that immediately after the buy-out was first approved, Mr. Rothmeier indicated that he and several of his officers were considering leaving the airline. 

The other officers who resigned are: Allan Pray, executive vice president-international; Benjamin G. Griggs Jr., executive vice president of NWA Cos.; and William Sitter, executive vice president of administration and chief information officer.
NWA Cos. is a unit of NWA Inc. 

James Cronin, former president and chief executive officer at Tiger International, was named executive vice president and chairman of NWA Cos.
He is a partner at Alfred Checchi Associates, the Los Angeles investment firm of which Mr. Checchi is president. 

One thing Mr. Checchi has in common with Mr. Rothmeier, who rose through the finance department at NWA, is a strong aptitude for working with numbers. 

Mr. Checchi, 41 years old, spent much of his career arranging financing for hotels as treasurer of Marriott Corp. and as an adviser to the Bass Brothers of Fort Worth, Texas.
Mr. Malek, the new NWA president, was president of Marriott much of the time Mr. Checchi worked there.
Working with the Bass Brothers for tiny percentages of the profits on multi-billion-dollar deals, Mr. Checchi amassed personal wealth of more than $50 million. 

He also is known for having a sometimes abrasive personality. 

Mr. Rothmeier's own hard-line approach became obvious when he oversaw the 1986 acquisition of Republic Airlines by NWA.
The executive was one of the first in the airline business to predict a significant consolidation of the industry.
Moving to ensure that Northwest would be one of the surviving carriers, he added more planes, built up hubs in Minneapolis, Detroit and Memphis and negotiated the acquisition of Republic. 

The speed with which Northwest acquired Republic, however, caused problems.
The combined carrier had difficulty blending its route systems and employee groups.
The results included flight delays and passenger complaints.
At one point, the carrier even lost track of one of its own jets. 

Mr. Rothmeier became a lightning rod for criticism -- and a disgruntled employee group once held a candlelight vigil outside his castle-like home. 

Nevertheless, he was admired by many of his immediate subordinates for his long work hours and dedication to building Northwest into what he called a "mega carrier." 

