.START 

In a successful counterattack, Audi dealers won legal sanctions against a woman who had charged that the Audi 5000 luxury car was prone to "sudden acceleration." 

Alice Weinstein, a Long Island, N.Y., woman who led a publicity campaign against Audi and filed five product-liability suits against the company, could end up paying thousands of dollars in damages to two New York Audi dealers. 

A New York state judge earlier this month ruled in favor of the dealers who charged that Ms. Weinstein violated a New York law aimed at preventing frivolous lawsuits.
The judge set a December hearing to determine how much she will be required to pay the dealers.
The maximum allowed by law is $10,000. 

Meanwhile, at Audi's urging, a federal judge in New York plans to hold hearings on whether Ms. Weinstein and her lawyers should be slapped with sanctions for repeatedly suing the auto maker over the same issue: whether Audi was negligent and liable for selling cars that she claimed unexpectedly accelerated beyond control. 

U.S. District Court Judge Eugene H. Nickerson earlier dismissed Ms. Weinstein's three federal suits, including one seeking $5 billion in punitive damages from Audi's U.S. parent, Volkswagen of America Inc., which is a unit of Volkswagen AG of West Germany. 

In the state case, a judge decided that Ms. Weinstein -- who delayed pretrial fact-finding because her attorney resigned -- wasn't really interested in taking the case to a trial and dismissed it.
The auto dealers, Koeppel Porsche Audi Inc. and Walters-Donaldson Porsche Audi, countersued, alleging that Ms. Weinstein "willfully used {the} court in a perverted manner" to, among other things, obtain publicity for her campaign against Audi.
Under New York law, defendants in a case can collect costs and attorney's fees if they can prove a plaintiff is unreasonably prolonging a case, or if a case is harassing or maliciously injuring the defendants.
Seeking such sanctions is an increasingly popular tactic with businesses facing product-liability suits, New York lawyers say.
Federal-court rules similarly call for sanctions against lawyers and plaintiffs who file frivolous lawsuits. 

This month, Ms. Weinstein appealed the dismissal of her first state suit, although she said she won't challenge the dismissal of the federal cases.
Ms. Weinstein says she filed five cases because of disagreements between her lawyers over the proper venue for the matter. 

For officials with Volkswagen of America, the court decisions have provided a measure of vindication. "How do you put things back in balance after you've been brutalized?" says Philip A. Hutchinson Jr., Volkswagen of America's vice president/public affairs, general counsel and secretary. "The whole thing has been an unfortunate legal episode." 

After an alleged sudden acceleration accident, Ms. Weinstein helped organize the Audi Victims Network in April 1986.
Studies by U.S., Canadian and Japanese transportation agencies concurred with Audi's reasoning that the problem is likely caused by drivers' stepping on the gas pedal while intending to apply the brakes. 

BRANIFF'S SECOND RETREAT to the refuge of bankruptcy doesn't appear to be improper. 

Bankruptcy law specialists said the Braniff that filed for Chapter 11 protection yesterday as a unit of BIA-COR Holdings Inc. is a substantially different entity from the Braniff International Corp. that filed under Chapter 11 in May 1982. 

The difference in entities is one test of the propriety of a second Chapter 11 filing; another is the company's progress in adhering to the first plan of reorganization, lawyers say. 

"There is always the threshold test of whether it was filed in good faith.
If you regularly file Chapter 11 every time the ides of March come around, there could be cause to question your good faith," says former Dallas Bankruptcy Judge Dean Gandy. 

Braniff appears to have passed the tests for filing the new Chapter 11 case, but it could face some interesting legal challenges, including the question of whether leveraged buy-outs should be treated as an improper transfer of assets prior to a bankruptcy.
A group led by Philadelphia investor Jeffrey Chodorow bought Braniff in a $105 million leveraged buy-out last year from the Pritzker family of Chicago. 

Braniff's original Chapter 11 case is still open in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Fort Worth, Texas.
Creditors, whose original claims totaled $1.5 billion, have yet to be paid in that case.
Braniff is expected to settle by the end of this year from a fund of more than $30 million, most of that from the sale of the carrier to the Pritzkers in 1983.
Under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code, a company continues to operate under protection from creditors' lawsuits while it works out a plan to pay its debts. 

Edgar Booth, the lawyer for the unsecured creditors committee, says his clients shouldn't plan a Christmas-time windfall. 

Even with creditors' claims whittled to about $600 million, he says, the payout will equal about five cents on the dollar. 

A GROUP of asbestos victims won a round in their suit alleging that the $2.44 billion leveraged buy-out of Jim Walter Co. was a fraudulent scheme designed largely to shield the company from mounting asbestos litigation.
A state district-court judge in Beaumont, Texas, refused to dismiss claims against nine of the defendants, including Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., which put together the buy-out; two KKR general partners, Henry Kravis and George Roberts; and Hillsborough Holdings Corp., a new concern organized in connection with the January 1988 buy-out.
The defendants, all based outside Texas, argued in a four-day hearing that the Texas court didn't have jurisdiction, but Judge Gary Sanderson disagreed, apparently clearing the way for a trial. 

TAMPA OFFICES of Mesirov, Gelman, Jaffe, Cramer & Jamieson will close. 

The 115-lawyer Philadelphia law firm says it wants to concentrate its efforts in the mid-Atlantic region.
The firm also has an office in Cherry Hill, N.J. Mesirov, Gelman's seven lawyers in Florida will join the Tampa office of Rudnick & Wolfe, a Chicago law firm. 

SAME SONG, second verse: A $90 million suit filed by Billy Joel against his former manager was a response to a breach-of-contract suit that the ex-manager filed Sept. 11, according to a lawyer for Frank Weber, who was fired by Mr. Joel on Aug. 30.
Mr. Weber filed the suit, which seeks damages of $33 million, in state court in Richmond, Va.
He claims Mr. Joel had no grounds for terminating his contract.
The suit also accuses the pop star of damaging Mr. Weber's future earnings by making false accusations about him to others in the entertainment industry.
Leonard Marks, Mr. Joel's lawyer, said he was unaware of the breach-of-contract suit. "We don't know anything about it," he said, denying that the singer's suit was filed in response.
Daniel A. Gecker, Mr. Weber's lawyer, said Mr. Joel's suit was "completely groundless." 

