.START 

On a recent hot, clear morning 112 longhorns poured onto the road to Roundup, cowboys at the sides of them and behind.
After them, the Montana Memorial Detachment of the Seventh Cavalry, Company K, the company that once survived Custer's last stand, rode out from the fields where wagons, riders and cattle had been gathering for days.
Then, at last, the wagon master shouted "Wagons . . . Ho]" and 208 wagons started rolling. 

Covered wagons, buckboards, surreys, carriages, stagecoaches.
Wagons pulled by huge, gentle draft horses, wagons pulled by mules; wagons that may have made it across the States to Montana a hundred years ago and new wagons built to the old standards.
Behind and among them were 2,397 horseback riders, assertedly the largest aggregation of them since Gettysburg. 

The train stretched 3 1/2 miles down the road.
As it passed through Roundup (population: 2,200) -- 15,000 people lined the street cheering, applauding, wishing us well.
They lined the road for miles. 

Women in long dresses and sunbonnets sat high on the wagons.
On horseback, spreading their skirts out over the horses' backs, they looked like flowers.
There was a nun in a long habit on a horse, tiny girls, little boys, mountain men and cowboys, ranchers, doctors, lawyers, poets, dancers, secretaries, restaurateurs, politicians, journalists, farmers, horseshoers -- as diverse an assortment of dreamers as probably ever was assembled on Earth.
The event, planned as a celebration of the state's beef industry by two Montana cartoonists, Barry McWilliams and Stan Lynde, and rancher Jim Wempner, became a celebration of all of life in the American West. 

Participants had been assigned to specific wagon circles for the six days of the drive.
Self-contained little villages, the lot of them made up what was for the week a city ranking somewhere between the 10th and 15th largest in Montana.
In camp, draft horses were tethered to their wagons, while riding horses and pack horses were set up in temporary corrals or hitched to rope lines some distance from the circles.
But wherever you looked, at any hour of day or night, people were leading horses, riding horses, watering horses, saddling or unsaddling, grooming, feeding.
There usually was at least one horse tethered to a Porta-Potti.
The only place I never saw one was inside the huge red-and-white tent Anheuser-Busch Cos. set up daily as a kind of community hall where a band played, people danced and a good deal of the postride activity took place. 

One night we had a wedding.
The bride wore jeans, a white shirt, a brown cowboy hat and carried a bouquet of wildflowers.
She walked down an aisle formed by a dense crowd of people backing away on both sides of the Budweiser tent.
A thousand people cheered the kiss.
When Jan Vickstrom -- a photographer for Big Sky Productions' Centennial Cattle Drive Commemorative Book (the drive's official book) and the person with whom I rode most of the time -- encountered the bride and groom on the next day's ride, she asked them how they felt. "Very married," the bride answered. 

My horse, Tess, which I had borrowed from Big Sky's publisher, Jim Boyde, didn't want to go anywhere without Jan's horse.
Tess was a lesson for me in assertion and the cause of some changes in my vocabulary.
There probably are no longer many cowboys who can outcuss me. 

We talked to hundreds of people on the trail, but never did meet the 102-year-old man who was the oldest person on the drive, and the only one to pre-date Montana's statehood.
Riding horseback, he was reported to have said earlier that if someone wanted to interview him, he or she would have to catch him.
How can you catch someone who's been riding a hundred years? 

Our route led over rolling land of sagebrush and prickly pear where occasional clumps of pine topped a knoll.
You could see across it at least forever.
A fair part of that land belongs to the Charter Ranch, whose present managers, Steve and Jeannie Charter, invited the press to a barbecue.
Steve's parents founded the Northern Plains Resource Council, which successfully defeated the attempts of coal companies to buy up prime ranch land in the region. "Our bond to the land is what keeps us here through the bad years," Steve Charter told us. 

It was a sense of the land that brought Boris Kalyagin, chief of the Bureau of Soviet TV and Radio, out from his base in Washington.
Mr. Kalyagin feels that the U.S. and the Soviet Union share ecological problems. "Cities destroy ecology," he said. "We should do something to preserve nature and to focus on the land, and the cattle drive is a good advertisement for that idea." 

Cowboy poet Wally McRae, whose family has been in the cow business for generations, is equally concerned about the land. "Things really haven't changed," he told me. "My grandfather fought wolves and we're fighting wolves.
Our wolves just take on another form." Likening the drive to "Fiddler on the Roof," he said he could easily see Tevye here. (The camp did, indeed, seem much like Tevye's village, and McRae a perfect Tevye.) "Why do we stay up there on that roof -- on that horse?" he asked. "I'll tell you in one word," he continued, almost singing. "Tradition]" 

Meanwhile, harking back to his own traditions, Montana's senior senator, Max Baucus, worked as a drover along with 112 other cowhands. (Drovers work the cattle.
Besides the lead herd, there were 2,700 head in the main herd.
Seventy-nine wranglers took care of the loose horses.) I asked him what he thought of the drive. "It's back to basics," he said. "People, soil, livestock, open space . . . I was supposed to be in Washington, but I canceled the rest of the week.
I told my staff to take care of it." 

One day I saw Max Baucus standing alone, the prairie stretching out behind him.
One hand held the reins of his grazing horse, the other held a cellular telephone on which he talked.
That sight represented the drive well.
A celebration of 100 years of statehood, it encompassed the present as well as the past.
It's why the pickups and horse trailers parked in camp seemed as appropriate as the horses and wagons. 

"This is past-oriented," Wally McRae said, "but it's also a celebration of the future.
The livestock industry is still viable." 

It's not just the livestock industry that is viable.
It's the whole myth of the West, that myth that probably filled the heart of most people on the drive.
Rancher Charles Patten was one of the drovers.
He looked grizzled and tough as he stood in a circle formed by a few other hands, one gray, raw morning. "We've got to be the luckiest to be living in the Treasure State that's so full of treasure," he said, tears suddenly forming in his eyes. "It was the greatest show I've ever seen when I watched the wagon train come in.
Some of them are not accomplished riders, but they got my support.
I'm mighty, mighty proud.
With something like that, I'm not ashamed to cry." 

Then a few of those tough cowboys in that circle had tears in their eyes.
The thing about the drive is that, yes, it was big and dusty and sprawling and macho.
But it filled us all with pride and was so moving that sometimes you couldn't keep from crying. 

Ms. Rudner is a free-lance writer based in Bozeman, Mont. 

