.START 

Melvin Jacobs, the chairman of Saks Fifth Avenue, said in an interview that he intends to lead a leveraged buy-out of the 46-store specialty retailer. 

Saks's parent company, B.A.T Industries PLC, on Tuesday announced its intention to sell its U.S. retail group, which includes Saks, Marshall Field, Southern department store chain Ivey's and the Breuners furniture chain.
B.A.T is attempting to thwart Sir James Goldsmith's $21 billion takeover bid. 

"Our thinking through the period prior to Tuesday's announcement was that if our company was going to be offered for sale, management was interested in buying it," said the 63-year-old Mr. Jacobs, who also is chief executive officer.
Management at Marshall Field also has said it hopes to buy that retail business. 

Mr. Jacobs said he has been approached by numerous investment bankers interested in helping him with a buy-out bid, but he hasn't made any financing decisions.
Noting that many retail industry buy-outs have failed this year because they were financed with high-interest junk bonds and bridge loans, which left retailers with insufficient cash flow, Mr. Jacobs said, "We don't want to follow the unsuccessful acts.
We will need partners who want a good return but are willing to take a long-range view." 

In 1988, Saks generated $1.2 billion in sales, with operating profits estimated at $95 million.
The specialty retailer is known for its assortment of expensive clothes made by such designers as Ralph Lauren, Calvin Klein, Bill Blass and Giorgio Armani. 

Saks is strongest in the New York metropolitan area, where it operates seven stores.
However, Mr. Jacobs said that the chain has also developed strong followings in Chicago, Beverly Hills, San Francisco and in Florida, where Saks operates five units.
In 1990 Saks will open new stores in Denver and Portland, Ore.
Saks does have some problems.
The company opened a second store in Houston in 1983, and it was hurt by the collapse of the oil-based economy.
It now appears that the neighborhood in which it is located will never be able to support the store.
A Saks branch in Tulsa, Okla., which opened in 1986, also has been a disappointment. 

Analysts have estimated that the B.A.T retail group will bring as much as $3 billion.
Possible bidders include Dillard Department Stores Inc., Limited Inc. and May Department Stores Co. Industry observers say Saks may bring as much as $1.5 billion and Marshall Field as much as $1.2 billion. 

Arthur Martinez, group executive for retailing for the U.S. subsidiary of B.A.T, said B.A.T doesn't generally favor management-led buy-outs.
However, he added, "To the extent that the management offers are competitive, they will be given a lot of support." 

