.START 

Time has all but run out on the fiscal 1990 budget.
Only one of the 13 regular appropriations bills has reached the president.
Though the House has now voted on capital-gains and a drug-bill funding deal appears concluded, it's too late for Congress to complete the remaining spending bills on time.
Instead, the president is sent an "emergency" continuing resolution to get us past Sunday, when the government would otherwise have to shut down. 

Still looming Oct. 16, however, is budget director Darman's Gramm-Rudman-Hollings report, saying whether, under the G-R-H accounting rules, the deficit forecast will exceed the $110 billion trigger for fiscal 1990, and, if so, what the sequester (or, across-the-board cuts) will be. 

Will the deficit be significantly greater than the $100 billion G-R-H target?
Will federal spending be held in check?
Will there be a sequester?
A lot depends on the strategy the president employs during the next two weeks. 

The president, no doubt, hopes for a "kinder and gentler" scenario.
To wit, after a smashing victory in the House on the Jenkins capital-gains plan, he signs the energy and water appropriations bill and the continuing resolution -- in order to give evidence of wanting to "work with Congress." In the Senate, he wins again on capital gains, defeating Sen. Lloyd Bentsen's IRA "substitute." The reconciliation bill then sails through Congress without any additional major changes.
At the president's urging, Congress trims remaining appropriations and holds spending just tight enough to get the deficit estimate under the $110 billion sequester trigger. 

But budget season is not a kinder, gentler time.
Already, the president is at a strategic disadvantage, having little option but to sign the continuing resolution that extends through Oct. 25.
Without action by Congress, the Oct. 16 report should invoke a sequester.
Had the continuing resolution's expiration date been sooner than Oct. 16, the president would have been in a position to veto any extension that invoked a sequester and could have used the threat of a shutdown as a bargaining chip. 

Before the month is out, the two sides will begin to play hardball.
What's likely is some variant of the following scenario: 

After passage of the Jenkins plan in the House, the president signs the energy and water bill, as well as the continuing resolution.
Despite the president's opposition, Congress then passes the Bentsen IRA plan, but the Democrats fail in their effort to eliminate the "bubble" (raise the marginal income-tax rate to 33%).
The Jenkins plan makes it through the Senate. 

The Democratic leaders, now eager to force a confrontation with the president over new taxes, give the green light to the appropriations committees to incorporate "essential" additional spending.
They pass the word to the appropriators that a sequester may be in the works, so in anticipation domestic spending is increased and cuts are made in defense and foreign affairs.
They give a similar green light to the Ways and Means and Finance committees, and amid rancorous exchanges the majority accepts numerous "add-ons" to entitlement programs. 

Just before Oct. 16, Congress sends the president a reconciliation bill and an omnibus appropriations bill tied together.
With increased spending and a revenue loss, a sequester is imminent.
The Democratic leadership agrees to relent, provided the president asks for a modest tax increase -- modest in the present year, but increasing rapidly thereafter. 

This is the tricky part.
To nearly everyone's amazement, the president signs the omnibus package.
However, he reveals that he plans to exercise his authority under the Constitution to item-veto individual spending accounts -- sufficient to get the forecast deficit below the $110 billion trigger. (This is the controversial proposal that has been championed on this page and elsewhere.) No sequester is ordered. 

House Democrats (Mike Synar again?) promptly sue in federal court, and the outcome is uncertain.
But President Bush, if he prevails, has made a major advance in restoring the power of the presidency over budgetary matters.
And even if he loses, he will have won.
The Democrats, not he, will be seen as forcing a sequester.
And, by at least trying, he will have kindled a national debate, perhaps leading to a line-item-veto constitutional amendment or at least to new "rescission" authority.
Also, whether or not he prevails in court, he will have lowered the spending baseline, making it easier to meet G-R-H next year. 

Of course, let's not forget the debt ceiling, which is now a cliff.
If not revised earlier, on Nov. 1 the ceiling falls from $2.87 trillion to $2.17 trillion, and the U.S. government will have no choice but to default on its obligations. (It is conceivable that this could be avoided by the president's taking Draconian steps to restrain spending immediately -- sure to be challenged in court -- and/or to sell the gold in Fort Knox; neither is likely.) 

Neither the congressional leadership nor the administration has any interest in holding up revision of the debt ceiling.
But it appears a group of fiscal conservatives in the Senate may well threaten to block a debt-ceiling bill in order to get major concessions.
Unfortunately, the changes they have in mind are quite modest -- a rescheduling of the G-R-H deficit targets and a phasing out of the Social Security surplus in the calculation of the deficit (i.e., the proposal being sponsored by Sen. Phil Gramm).
Far better would be real procedural reform, such as enhanced rescission authority, biennial budgeting, making the budget resolution a joint resolution instead of a concurrent resolution (that is, making it a law), and so forth. 

So there is good news.
Federal spending probably will be lower next year than many had reason to believe when the budget process got started in January.
There is not likely to be a tax increase, and the budget deficit will at least be lower than last year.
Also, there is a chance the president will assert, or be granted, more control over federal spending. 

The bad news is that we have to go through all of this again next year] 

Mr. Miller chairs Citizens for a Sound Economy in Washington. 

