.START 

One morning this spring, Marilyn Quayle dropped in at Paramount Studios here and asked to appear on Arsenio Hall's new late-night talk show. 

The 30-year-old host readily agreed.
Wearing a baseball cap and sunglasses for their outdoor meeting, he talked Mrs. Quayle through her feelings about the worst things said of her spouse, Vice President Dan Quayle.
Then, with schoolboy charm, he melted her reserve with a husky-voiced paean to her eyes. 

Looking back on that impromptu interview, Mr. Hall calls it the kind of triumph white industry executives thought he couldn't pull off. "Do you know why she did the show?" he asks, sitting in his office on the Paramount lot. "Her children told her to do the show.
Her children]" He plants his unlaced tennis shoes on the rug and sails back in his chair in exhilaration. "That's when I said, 'God, thank you -- I'm getting through. '" 

Mr. Hall is indeed getting through -- to millions of young viewers each night.
In the process, he is shattering the notions of TV executives, a predominantly white male fraternity he refers to as "the suits," about what can succeed in their medium. 

"Here you have a black man calling all the shots," says Hamilton Cloud, a black independent television producer who has worked with Mr. Hall. "Why is the show so hip?
Hell, Arsenio is booking all the talent.
What's amazing is that Hollywood still doesn't get it." 

Home audiences apparently are, however.
Mr. Hall is reaching more viewers in the coveted under-35 age group than any of his competitors -- an average of 2.9 million a night during July, according to A.C. Nielsen Co., the TV rating service.
By contrast, Johnny Carson's "Tonight Show" was watched by 2.4 million people in this age group in July.
And while Mr. Carson is still the king of late-night talk, with a 5.4 overall rating for that month, Mr. Hall's mark of 4.1 put him well ahead of both David Letterman, who garnered a 3.1, and newcomer Pat Sajak, who earned only 2.8 despite his popularity earned as host of "Wheel of Fortune." (Each rating point represents about 904,000 households.) 

Most nights, "The Arsenio Hall Show," which made its debut in January and is now syndicated to some 172 local stations across the country, amounts to an unpredictable house party.
Celebrities are welcome to show up uninvited, and many of them are somewhat less familiar to white people over 40 than Mrs. Quayle.
Mr. Hall might jump up and dance with a rap musician's dancers or sit on the floor to interview a child actress.
Once, he brought on a court reporter, just to see if she could really get everything down. 

The party has a few ground rules.
After his monologue, Mr. Hall exhorts the studio audience to "get busy," which translates as a call for passionate involvement.
The crowd barks "roof" to signal its enthusiasm.
And guests must "give it up" -- that is, shed pretense and inhibition. 

"America has never come to a party at a black man's house," says Mr. Hall, adding that he has a larger mission. "I'm more than a comedian.
I bring stuff from the ghetto to the suburbs and stuff from the suburbs to the ghetto.
I'm an American, and I'm going to do everything every other talk show host has done -- and one thing more.
I'm going to bring everybody together on the same couch." 

Perhaps not surprisingly, such pronouncements have laid Mr. Hall open to charges of arrogance.
Tom Shales, a critic for the Washington Post, says he resents the implication that television needs Mr. Hall to save it from "square" whites. "I think it's a little messianic," he says. "I wish he could scale it down a bit and just try and do a good show." 

Another criticism, leveled in various media by such people as the black film maker Spike Lee, is that Mr. Hall hasn't been ambitious enough in exercising his newfound clout to get more jobs for blacks, who remain under-represented in the industry.
A heated exchange on this point between Mr. Hall and Willis Edwards, head of the Beverly Hills-Hollywood branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, resulted in Mr. Edwards's filing a $10 million libel lawsuit against Mr. Hall. 

Mr. Hall counters that he employs significantly more blacks than any similar show and even has a small minority-internship program.
As for the rest, he insists that he is looking only for ratings, not power.
Thinking in terms of power is "the beginning of the end" of being himself, Mr. Hall says. 

Recently, Mr. Hall signed a second one-year contract for the show, of which he is executive producer.
Although he won't disclose how much he is paid, he says his financial stake gives him a piece of "the upside" if the audience grows. "I have faith that if I do good work, the money will come," he says. 

What viewers get in Mr. Hall is a spontaneous, genial and, where women guests are concerned, often flirtatious host.
Working without a desk, he tends to interview visitors while hunched at the edge of his chair -- a posture that some critics contend is evidence of a generally fawning approach.
Mr. Hall's style "smacks of that insider Hollywood sycophantishness," says Rick Kogan, a TV critic for the Chicago Tribune. "It may be that it's his method of creating instant intimacy." 

Mr. Hall does have a sharper side, though.
Last season, he opened a conversation with rock star Sheena Easton by asking if it was true that "your ex-husband was a female impersonator, and now he does you." Though the two traded barbs, Ms. Easton remained cool, despite having been upstaged as well by pop superstar Whitney Houston, who had made an unscheduled walk-on during the monologue. 

But unannounced appearances aren't unusual.
One night, the whole cast of the NBC hit "Cheers" showed up to see their friend, singer Jackson Browne.
Boxing champs Mike Tyson and Sugar Ray Leonard seem to have sublet spots on the couch, as has comedian Eddie Murphy, a close friend of Mr. Hall.
And former New York Jets defensive end Mark Gastineau broke up one monologue by tackling Mr. Hall. 

Paramount Communications Corp. didn't set out to create a free-for-all.
Early last year, while researching the possibility of launching a late-night show, the company discovered that "the 18-to-34 market was not being serviced," says Steve Goldman, the executive vice president in charge of distributing and marketing Paramount's syndicated products.
Paramount decided that Mr. Hall would have the best chance of reaching this market. 

"When we went to Arsenio, we looked at him as a talent and a performer who could do late-night," says Lucille Salhany, president of Paramount's domestic TV division. "Talent rises to the top -- I don't care if you're black, white or whatever." 

Mr. Hall, the son of a Baptist preacher, grew up poor in Cleveland, raised by his mother, grandmother and godmother after his parents divorced.
By the age of 12, he says, he had already decided on the signature he would one day use as the logo for his talk show. 

After graduating from Kent State University in 1979 with a degree in communications, he worked briefly in sales for Noxell Corp., the cosmetics company.
It was in 1980 that he first tried stand-up comedy on a dare, and only a short time later that singer Nancy Wilson caught his act in Chicago and paid for his move to Los Angeles. 

Between 1983 and 1986, he appeared on three comedy/variety shows, including Paramount's "Solid Gold" dance program.
In 1987, Paramount released him from his contract so that he could replace Joan Rivers as an interim host on Fox Broadcasting Co. 's sinking "Late Show." Mr. Hall developed a cult following, but by the time Fox reviewed the ratings, the show had been canceled and Mr. Hall was filming "Coming to America" with Mr. Murphy.
It was while promoting that movie that Mr. Hall decided to accept an offer by Paramount to do a show of his own. 

Besides having more blacks and other minorities, Mr. Hall's production staff is also younger and includes more women than most television shows.
Marla Kell Brown, the show's 27-year-old producer, acts as a stand-in for white Middle America as Mr. Hall flies through the show.
Always standing just behind the cameras, she can signal to her boss when he should slow down for those who don't know, for example, that "def" means great. 

Ms. Brown confesses that when Mr. Hall met her, she was like "an unhip Girl Scout." But now, "he trusts me because when I make a decision, he knows it's in his best interest," she says, adding, "I'm not from that old-boy network." 

Minutes before taping this season's premiere, Mr. Hall roams through Studio 29 in a sweatsuit, patting his employees' backs, greeting visitors and checking details.
He stops once to hug the mother of singer and dancer Paula Abdul, whose fans have been lining up since dawn for a chance to see her first performance on his show, and again to explain the etymology of "get busy" for a visitor.
Only at the last minute does he shower and slip into one of his trademark double-breasted suits. 

Downstairs awaits an almost all-white audience of about 300.
Instead of his usual monologue, Mr. Hall just shouts "I'm back]" from offstage and introduces Ms. Abdul.
Later, while interviewing the former Los Angeles Lakers cheerleader, he tells the audience she has an evil side that he jokingly calls "Pauletta." When Ms. Abdul fails to respond, a woman in the audience breaks the nervous silence by yelling, "The honeymoon's over." (Mr.
Hall denies reports of a romance with Ms. Abdul, but he acknowledges that theirs is a "special friendship.") 

After the show, Mr. Hall changes quickly out of the suit and heads for his production trailer to review the show.
He is focused on only one thing -- doing well for a second season.
For already, another syndicated talk show has appeared with a rowdy audience and a black host, TV personality Byron Allen. 

Mr. Hall is heartened, though, by a story told to him by some Paramount executives: One station manager who bought Mr. Allen's show said he expected it to do even better than Mr. Hall's because Mr. Allen, who created his image on the wholesome "Real People" show, "wasn't as black." Mr. Hall says that when the executives told him the story, "they were laughing now at the concept of a black man having to be white" to succeed on television. 

"My white 'suits' here," he says, "are a lot hipper than they were before." 

