.START 

Believe it or not, Seattle is going to prove a much sunnier clime than Palm Springs, Calif., for the next few days. 

That is the forecast, anyway, for Machinists union leaders who are holed up in hotel suites at both locations forging new labor agreements with Boeing Co. and Lockheed Corp. 

During the past few triennial sessions, the Boeing accord has served as the industry trend-setter.
But this time, with commercial aircraft orders flourishing and military markets drying up, Lockheed is sure to resist signing a pact that's as generous as what Boeing can afford.
Neither company will comment. 

"Certainly, Lockheed is not as well off," acknowledges Tom Baker, who as president of union District 751 represents some 40,000 of the 55,000 Boeing rank and file covered by the accord. "I think the guys down there are going to have some tough bargaining ahead." 

Not that Mr. Baker and his team at the Seattle Westin are sipping tall drinks poolside.
In an interview before going into meetings with Boeing, Mr. Baker indicated that the most serious economic issues -- save for some discussion about cost-of-living adjustments -- had yet to even be broached.
But before the contract expires Tuesday, Boeing is most certainly going to oppose the union's push for a base-wage increase. 

Yet without a doubt, the vigor of Boeing's balance sheet has given the Machinists confidence that the bulk of their demands will be met this year.
Boeing, three-quarters of whose revenue is derived from its commercial-jetliner business, reported a 20% gain in net income through the first six months.
Now, the Machinists want their share. 

By contrast, Lockheed -- where 20,000 workers have a stake in the negotiations at the Palm Springs Marquis -- is suffering much more from federal budget battles and the resultant near-paralysis at the Pentagon.
Beset by cost overruns, the Calabasas, Calif., aerospace giant posted a 37% plunge in profit for the first half. "The military sector has never been bleaker," says Howard Rubel, an aerospace analyst at Cyrus J. Lawrence Inc. 

Machinists haggling with McDonnell Douglas Corp., where the contract for an additional 6,800 hourly employees is set to expire, faces a similarly difficult challenge.
The nation's No. 1 defense contractor also makes commercial airplanes, but its Long Beach, Calif., transport operations are in disarray after a major restructuring.
In the second quarter, the St. Louis-based company suffered a $48 million net loss. 

"This is just not a good time to be bargaining with" McDonnell Douglas, explains Doug Griffith, president of United Auto Workers Local 148, which represents 15,500 aerospace workers at Long Beach.
He adds that in 1987 he pushed for a UAW contract that extends all the way to March 1991 because he foresaw "the tremendous upheaval and change" that a restructuring would bring. 

Some Machinists nonetheless insist that whatever the union wins at Boeing eventually will be swallowed by the two other manufacturers -- wages included. "The fact is that historically these companies have maintained the same labor costs, regardless of their product mix," says Justin Ostro, the Machinists' international general vice president. 

After all, says the 39-year veteran of industry bargaining, the entire membership "basically does the same work" and, therefore, is entitled to the same pay and the same benefits. 

However, other union officials concede that such high hopes are unrealistic in 1989. "The military side has slowed down, and I'm sure concerned about it," says Bryan Carver, who is squaring off against Lockheed as president of District 727.
Yesterday, he issued a letter to union members, saying that Lockheed has proposed a medical plan under which workers could see their deductibles increase as much as fivefold, depending on salary. "The company is very serious about raiding our contract and stripping away our benefits and wages," he wrote. 

Though getting a pay raise is the paramount goal for Mr. Carver's brethren at Boeing, non-monetary matters have been the dominant issues so far.
Mr. Baker says the union has made especially good progress in securing guarantees that members won't be laid off because of injuries.
The Machinists are also seeking from Boeing a jointly funded data bank to better track illness in the workplace.
Lessening overtime is another important objective. 

But at Lockheed, it's the basic struggle for dollars and the preservation of benefits and jobs themselves that are at the fore. "On the surface we have to say one thing, but we can't possibly hope to match what they'll get at Boeing," says a union insider familiar with the Lockheed situation. "We have to focus on things like job security, given our situation." 

Basic economics offers no other choice. "It takes supply and demand to determine wages -- not just supply," says Leo Troy, a Rutgers University professor. "There's no question that the Lockheed workers are in a weaker position." 

Some analysts think even Boeing may be able to exploit the softness in the defense sector.
David Smith, an aerospace analyst and consultant at Raymond James & Associates, says the company "would be apoplectic if they gave away the store." While there is pressure on the company to keep production cranking -- it has finally gotten its 747 deliveries back on schedule, for example -- he notes that Boeing's own military business is shrinking. 

And, most important, there is a surplus of workers around the country who have been laid off at other defense facilities.
In fact, in 1988 the level of overall industry employment fell for the first time since 1983, according to the Aerospace Industries Association, and is expected to slip slightly again this year. 

If push came to shove, Boeing "could have 10,000 new applicants in a heartbeat," Mr. Smith says. "I'm not sure the word scab even applies in a declining and consolidating industry.
It's every man for himself." Aerospace workers are famous for being itinerant careerists. 

Both Boeing and Lockheed workers have authorized their leadership to call for strikes, if need arises. 

Whether there actually will be a work stoppage, though, is increasingly unclear.
Mr. Smith says he expects "some give and take on both sides," giving Boeing workers a very measured wage increase combined with productivity-based bonuses.
Such a package would be similar to those struck recently in other cyclical industries, such as aluminum and steel. 

So far, the talks are reported to be going smoothly -- though there is an increased awareness that time is running out.
Mr. Baker in Seattle says he is "starting to get worried that we haven't made any real progress" on many of the most fractious issues dividing the company and union. 

Mr. Carver in Palm Springs, the California resort town, says Lockheed on Monday put a typical first proposal on the table -- asking for concessions on everything. "I can't take it seriously," he says. 

