.START 

Count on Wall Street to figure out a way to profit from the government's war on drug abuse. 

"Crisis creates opportunity," says PaineWebber strategist Edward M. Kerschner.
Congress and President Bush are likely to budget $8.8 billion for the anti-drug campaign in the fiscal year starting Oct. 1, and that amount could expand in future years. 

PaineWebber expects a number of companies to benefit.
One is Thermedics, a company with annual revenue of only $32 million.
It makes a drug-sensing device called Sentor and another device to detect plastic explosives.
PaineWebber's Tina Rizopolous calls the stock a "double play" on "two of the most virulent scourges of the 1990s: drugs and terrorism." 

A PaineWebber memo to clients says Sentor "functions like a dog's nose except that it is 1,000 times more accurate and, in fact, is capable of detecting cocaine and heroin that are present in trace amounts." 

James H. Morgan, president of Morgan Investments in Greenville, S.C., says he prefers to play Thermedics through the stock of Thermo Electron, owner of 60% of its stock.
Thermedics, at 18 1/2 yesterday, "is not cheap" as it sells for more than 30 times the 60 cents a share Mr. Morgan figures the company will earn in 1990.
Thermo Electron is trading at around 29 times the past 12 months' earnings, much less than Thermedics' 200 multiple. 

CompuChem, Syntex, and Abbott Laboratories are all on PaineWebber's list because they are active in drug testing.
Employers in government, sports and safety-sensitive industries such as airlines and railroads increasingly require pre-employment drug tests, and sometimes periodic tests during employment. 

Of the three, CompuChem is the purest play -- that is, it derives the largest share of its revenue (about 50%) from drug testing.
Its other major business is environmental testing for pollution-control efforts. 

CompuChem is doing "a good bit of testing for the U.S. Army, and could have 20% to 30% {annual earnings} growth over the foreseeable future," Mr. Morgan says, but the stock "has sort of been found" by investors already.
In the past year the shares have risen from a low of 5 1/2 to yesterday's 15 3/4.
Mr. Morgan puts 1990 earnings at about 80 cents to 90 cents a share, so the stock is selling for about 18 times his estimate. 

Mr. Morgan says Abbott Laboratories gets only about $50 million in revenue from drug testing, a drop in its $6 billion bucket.
But he says Abbott's equipment used in drug testing is "one more reason to own a grand company" that is "in the forefront of anything that's medical." For Syntex, the diagnostics business's $154 million in revenue equals about 11 to 12% of sales, with drug-abuse testing accounting for half of that. 

Gail Cook, president of Perimeter Financial Group, an Atlanta financial planner, says Syntex is also working on a nonaddictive pain reliever called ketorolac that hospitals could use in place of such drugs such as morphine.
She says there are rumors that the Food and Drug Administration will approve the new drug soon after Christmas.
The company says the drug would be "primarily for post-surgical pain." It won't speculate on the timing of any possible FDA action. 

Community Psychiatric Centers charges patients about $400 a day, scaring off all but the well-heeled and people with ample insurance.
So it probably wouldn't benefit directly from increased government spending on drug treatment.
But PaineWebber thinks the chain of 44 psychiatric hospitals will benefit "as corporations become more aggressive in identifying and treating addicts on their payrolls." 

Meanwhile, PaineWebber says, defense companies such as E-Systems and Watkins-Johnson may get increased government contracts because "electronic surveillance is playing a growing role in the drug war." And broadcasters such as CBS and Capital Cities/ABC may find it easier to boost prices for commercials because "advertisers displaced by anti-drug spots . . . will have fewer time periods to pick from." 

Demand for prison space may increase, says James Craig, portfolio manager for Janus Fund in Denver.
Investors have recently bid up the shares of companies that operate prisons for various levels of government, such as Corrections Corp. of America and Pricor.
But Mr. Craig's fund owns neither.
Corrections Corp. has risen to 11 7/8 from 9 3/4 since President Bush's speech launching the drug war "and it isn't even earning any money yet," he says.
Pricor has climbed to 10 1/2 from 8 1/2. 

Nicholas Parks, head of Parks Capital Management in New York, thinks lots of people are noticing Corrections Corp. but overlooking Wackenhut, which has a comparably sized corrections unit "buried within it" and sells for a more reasonable multiple. 

The war on drugs could generate some investment losers, too. "All that cash {taken in by drug dealers} goes somewhere.
It does not get saved," says Stewart Lawrence, a senior vice president with Martin E. Segal Co., a New York consulting firm. 

If the drug trade slows substantially, he expects declines in Florida real estate, particularly luxury houses.
There might be some effects on luxury car sales and sales of gold jewelry.
Of course, any such analysis can be taken to extremes, says the Janus Fund's Mr. Craig: "If you want to say people are going to drink more beer, that's up to you." 

