.START 

The House of Representatives voted to back a capital-gains tax cut yesterday.
And that was good news for Frank Shafroth's house in Colorado. 

Mr. Shafroth recently delayed the sale of his Aspen vacation home until January, to allow time for the capital-gains debate to play out.
His house has risen "at least 20 times" in value since he bought it in the late 1960s, he says, and a drop in the tax rate on his profits from 28% to 19.6% "will make a very significant difference." 

Bob Stinson of Salina, Kan., also had an eye on the House vote.
Mr. Stinson inherited his family's 160-acre wheat farm in Jewell County and wants to sell.
With the top tax rate on long-term gains at 28%, he's been loath to unload the $75,000 piece of property, fearing he'd have to turn over a quarter of his profit to the government.
But if the maximum rate drops to 19.6% as the House plan envisions, "I'll go ahead and sell," he says. 

Once again, it seems, the finances of millions of Americans are about to be rearranged by government. 

Only three years have passed since the 1986 Tax Reform Act last sent investors scrambling to meet Washington's whim.
At that time, the idea was that more-or-less all income should be taxed the same: Tax shelters were torpedoed, and huge holdings of stock were sold as Congress concluded that the tax break for long-term capital gains should be eliminated. 

Yesterday, the House said "never mind." By a vote of 239 to 190, it rejected efforts to kill the capital-gains tax cut, marking a major retreat from the 1986 bill.
The capital-gains proposal still faces a final vote in the House -- probably next week -- and then a tough fight in the Senate.
Nonetheless, yesterday's action makes it likely a capital-gains break of some sort will become law by year's end. 

The proposed capital-gains tax relief would be a boon to millions of Americans sitting on assets that have appreciated in value.
But it's unlikely it would have the long-term, stimulative effect on the economy that its supporters, including President Bush, have promised. 

The vast majority of the benefits resulting from such tax relief would go to the nation's very wealthiest citizens, who hold the lion's share of appreciated assets.
But the tax change will also be a boon to people like Mr. Stinson, who have small businesses or farms they'd like to sell, or to senior citizens who wish to unload stocks to help pay for retirement.
Last year over 12 million Americans reported capital gains on their tax returns, according to the Internal Revenue Service. 

In the near term, the change may prompt large sales of stocks, as investors rush to take advantage of new, low tax rates.
But, because many of the sellers of stocks will simply turn around and buy new securities, the move won't necessarily depress the market. 

"There have been some large gains in the market, and investors will use this as a window to sell stocks," says Steven Einhorn, chairman of the investment policy committee at Goldman Sachs & Co. "That could bring some near-term choppiness, but the effect will be small and short." 

Real estate markets could also be hit, particularly in posh areas like Aspen, where much of the property is held for investment purposes. "I expect to see some additional inventory come on the market if this passes," says Rick Griffin, a broker in nearby Snowmass, Colo. "We might see an increase of 5%, or maybe 10%," which could cause prices to soften, he says. 

The tax change's long-term effects on the economy, on the other hand, may be negligible.
President Bush has argued that a permanent capital-gains tax cut would fuel the nation's growth, and Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady claims it would encourage investment for the long term.
But discussions with people outside the heated debate in Washington suggest the beneficial effects are far less than promised, with a bill structured the way this one is. 

Skeptics note first that the proposal approved by the House would cut the capital-gains tax rate for only a little over two years -- and then raise it again.
That does little or nothing to encourage investment in the long run, they say.
If the plan isn't changed, says Alan Auerbach, an economist at the University of Pennsylvania, "The economic effects will be pretty trivial." Experts say that even if the tax cut were to become permanent, as the president would like, it isn't clear the cut would produce the desired economic stimulus.
President Bush paved the way for yesterday's vote during his election campaign, when he called for a capital-gains tax cut to "encourage the entrepreneurial spirit that is the source of so many new jobs in America." 

At a time of giant budget deficits, Mr. Bush's proposal offered a way to cut taxes without reducing government revenue.
Because of the peculiar structure of the capital-gains tax, many experts believe a drop in the rate actually raises the government's revenue, at least in the short run.
That's because capital-gains taxes are paid only when an asset is sold, and the lower tax rate encourages sales. 

In the House, proponents of a capital-gains tax cut discovered they could claim an even bigger short-term revenue boost by saying the cut lasts only two years.
Investors would then rush to sell more assets, they argued. 

Even proponents of the proposal admit that such a temporary tax, while helping constituents, does little to help the economy.
It rewards people who've made investments in the past, but offers nothing to those investing for the future. "How can you build a stronger economy with a tax policy that gives a strong incentive to sell and no incentive to buy?" asks Lawrence Summers, a professor of economics at Harvard University. 

Administration officials vow to make the capital-gains tax cut permanent, and the strong political support for the cut demonstrated by yesterday's House vote suggests they may eventually succeed.
Nevertheless, even if the tax cut is made permanent, its effects on the economy may be far less than its proponents anticipate. 

Take entrepreneurs, for instance, whom the president mentioned frequently in his campaign rhetoric.
Back in 1986, Washington lobbyists predicted venture capital for entrepreneurs would "dry up" after that year's tax bill raised the top tax rate on capital gains to 28% from 20%.
But instead, 1987 was the best year ever for new venture capital. 

Why? "Most of the capital these days is coming from institutional sources with less concern for taxes," explains Scott Sperling, who heads direct investment for the Harvard Management Co., which invests Harvard University's endowment. "The capital-gains tax doesn't affect them." 

A look at last year's numbers reinforces the point.
Tax-free pension funds provided almost half of all new venture capital; foreigners, foundations and corporations provided an additional third.
Individuals and families, who are directly affected by lower capital-gains rates, provided only 8% of the new capital. 

Faced with these numbers, venture capital lobbyists take another tack.
They argue the capital-gains tax break is important for recruiting people to start-up ventures.
Such ventures can't afford to pay high salaries, they argue, but they can give employees stock options.
Such options give the holder the right to buy a company's stock at a fixed, generally low price at some time in the future when -- if the company has done well -- the actual market price of the stock should be much higher. 

Those options would look more attractive if the capital-gains tax were reduced. "I think this will make it easier to attract people to entrepreneurial concerns," says Mr. Sperling. 

One such entrepreneur is David Friedman of Cambridge, Mass., who took a 30% salary cut this year when he left his old company to become chief executive of Premise Inc., a start-up company that makes computer software for mechanical design systems.
In return for the lower salary, he received a generous stake in the new company's stock. 

But even Mr. Friedman disputes the argument that a tax cut would have much of an effect on entrepreneurs. "If a venture company is a blowout {or failure}, the tax cut doesn't help you," he reasons. "And if it's a winner, the appreciation you receive is so big that taxes aren't a big factor." 

The tax cut's potential to affect the stock market is also reduced by the fact that the amount of stock in the hands of individuals has declined sharply.
Over the last 20 years, individual investors have reduced their stock holdings from 44% of their financial assets in 1968 to only 19.5% last year.
At the same time, roughly a third of outstanding stock is now owned by pension funds and other institutions that don't pay the capital-gains tax, and most estimates suggest more than half of all trading is done by those institutions. 

Even if a capital-gains tax cut isn't likely to do all its backers promise, many experts agree that a permanent cut in rates would boost certain facets of the economy, such as the stock market. 

"Over the long term, this is bullish for the stock market," says David Hale of Kemper Financial Services. "Every capital-gains tax cut has been good for the market." In fact, the Dow Jones Industrial Average yesterday closed up 21.85 points to 2694.91.
Goldman Sachs's Mr. Einhorn adds that his calculations suggest the tax cut over time will increase stock prices by about 10%. 

And even if the tax cut doesn't become permanent, a proposal in the House bill to exclude from tax all gains due solely to inflation after 1991 still would help stock prices. 

Some developers believe the tax cut also could gradually increase investment in commercial real estate.
Developers were hard-hit by the 1986 tax bill, which not only took away their capital-gains tax break but also ended real estate tax shelters.
The authors of the 1986 bill complained that excess tax breaks had stimulated too much construction, resulting in "see-through office buildings" in many cities that couldn't be rented.
But the capital-gains tax break would once again give developers a boost. 

"I don't think there's any question," says Jack Hamilton, a land broker in Atlanta. "This would stimulate development.
When they took away the capital-gains incentive, they took away one of the reasons to stick your neck out a little." 

For residential real estate, the capital-gains tax cut is likely to make less difference.
Current tax law allows people selling a home to defer the tax indefinitely by taking the money and reinvesting it in a new house.
And the tax code also provides a one-time, tax-free gain of up to $125,000 for people over the age of 55.
The people most likely to be affected by the proposed capital-gains tax relief are those who hold homes for investment reasons, or wealthy senior citizens with homes worth substantially more than $125,000. 

Many Washington analysts fear passage of a capital-gains tax break will lead to the gradual unraveling of the landmark 1986 tax bill, including its lower tax rates on ordinary income.
Some tax experts fear it could bring back the kind of tax-avoidance gimmicks that proliferated in the early 1980s. "The capital-gains tax break was the root of many, many tax shelters," says Roscoe Egger, commissioner of the IRS during Ronald Reagan's first term. "If you reintroduce that, you're going to face the same problems." 

Some tax economists also say that if the goal is to boost savings and investment, there are better ways to do it. "I don't think you will see any effect in savings and investment," says Joel Slemrod of the University of Michigan. "This is a tax reduction for only one particular way of earning capital income, and not others." Reintroducing the investment tax credit would do more to boost investment, he says.
And even better would be to move further in the direction of tax reform, eliminating more tax loopholes and further lowering tax rates. 

But yesterday's House vote makes it clear that approach is no longer in vogue.
For now, tax reform is out, and tax incentives are back in. 

