.START 

Crop Genetics International Corp. expects to begin field tests next year of a new bioherbicide technology designed to reduce farmers' use of chemical herbicides as much as 90%. 

John B. Henry, chairman and chief executive officer, said that greenhouse testing this year at the company's research center in Maryland produced such encouraging results that Crop Genetics applied last week for a U.S. patent on the technology. 

Registered under the trademark X-tend, the technology combines a small amount of chemical herbicide with highly concentrated bacteria that attack and kill weeds.
The diluted chemical puts stress on weeds without killing them, greatly increasing their susceptibility to the bacteria.
The bacteria kill the weeds, then enter the soil and have no further effect. "It's like a one-two punch.
The chemical weakens the plant and the bacteria finish the job," says Peter Carlson, the company's chief scientist. "We think this biological solution has broad application." 

The technology promises to give Crop Genetics an entry into the herbicide market.
Farmers in the U.S., Western Europe and Japan spend an estimated $6 billion a year on chemical herbicides. 

The bacteria-based technology also complements the company's biopesticide product lines, including its InCide plant-vaccine technology.
Expanded field trials of InCide are already under way.
In Minnesota, Illinois and Nebraska, for example, corn crops are being evaluated for effectiveness of the company's seed inoculation technique as a defense against corn borers, which cause an estimated $500 million in crop damage annually despite expenditure of about $50 million on chemcial insecticides. 

Moreover, the company hopes its new bioherbicide will cut costs of chemical herbicides to farmers and curb the chemical contamination of soil and water. "We don't have to create a new herbicide," said Mr. Henry. 

The greenhouse tests were conducted on such species as velvet leaf, foxtail and barnyard grass, three of the most economically burdensome weeds in the U.S.
Such weeds not only plague row crops, including corn, wheat, barley, soy beans and cotton, they also require extensive control efforts on highways and railroad beds and at industrial sites. 

Ron Dodson, marketing vice president of Crop Genetics, said the bacteria, combined with greatly diluted solutions of such commercial herbicides as Banvel, produced by a unit of Sandoz AG of Switzerland, and Roundup, produced by Monsanto Co., provided a high degree of weed control.
Bacteria combined with Banvel diluted by 75%, for example, was sprayed on the weeds and killed 93% of the velvet leaf, 91% of the foxtail and 100% of the barnyard grass, he said. 

"Banvel doesn't even have grasses on its label," Mr. Dodson said. "We literally have made a new market for Banvel." 

He indicated the company will need to conduct field tests for at least three years before it is ready to begin broad commercial marketing of the product line.
That field testing will begin in 1990 in Maryland with a corporate partner he didn't identify.
Further tests may be conducted in the Midwest for grain crops and in the South for cotton. 

For the year ended March 31, Crop Genetics reported a net loss of $6.3 million on revenue of $2.9 million.
Research and development costs totaled $4.8 million, up from $2.8 million the prior year. 

Mr. Henry said the company has invested about $20 million, or about half of the total research capital it has raised, on development of plant-vaccine technology and related work on pesticides and insecticides. "Now we are ready to begin systematic investment in the herbicide business," he said. 

