.START 

In this century, few international developments have been as persistently contentious and destabilizing as the "refugee problem." Around the globe, population flows exacerbate interstate and regional tensions, drain the economies of host nations, overextend humanitarian support mechanisms, and put a strain on the world's compassion threshold.
Even as the West Germans welcome the 16,000 East Germans who just escaped via Hungary, the doors are closing on thousands of Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong, 400,000 Indochinese have languished for years in camps in Thailand, and hundreds of thousands of ethnic Turks have been expelled from Bulgaria.
And then there are the millions of refugees long dispersed in Africa and Latin America. 

Governments and international groups cannot agree on a definition of "refugee." For this survey, Freedom House defined refugees as people who are forced to flee or are expelled from their homelands due to war, civil conflict, pestilence, natural disaster or persecution based on ethnicity, race, tribal affiliation, religion or political beliefs.
Unless otherwise noted, the numbers are cumulative totals for 1988. 

A significant group not included here and not recognized by international agencies is internal refugees.
These are the millions world-wide displaced from their homes for much the same reasons as external refugees but who cannot or choose not to leave their countries.
Often brutalized by their own governments and subjected to egregious human rights abuses, they usually fall out of the purview of international relief efforts.
They include an estimated 700,000 to 1.5 million Ethiopians forcibly resettled inside the country by the Mengitsu regime or forced to move because of famine and the up to 2 million Mozambiquans driven from their homes by civil war.
The 3.6 million South African blacks resettled in tribal homelands fall into this category as do the 150,000 to 500,000 Salvadorans uprooted by civil war. 

The total international refugee population is difficult to measure for several reasons.
First, the dynamics that create refugees are volatile and often chaotic.
For example after the Burmese government launched a reign of terror in the summer of 1988, 8,000 to 10,000 Burmese fled to border areas and into Thailand.
Burma claims 3,115 have returned; unofficial estimates are half that.
Some 2,500 are reported in Thai camps, while unknown thousands have joined insurgency groups along the border.
A second difficulty is the differences in the way countries classify and process refugees.
When East Germans get West German citizenship, they are no longer considered refugees.
Many Hungarians who fled to the West after the 1956 Soviet invasion now carry other citizenship and so do not count as refugees.
A third difficulty is that, for political reasons, nations often do not disclose the number of refugees who have fled or how many from other countries reside within their borders. 

While Freedom House has found advances in political rights and civil liberties around the world in recent years, the millions of refugees remind us that significant parts of the globe continue to be marred by strife, privation and bigotry.
These displaced men, women and children are carriers of history, indicating the state of human relations.
They are living reminders that the quest for freedom from repression and intolerance is typically told by the ebb and flow of population movements.
The world cannot pretend to be isolated from their suffering. 

Mr. McColm is executive director of Freedom House. first years.
Many have returned since last September's amnesty. prisoners. relocating people to "safe" villages.
There are hundreds of thousands more without refugee status. and the government's campaign against leftist insurgents.
In addition, there are hundreds of thousands without refugee status. been accorded official refugee status. for refugee status for fear of deportation if turned down. and are more or less recent years because of government restrictions on travel, may increase if the exit-visa system is liberalized, as announced. liberalized its passport laws last year, making leaving much easier for all but a few dissidents. travelrestrictions were relaxed.
Of those going to Germany, 140,266are ethnic Germans. to escape Romania's plan to resettle ethnic Hungarians in "agro-industrial centers." All in Germany are ethnic Germans.
Italy are awaiting U.S. hearings or appeals. nationalist insurgents. between the government and local insurgents. unofficial refugees in Turkey. to Turkey and Iran after Iraqi chemical attacks. and subsequent Arab-Israeli and inter-Arab conflicts. majority Buddhist Sinhalese. factions of the Yemeni Socialist Party. takeover.
The latest wave fled in 1988 after a bloody government crckdown. separatists and the goverment. rule. and the Philippines are awaiting permanent asylum elsewhere. 

* Numbers are in dispute. 

** 1988 only; not cumulative. 

Sources: United Nations High Commisioner for Refugees, the U.S. Commission on Refugees' World Refugee Survey, the U.S. State Department World Refugee Report (1987) and Summaryof Refugee Admissions for 1988, the Interior Ministry of Austria, the West German Information Center, and the CanadianImmigration and Refugee Documentation Center. 

Compiled by Freedom House, with the assistance of John Worth. 

