.START 

Scientists at Merck & Co. are developing a group of drugs that hold promise for treating eating disorders and obesity. 

The drugs, being tested in laboratory animals, are years away from commercial use.
They interact with a natural protein in the brain that regulates the body's sense of hunger.
The protein, called cholecystokinin, or CCK, was discovered in the 1970s.
Its release by the brain shuts off nerve signals that initiate the desire to eat.
Only recently have Merck chemists discovered drugs that can manipulate CCK. 

A number of drug makers around the world are racing to develop medicines that affect hunger by interacting with several neurotransmitters, brain proteins that carry signals through the nervous system.
Eli Lilly & Co. is testing its anti-depressant drug Prozac against obesity because of its involvement with one neurotransmitter called serotonin.
Merck is the first company to develop drugs affecting CCK. 

In a study released in today's Science magazine, Merck researchers at the company's laboratories in Britain report that two Merck drugs stimulated the eating desire of laboratory rats.
The drugs are so-called CCK antagonists in that they block CCK from interacting with other nerve signals. 

In the study, researchers fed rats until they were no longer hungry.
An hour later one group of rats was given a placebo, or dummy drug, while another group was given the Merck drugs.
The ones given the Merck drugs began eating anew.
Merck tested one compound first developed about five years ago and its affect in triggering the eating was modest.
A second Merck drug developed earlier this year was "100 times more potent" in stimulating hunger, the researchers said. 

Merck researchers said the drugs might be useful in treating anorexia, an eating disorder in which people lose their hunger.
But Merck and other drug makers are searching for a compound that promotes activity of CCK, the protein which suppresses hunger.
Such a drug is expected to be useful against obesity. 

Interfering with brain neurotransmitters is one of the most competitive fields in drug research.
Scientists believe drugs that work on the brain proteins will be effective in treating mental problems such as schizophrenia, depression, headaches, and drug and alcohol addiction.
Other companies thought to be working on CCK-related drugs are Warner-Lambert Co., Upjohn Co., Abbott Laboratories Inc., and Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., the U.S. unit of the Swiss drug maker F. Hoffmann-La Roche & Co. 

