.START 

The Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health unveiled a long-awaited plan to distribute the drug DDI to a broad number of AIDS patients while tests on the drug continue. 

The move, cheered by AIDS activists, was delayed by two weeks of wrangling over dosage levels, and by belated alarms raised over toxic side effects that had been reported in the scientific and general press two months ago. 

DDI, or dideoxyinosine, was created at the National Cancer Institute by Samuel Broder and Robert Yarchoan, and licensed to Bristol-Myers Co. for further development.
A chemical cousin of AZT, DDI is a nuceoside analog, a false building block of DNA that gets into the virus's genetic material and blocks its replication.
DDI shows promise of being useful to the 40% of AIDS patients who can't take AZT as a result of toxic side effects, mainly bone marrow suppression and a drop in red or white blood cells. 

In July, the phase-one safety study of the experimental drug reported that most patients tolerated the drug well and experienced a fall in virus levels in the blood, accompanied by a rise in T4 and T8 lymphocytes, which are disease-fighting white blood cells.
However, the study, published in the journal Science, said a few patients at the highest dose levels developed pancreatitis, an inflammation of the pancreas, or neuropathy, nerve damage with pain and tingling in the hands or feet. 

Under terms of the broad program launched yesterday, phase-two studies for efficacy will determine whether the drug is beneficial in 2,600 patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome or AIDS-related complex, a precursor condition that can be serious or fatal in its own right.
Two studies will compare DDI against AZT, and a third study will compare three different doses of DDI in patients who cannot tolerate AZT due to drug toxicity. 

Simultaneously, the FDA granted Bristol-Myers the right to distribute DDI under two related give-away plans: a treatment investigational new drug (IND) program for patients who cannot take AZT; and an open safety protocol for patients in whom AZT failed to halt the disease.
The company declined to say how many people the two give-away programs can accommodate and disputed a currently rumored figure of 5,000. "We think we have enough supply," she added. 

"This is a tremendous step forward," said Jay Lipner, a New York attorney with the Lambda Legal Defense Fund, which specializes in gay-rights issues. "It's one of the most important developments in the past two years because it responds to the needs of people who are sick." 

"Access to promising drugs must be increased, and this is a step in that direction," agreed Jerome Groopman, a researcher at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
Dr. Groopman described the drug as "very active but still experimental." He added that "physicians and patients must understand not only its promise, but also its unknowns." 

Reactions from the gay community and patient advocacy groups yesterday offered the first general affirmation of the coordinated FDA-NIH-industry actions in recent days of the epidemic. 

"We're encouraged by the FDA's responsiveness to community input on DDI," said Timothy Sweeney, who is acting executive director of the Gay Men's Health Crisis, a New York support group.
He said the group isn't unaware of toxicity risks attendant upon such an expansion of an experimental treatment. "But we feel that this process will give us answers quickly on DDI's safety and effectiveness." 

While the Bristol-Myers plan stops short of a more liberalized "parallel track" distribution still under review at the Department of Health and Human Services, fans of parallel track still expressed satisfaction with yesterday's progress. 

"I'm very happy," said Mathilde Krim, founding co-chairperson of the American Foundation for AIDS Research. "It's a step toward implementing the concept of parallel track, and ensures DDI will be studied in a controlled clinical trial." She said the trial carries heightened importance in view of data, reported at the Montreal AIDS conference last June, that AZT-resistant strains of virus retain the ability to respond to DDI. 

But even as excitement was mounting in the patient population about imminent access to DDI, a group of academic investigators allied with the AIDS Clinical Trial Group were growing restive in recent weeks.
Worried about a popular and uncritical embrace of the drug, they began private circulation of a letter damning the effort and raising anew the specter of toxicity -- much of it at high doses (above the current 750 mg per day ceiling) that were already abandoned. 

"DDI swept through with a lot of enthusiasm," said Thomas Merigan, professor of medicine at Stanford University. "When you initiate wide use you run a risk." He acknowledged he now is satisfied with the dose levels in the trial, especially since Bristol agreed to include a 500 mg dose in the study.
But he cautioned that even at moderate doses, toxicity can appear over time. 

Dr. Yarchoan, who has tested and reported DDI's effects in many patients, reiterated yesterday that out of 30 patients tested at the 500 mg to 750 mg dose range, only one patient developed pancreatitis, with some vomiting and elevated enzymes.
No patients suffered neuropathy at that dose range, and those who had nerve pain at higher doses got relief when the drug was stopped. 

"From my experience, doses selected for the trial and for the treatment IND and open safety protocol are doses that are well tolerated and show activity against the virus." 

In addition to lowering virus levels and boosting levels of immune cells, Drs.
Yarchoan and Philip Pizzo of the cancer institute have reported at recent scientific meetings the reversal of AIDS dementia both in adults and in children. 

Dr. Broder, director of the cancer institute, said that notwithstanding community enthusiasm or disputes over dosage, "the only way we're going to make progress with this or any drug is to do controlled trials." 

