.START 

Sony Corp., in an apparent bid to secure a new management team for Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., said it agreed to purchase Guber-Peters Entertainment Co. for $200 million, or $17.50 a share, in an offer it plans to commence next week. 

Sony plans to acquire Columbia for $3.4 billion, or $27 a share, including the 49% block owned by Coca-Cola Co.
During its discussions with Coke and Columbia, Sony began searching for a Hollywood executive to run the studio.
It decided on Guber-Peters co-chief executive Peter Guber, a respected Hollywood producer, to succeed Columbia's chairman and chief executive, Victor Kaufman.
Mr. Guber and his partner, Jon Peters, who would also join Columbia under the arrangement, together control about 28% of Guber-Peters, which until recently was called Barris Industries Inc. 

Analysts said the price Sony is offering for Guber-Peters is surprisingly high given the assets of the company, which consist primarily of a percentage of revenue from the movies "Rain Man" and "Batman" and a small library of television game shows such as "The Newlywed Game," "The Gong Show" and "The Dating Game." The company tried to launch updated versions of those shows but they got poor ratings. 

Yesterday, Guber-Peters shares soared $3.875 to close at $17 each in national over-the-counter trading. 

"It's a very beneficial price for Guber-Peters shareholders.
It's far more than they might have expected from continuing operations," said Jeffrey Logsdon, an analyst at Crowell, Weedon & Co. "I think it's an expensive way to secure the services of two very successful individuals." 

Michael E. Tennenbaum, vice chairman of investment banking at Bear Stearns & Co., said his firm, retained by Guber-Peters to provide a fairness opinion on the offer, hasn't yet reached a conclusion.
But he called the price "attractive," adding that while the Los Angeles-based film and TV production company "doesn't have a great amount of assets compared to the price shareholders are getting, the main attraction is the superb record {in movie production}.
The overwhelming asset they have is their management team." 

Guber-Peters said the completion of the Sony tender offer is subject, among other things, to "modification of certain {Guber-Peters} agreements on terms satisfactory to Sony." As previously reported, Guber-Peters last month signed a new five-year contract to supply movies exclusively to Warner Communications Inc. and Warner officials were taken by surprise at the news that Mr. Guber wanted to take the Columbia post and sell his company to Sony. 

Warner officials were said to be meeting over the past two days with Mr. Guber, who is attempting to extricate himself from his obligations to Warner.
Neither side could be reached.
But Hollywood executives familiar with the situation noted this isn't the first time Mr. Guber has tried to get his hands on a major Hollywood studio; last year, he and some associates tried to buy a stake in MGM/UA Communications Co.
At the time, the executives said, Mr. Guber persuaded Warner to release him from certain obligations and he apparently believes he has a verbal commitment from Warner executives to do so if the opportunity to run a major studio comes up. 

The Hollywood executives said Warner Chairman and Chief Executive Steven J. Ross is unlikely to hold Mr. Guber to a commitment that would prevent him from taking the job at Columbia.
At the same time, Warner has its own interests to protect; Guber-Peters has already begun developing and producing a number of movies with Warner funds and Warner is sure to act to secure rights to those projects.
For example, Guber-Peters is producing a movie version of the novel "A Bright and Shining Lie" in conjunction with Jane Fonda for Warner and also bought rights to the Carl Sagan novel "Contact" on behalf of Warner. 

Mr. Logsdon of Crowell Weedon noted that Sony's bid for Guber-Peters follows a joint venture between another large Japanese company and Larry Gordon, an independent Hollywood producer.
JVC/Victor Co. of Japan agreed to invest more than $100 million to form a joint venture with Mr. Gordon to produce and finance motion pictures.
JVC/Victor is 50%-owned by Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. -- a Sony rival. 

"The trend from the Japanese perspective is to put your money behind proven talent.
They need to have people with a proven track record for making movies," Mr. Logsdon said. 

Mr. Guber, a lawyer, and Mr. Peters, a one-time hairdresser, sold Guber-Peters Co., a private movie company, to Barris Industries, a TV game show concern, in January of last year for about $32 million.
At the time, Barris was 31%-owned by Giant Group Ltd., a Beverly Hills, Calif., cement-making company controlled by Hollywood producer Burt Sugarman. "He promised them they would be running a studio, but when the MGM/UA deal fell apart, they felt suckered," says one Hollywood producer.
Mr. Sugarman has since sold his 24.4% Barris stake to an Australian venture-capital company. 

Earlier this month, Barris said it changed its name to Guber-Peters Entertainment to reflect "recent changes in ownership and management." 

Separately, a group of former shareholders of the Tri-Star Pictures unit of Columbia, which previously sued Coke and Columbia and certain directors of both in Delaware Chancery Court, filed an amended complaint seeking to enjoin the sale of Columbia to Sony.
Tri-Star at one time was partly owned by the public before being folded into Columbia. 

In Los Angeles, two separate shareholder lawsuits were filed in state court against Columbia and its officers and directors.
The suits, which seek class-action status, allege that the purchase price to be paid by Sony is "grossly inadequate." The suits seek to force Columbia to negotiate a better deal with any third party that might come forward. 

The amended complaint charges that the defendants breached their duty to Tri-Star shareholders over the past two years through a number of actions that resulted in huge losses for Tri-Star.
The complaint also charges that Coke "siphoned off" profits from Tri-Star when combining it with Columbia.
As for the Sony transaction, the complaint says Coke sold Columbia at a bargain price "because it wishes to reap a huge profit now . . . in order to have funds available for overseas expansion of its soft drink business and to repurchase its own shares." 

A spokeswoman for Coke and Columbia called the suit "totally without merit." 

