.START 

Immune Response Corp. has 29 employees, no marketable product, no sales and no earnings.
But if all goes well for the company, it soon will have a stock-market valuation of as much as $135 million, thanks to Wall Street. 

The new-issues equity market, it appears, is heating up.
Many of the players think the success of Immune Response of La Jolla, Calif., which is already circulating its preliminary prospectus, could mark a turning point for the entire market. 

If Immune Response's offering fares well, many other young technology companies now effectively barred from going public might be able to take the plunge, investment bankers and investors say.
The Immune Response offering, still subject to clearance by the Securities and Exchange Commission, is tentatively scheduled for late October. 

Although it still lacks a marketable product, the company has a glamorous concept that could prove to be enormously lucrative -- an AIDS vaccine.
Moreover, the celebrated father of the polio vaccine, 74-year-old Jonas Salk, is chairman of the company's scientific advisory board. "That's the kind of sizzle investors long to buy," says Gordon Ramseier, chief executive officer of Immunetech Pharmaceuticals, a San Diego drug maker. 

Wall Street underwriters, led by Merrill Lynch & Co., hope to raise as much $45 million by selling about one-third of Immune Response's shares to the public at $11 to $13 each. "Pretty expensive," says Stuart Weisbrod, a biotechnology analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities, New York.
One influential East Coast mutual-fund manager says many institutions are avoiding -- as too risky -- investments in biotechnology companies that lack marketable products.
Although a biotechnology investor himself, he has yet to make up his mind whether to buy Immune Response shares. 

James B. Glavin, chief executive officer of Immune Response, couldn't be reached for comment.
Charles J. Cashion, vice president and chief financial officer, said of the proposed price: "We haven't just pulled the numbers out of the air.
We wouldn't be seeking the price if we didn't think it was the right one." A Merrill Lynch spokesman in New York had no immediate comment. 

It's too early to tell how the underwriters will fare; some meetings between Immune Response officials and potential investors aren't even due to take place until mid-October.
But succeed or fail, the attempted underwriting may have great market significance. "It's a bellwether for whether the markets are going to be receptive to funding emerging technology, something they haven't done for the last two years," says Peter Drake, a biotechnology analyst with Vector Securities International Inc., a Chicago securities firm. 

If the offering succeeds, "it could create a lot of hope for many biotechnology companies looking for capital," says Frederick J. Dotzler, managing general partner of Medicus Venture Partners, Menlo Park, Calif.
Even before the outcome is clear, the offering is prompting some small technology companies to inquire about their chances of going public, adds Sanford Robertson, a principal of Robertson, Stephens & Co., a San Francisco investment bank. 

For much of this year, such chances were poor indeed. "Every time underwriters have tried to bring out something a little racy, it hasn't done well," says Michael Murphy, editor of California Technology Stock Letter, San Francisco.
IDD Information Services, a New York research concern, says initial public offerings in the first nine months raised about $8.5 billion, a sharp drop from nearly $19 billion in the year-earlier period. 

Although some technology companies have been among those going public this year, "the high-tech market is a pale shadow of what it was in 1983," the speculative peak, says Norman G. Fosback, editor of New Issues newsletter, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 

After 1983, and especially following the October 1987 stock-market crash, many investors turned away from small companies as investments or, at minimum, insisted on high quality, usually defined as a record of growing profits. "Investors have been discriminating in their pick of new issues," says Edward Mathias, managing director of T. Rowe Price Associates, a Baltimore manager of mutual funds. 

With the stock market robust once again, some institutional investors began returning to the new-issues market early this year, says Richard L. Franyo, the investment banking chief for Alex.
Brown & Sons Inc., Baltimore.
One result was that Network General Corp., a Mountain View, Calif., maker of diagnostic tools for data-communications systems, easily raised $17 million in its initial public offering in February.
The shares have more than doubled since then, stirring further interest in the new-issues market, Mr. Franyo says. 

Among companies hoping to exploit the situation by going public by year-end are Electronic Arts, a San Mateo, Calif., maker of entertainment software for computers; Lattice Semiconductor Corp., Beaverton, Ore.; and ImmunoGen Inc., a Cambridge, Mass., biotechnology company.
MIPS Computer Systems Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif., plans a public offering early next year. 

As for Immune Response, which Dr. Salk helped found, the company says it is going public because it needs capital to offset anticipated operating losses as it develops its first products.
Although the company has already received more than $17 million from private placements -- the investors include Rorer Corp. and Colgate Palmolive Co. -- it expects to spend much more than that before seeing a profit. 

The company says its first product under development, an AIDS vaccine, is based on a scientific approach first suggested by Dr. Salk.
As he had done with polio, Dr. Salk proposed using whole but inactivated AIDS viruses to inoculate people already infected.
But some other scientists say such viruses are unsafe in humans, and Dr. Salk's approach is by no means a certain winner. 

Still, because of the Salk name and track record, Immune Response shares may have great appeal to individual investors -- which Merrill Lynch, the chief underwriter, is particularly adept at reaching. "It's the kind of thing the public is interested in," James McCamant, editor of Medical Technology Stock Letter, Berkeley, Calif., says of the pending offering.
The new-issues market is strong enough that the offering "is probably doable," Mr. McCamant says. 

Others caution, however, that no name -- even Jonas Salk's -- can guarantee a company's success.
In 1983, Symbion Inc. of Salt Lake City (then called Kolff Medical Inc.), went public at $12.50 a share.
The company had appeal largely because its president, Robert K. Jarvik, had implanted an artificial heart in patient Barney Clark, whose name became a household word.
But the artificial-heart market failed to develop as projected.
Symbion shares now trade at about $2 and Dr. Jarvik has long since left the company. 

