.START 

Corn and soybean futures prices are likely to fall sharply in early trading today based on larger-than-expected quarterly stockpile figures released after the close of trading yesterday by the U.S. Agriculture Department. 

The Sept. 1 figures reported yesterday reflect the amount of grain in the U.S. before the start of this year's harvest.
The stockpiles, while sharply lower than a year ago -- due to the withering effect of the 1988 drought on U.S. corn and soybean crops -- weren't as depleted as some analysts had expected. 

Corn stockpiles as of Sept. 1 totaled 1.93 billion bushels, the Agriculture Dept. said, compared with recent estimates of 1.89 billion bushels or lower.
Soybean stockpiles totaled 182 million bushels, compared with estimates of 159 million bushels. 

Less than an hour after the stockpile figures were released, corn was trading in the cash market at two cents to four cents lower, and cash market soybeans were trading five cents to 10 cents lower, traders said. 

Wheat futures prices are likely to rise today, as stockpiles came in at 1.91 billion bushels, below recent market expectations of 1.99 billion bushels.
Also buoying wheat futures prices were reports that China wants to buy 400,000 metric tons of wheat, traders said. 

Yesterday's rally in corn and soybean futures prices was due almost solely to renewed rumors that the Soviets would be making major purchases of U.S. grain and soybeans before year end, said Richard Loewy, president of AgResource Co. in Chicago.
Traders buying contracts to offset earlier sales in order to reduce their overnight market exposure ahead of the release of the stockpile figures Thursday afternoon added somewhat to the rally, he noted. 

Corn futures for December delivery on the Chicago Board of Trade gained five cents a bushel to close at $2.3375 a bushel.
November soybean futures advanced 5.25 cents a bushel to close at $5.705 a bushel.
Wheat futures for December delivery added one cent a bushel to close at $3.995 a bushel. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

ENERGY: Petroleum products prices led crude oil higher in futures trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Gasoline showed sharp gains ahead of today's final session for the October contract.
And, mostly due to technical factors, heating oil set new contract highs in all but one period. 

The U.S. benchmark crude, West Texas Intermediate, showed a steady rise to close 27 cents higher for the session at $19.86 a barrel for November delivery.
Outer months closed higher, as well.
Fourth-quarter demand projections continue to sustain the price moves, even in light of increased production from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, analysts said. 

The October contract for unleaded gasoline, which expires with today's session, closed 2.19 cents a gallon higher at 60.93 cents.
The November contract was 2.19 cents higher. 

COPPER: Futures prices fell back from Wednesday's advances and resumed their declining trend.
The December contract ended with a loss of 0.45 cent a pound to $1.2075.
There were no new developments of a fundamental nature and the market moved mostly on technical considerations, an analyst said.
Prices early in the day were higher, in reaction to firmness in London, where the analyst said there had been active merchant buying of copper.
However, at midafternoon, the Commodity Exchange's report showed that open interest in copper, or the number of contracts that remain to be liquidated by either an opposite trade or delivery, had dropped by 2,083, to 19,063.
The December open interest declined by 1,597 contracts.
Traders interpreted this open-interest shrinkage to mean that Wednesday's rally, which broke a four-day decline, wasn't the result of fresh buying, but instead was liquidation of contracts by traders who'd previously sold short in anticipation that prices would go lower.
The indication that traders were leaving the market, rather than coming into it, caused late selling that depressed prices, the analyst said. 

SUGAR: Futures prices eased in the wake of a larger production estimate.
The March contract was down 0.28 cent a pound at 13.79.
The West German sugar statistical firm, F.O. Licht, estimated that world sugar production for the 1989-90 season, which began Sept. 1, will amount to 107.7 million tons, up 1.9 million tons from 1988-89, according to an analyst.
But 1989-90 global sugar demand, based on historical trends, could reach 110 million tons, the firm also said.
The report noted that the major increases in output were in India, China and the Soviet Union, but added there was some uncertainty because these countries have less predictable crops, the analyst said.
Also, the firm noted, if production is as forecast, reserve stocks would be less depleted than had been expected.
The report said there had been a structural change in the sugar market in that more demand was coming from developing countries, which aren't inclined to pay higher prices for sugar, and that sugar-using industries are keeping smaller inventories because of high interest rates and other costs of carrying the supplies, the analyst said. 

