.START 

The Senate sought to slow the erosion of support for the administration's Strategic Defense Initiative by signaling its resistance to major cuts below current spending for the space-based anti-missile system. 

The narrow, 53-47 vote was engineered by the same Appropriations Committee leadership that earlier rejected an effort to add funds back for SDI, and the maneuvering yesterday was designed to bolster the Senate's position going into negotiations with the more liberal House.
After stumbling badly in a prior vote this week, the White House recovered some ground.
But the administration's best hope is to maintain the program at about $3.7 billion, or the equivalent of the current spending plus inflation. 

Yesterday's vote came as the Senate pushed toward completion of a $288.1 billion Pentagon appropriations bill.
And with the current fiscal year ending tomorrow night, both houses sought to expedite action on spending measures for the new year.
A stopgap bill to keep the government operating through Oct. 25 was sent to the White House after lawmakers attached $1.1 billion in emergency assistance for communities devastated by Hurricane Hugo in the Carolinas and Caribbean. 

Separately, the Senate approved $67 billion in fiscal 1990 appropriations for federal housing, space and veteran programs.
And by a 274-137 margin, the House approved a much smaller but still controversial bill funding Congress's own budget as well as the operations of the Capitol.
The $1.95 billion measure cuts by half the number of annual newsletters lawmakers may send to constituents.
But the $115.6 million included to sustain the franking, or freemail privilege, has been attacked as exorbitant in a time of high deficits. 

Elsewhere, a House-Senate conference reached agreement on major portions of an $11 billion natural-resources bill that imposes a sweeping moratorium on oil drilling off much of the East and West Coasts as well as Alaska's Bristol Bay.
The restrictions cover a total of 84 million acres of U.S. waters and are most sensitive for the petroleum industry in California, where environmentalists yesterday won a provision forbidding the release of even a draft environmental-impact statement on future oil-lease sales until five months after a presidential task force releases its findings this winter. 

No final decision was reached on a second environmental issue, related to timber harvesting in old forests in the Pacific Northwest.
But the conference approved reduced funding of $164 million for the Forest Service road-construction budget -- an 11% cut from the administration's request. 

The same bill has become the vehicle for passage of new Senate-backed requirements to force the disclosure of payments and the identity of consultants and lobbyists hired to pursue federal funds.
The measure would apply to all grants or contracts in excess of $100,000 and, as agreed to by conferees, it would forbid, with some exceptions, any grantee from diverting federal funds received to pay lobbying costs.
Discretion is given to the secretary of defense to waive the provisions when judged in the national interest.
But the initiative represents a major step toward disclosing lobbying of the executive branch, such as the influence-peddling found in the now unfolding housing scandals. 

A remaining dilemma is how to resolve conservative pressure to impose some obscenity standard on projects funded by the National Endowment of the Arts.
Waving photographs from an exhibit of homoerotic art, Sen. Jesse Helms (R., N.C.) last night demanded a recorded vote on the issue and even suggested the chamber be cleared of pages, staff and "ladies" so the pictures could be viewed.
But senators, who have been reluctant to get in the fight, challenged him, and Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Byrd bluntly said he would ignore any resolution to instruct the conference at this stage. 

The Senate Defense Appropriations bill withholds all new procurement money for the Navy's troubled D-5 Trident missile.
But the SDI budget has drawn the most attention because of the potential impact on meetings under way between defense authorizing committees in Congress. 

Reflecting budget pressure, appropriators had proposed to hold funding at $3.7 billion, a reduction of $600 million from the Senate authorized level but still sufficient to maintain the program at its current level plus inflation.
Initial efforts to restore half the cut failed 66-34 Tuesday, when the White House embarrassed itself by backing an awkwardly constructed amendment rearranging not only spending priorities for SDI and D-5 but also a range of more conventional weapons and space accounts important to conservative senators. 

Yesterday's vote was devised as a better test of sentiment for SDI, and on paper at least it restores $600 million to the program, bringing total funding to $4.3 billion.
In fact, this is largely a negotiating ploy in the face of House demands for a much lower $2.8 billion figure, and the real intention was to signal opposition to going far below the current level. 

Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn said last night that the vote can't be interpreted as supporting a $4.3 billion figure, and the administration must also contend with increasing pressure to keep the program focused on its longerterm goal of developing directed energy, or laser-type weapons. 

