.START 

An apparent compromise by OPEC on a new, higher fourth-quarter oil production ceiling collapsed at the last minute. 

For a time last night, it appeared the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries was well on the way to boosting its output limit by as much as 1.5 million barrels a day and wrapping up the session it began here Saturday.
Such an increase would recognize rising world demand for OPEC oil and bring the group's official ceiling more into line with its actual production pace.
The oil ministers had even scheduled a formal session to ratify a new agreement. 

But instead, they found themselves continuing to negotiate privately through the evening, apparently trying to work out snags that developed with such countries as Algeria, Libya, Iran and Kuwait.
As a result, the OPEC conference will resume today. 

"There are certain positions from certain countries, and we are trying to accommodate them," said Issam Abdul Raheem Al-Chalabi, Iraq's oil minister. 

Few ministers were willing to elaborate on the specific 11th-hour problems that cropped up.
But some countries that are already pumping at close to maximum rates have consistently opposed a higher ceiling, which would be of little practical value to them.
They would prefer to see the organization's production reined in until OPEC's average oil price, currently less than $17 a barrel, reaches the targeted $18.
In addition, Kuwait all along has opposed higher ceilings unless it gets a disproportionate share of any boosts. 

The proposal that gathered support during meetings in the suites of leading oil ministers all day yesterday was promoted by Iraq and several other countries, including OPEC heavyweight Saudi Arabia.
It called for an increase of one million or 1.5 million barrels a day in the fourth-quarter production ceiling.
OPEC's current production ceiling is 19.5 million barrels a day, but because of overproduction by some members -- chiefly Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates -- output recently has surged beyond 22 million barrels a day. 

Demand for OPEC oil, however, is also rising and is expected to match or exceed that level of production in the fourth quarter.
Several OPEC members want the official ceiling increased to reflect that so their assigned quotas will rise accordingly and some of the quota cheating now going on will be legitimized. 

By late in the day, most ministers backing the proposal were confident it would be accepted by all 13 OPEC ministers, and an 8 p.m. meeting was called to complete the agreement. "It has been presented to everybody, and I hope we have a final decision in a few minutes," said Celestino Armas, Venezuela's oil minister.
A communique announcing the details had even been drafted with some blanks to be filled in.
But by 9:30, it was clear that the proposal had failed, and the meeting was scrubbed. 

Some of the ministers, including Mana Said Otaiba of the United Arab Emirates, waited an hour in the meeting room before being told the session had been postponed until this morning.
Asked whether there still might be an agreement, Mr. Otaiba replied, "I hope so." Some delegates seemed more pessimistic. "Things are not looking very good, but they (the ministers) are still talking," said one. 

OPEC's secretary-general Subroto, at a late-night news briefing, spoke only in vague, road-map metaphors. "The caravan hasn't started moving yet.
There are plans to have a last look (Tuesday) as to the route to take," he said. 

Even if the ministers today are able to resolve the objections from those countries with little spare producing capacity such as Algeria, Libya and Iran, they still may have difficulty with Kuwait, the affluent Persian Gulf producer.
Kuwait refused to adhere to the quota that resulted from OPEC's most recent production accord, and again at this meeting has insisted that it won't agree to any increase in OPEC's ceiling unless it receives a larger allotment than its usual percentage share would dictate.
Most of the other countries are willing to parcel out any increase on a pro rata basis. 

"We're not going to change our position," a Kuwaiti delegate said after the compromise effort failed. 

