.START 

As recently as April, the year-old Sheraton Hotel in the scenic Chinese city of Guilin enjoyed a 90% occupancy rate.
Today, the luxury establishment is nearly deserted; business is so dismal that the foreign investor in the hotel project, Hong Kong businessman Frederick Hsieh, is prepared to give away his 50% share to his partner, the Guilin government. 

The hotel hasn't defaulted on its debt, though its most recent loan payment was late.
And it isn't clear how it is going to finance its next payment, due in two months. 

The hotel's reversal stems from the massacre in Beijing's Tiananmen Square on June 4.
In the wake of the shootings, tourism to China dried up and foreign trade faltered.
Even before June 4, investors in hotel and office projects faced cost overruns and late loan payments because of a glut of projects.
The shootings simply magnified the problems. 

Foreign bankers say almost every new Chinese hotel and office tower faces problems meeting loan-repayment schedules.
Though analysts say the hotel business in China is slowly improving, 1989 occupancy rates are expected to average only 50%, down from estimates of between 70% and 80% before the massacre.
Currently, occupancy rates average 30% to 40%. 

While bankers have been relatively patient in addressing the loan problems, more of them are becoming hard-nosed because of a growing nervousness about China's ability to repay its debts, especially those guaranteed by provincial governments.
Some foreign banks are even considering taking loan-defaulters to court, a drastic step in China because court action is viewed as harmful to a foreign bank's long-term interests in China.
Since June 4, there has been almost no new lending to the country. 

Foreign bank loans to China's hotel and property sector are estimated at between $6 billion and $8 billion, or 15% to 20% of the estimated $42 billion in total lending to China. "Everybody in the hotel market probably shares the same view that in the coming years China will face a very difficult time in servicing its debt," says a Japanese banker based in Hong Kong. 

Japan is the most exposed.
The Tokyo government and Japanese commercial banks have made loans totaling $20 billion to China.
Among the most prominent credits is a $135 million syndicated loan, mostly from Japanese banks, for the construction of the Shanghai Exhibition and Hotel Complex, which is near completion.
The project's creditors already are working to reschedule the loan, and its Chinese and foreign equity partners agreed last month to inject $20 million in fresh capital. 

In another instance, the Chinese and foreign equity partners of the prestigious China World Trade Center in Beijing provided an additional $50 million last month to keep that project going. 

While most foreign banks are gambling that tourism will pick up and are working to reschedule their loans, some bankers are hardening their approach. 

"Relationships have taken a back seat now, and bankers have probably realized that they would face a lot of loan defaults in the coming years," says a banker in Hong Kong. "It's better to act tough and try to collect as much money as possible before China runs out of money." 

