.START 

A U.S. appeals court here, resurrecting part of a six-year-old securities-fraud lawsuit against Apple Computer Inc., ruled that a trial court should decide whether Apple made "materially misleading" statements regarding the commercial viability of a disk-drive system designed for Apple's ill-fated Lisa computer. 

The ruling, however, by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, left intact a 1987 summary judgment by a lower court that Apple hadn't intentionally misled investors regarding sales projections for the Lisa computer itself because Apple officials "reasonably" believed the projections to be true. 

Furthermore, the appeals court said the trial court correctly found that "all material information tending to undermine {Apple's} optimistic statements about Lisa had credibly entered the market" through press and other public accounts. 

As reported, the lawsuit was filed by a group of disgruntled shareholders following a 75% drop in Apple's stock price in 1983.
The plunge came after Apple announced that it was abandoning Lisa, the forerunner to its popular Macintosh computer, after technological problems and the machine's stiff price sapped demand. 

In their lawsuit, plaintiffs alleged that Apple, in fact, had known that Lisa's prospects were bleak, but had trumpeted the machine, anyway, as a method of pumping up the company's stock.
The suit said further evidence of this were statements by then Apple chairman Steven Jobs and others that the disk drive being developed for Lisa -- known as "Twiggy" -- was ready for commercial application following "three years of research and development" and "extensive testing and verification." 

The appeals court found, however, that at the time Apple was issuing such statements, internal documents showed that company engineers were warning that reliability problems with the disk drive would lead to lengthy delays in Lisa's production.
The court concluded that "there is at least a triable issue of whether Twiggy's technical problems were material facts tending to undermine" Apple's "unqualified optimism" regarding the machine. 

Neither Apple nor Mr. Jobs could be reached for comment on the ruling. 

