.START 

Housing is very much in the news these days.
First there was the discovery that influence peddlers had penetrated HUD.
The true man-bites-dog story would have been news that there were no longer influence peddlers loitering around this big subsidy mill, but Congress gave a good imitation of outrage. 

The outrage was mainly for the press.
In substantive terms, Congress isn't mad at HUD at all.
Early this month the Senate voted to expand the powers of a key HUD enterprise, the Federal Housing Administration.
Under the National Affordable Housing Act, a wide-ranging bill designed by Senators Cranston and D'Amato, the FHA will be able to guarantee home mortgages up to just under $125,000, a 25% boost from the present maximum. 

The FHA is currently suffering from a large negative cash flow, reserves are shrinking and its inventory of foreclosed houses is climbing, which one might expect to give the legislators pause.
But this sad state of affairs is being used as an argument for, not against, expanding FHA insurance powers.
It is asserted that the Cranston-D'Amato bill will allow the FHA to spread its risks by insuring higher-priced real estate. 

They'd better be right, because Uncle Sam doesn't need yet another boost for his traffic in distressed real estate.
The one it got last month with the passage of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act -- better known as the thrift bailout bill -- will do quite nicely.
The new law created Resolution Trust Corp. (RTC) to take over the assets of crashed savings and loans and try to dispose of them.
How much housing and other developed real estate might that be?
Well, no one knows for sure but estimates range from $100 billion to $200 billion.
To give some idea of magnitude, the total of all home mortgages written in the U.S. last year by the thrift industry was $240 billion.
If any of this gives the impression that federal housing policies are in disarray, it should.
While the federal government becomes an ever larger holder of distressed property, the ability of young families to acquire decent housing has been shrinking.
Further, wide disparities exist in housing costs from region to region of the U.S. 

Politicians have found a new public cause in the "homeless," but the "homeless," by and large, are an altogether different problem, having to do with a troubling pathology of mental illness and addiction that dumps unfortunates on city streets.
Yet the "homeless" issue finds resonance among healthy people, simply because of things that are wrong with the housing market. 

Citing one example of real estate market disparities, Ira Gribin, president of the National Association of Realtors, notes that a house costing $25,000 in rural Oklahoma could go for 10 times that in Encino, Calif., where he lives.
NAR statistics show that the median price for an existing home in the Northeast is $147,000, just double the $73,500 of the Midwest.
In the West the median is $138,200 and in the South it is $88,200. 

Mr. Gribin and the NAR, not surprisingly, are among the backers of the Cranston-D'Amato bill, which also has numerous other provisions supposedly designed to make housing more "affordable." He supports the argument that a higher loan ceiling will make the FHA healthier, asserting that risks are lower on more expensive houses. "The FHA is being shut out of the very market that will spread its risks," he argues. 

Regional disparities in home prices also are cited as arguments for higher FHA mortgage ceilings, on grounds that higher ceilings are needed in higher-cost areas.
But it can be argued as well that more liberal terms, by raising demand in areas where housing supplies are tight, will only further widen the price disparities.
Indeed, the regional disparities that have developed in the housing market since 1980 probably owe something to a law that year keying FHA maximums to the median home price in an area. 

The true villains in high-cost areas are factors restricting the housing supply.
Rent controls have destroyed a large chunk of New York City's housing stock, putting price pressure on available housing throughout the metropolitan region.
In such areas, young people seeking rental housing are, in effect, subsidizing older residents who are on the rent-control gravy train.
Forced to pay high rents, these young people find it hard to save a down payment for home or co-op purchases.
To get a test of the impact of rent controls, take a look at the price of real estate in the Chicago metropolitan area, where rent controls are not a factor, as compared with New York or Washington.
They are substantially lower. 

Suburban areas meanwhile fight back against the demand pressure caused by a flight from rent-control cities with higher zoning requirements and more red tape for developers.
In Orange County, Calif., it has been estimated that red-tape delays raise construction financing and other expenses so much that a builder can spend $40,000 on a house before he ever drives a nail.
Distressed housing is becoming a very large burden for taxpayers.
Critics of the Cranston-D'Amato bill, who not surprisingly include private mortgage insurers, argue that the FHA is heading for a bust just as big or bigger than the one that demolished the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. (FSLIC).
A recent Heritage Foundation study by Ronald Utt notes that a FHA down-payment requirement of only 3% often leaves the FHA with a mortgage guarantee larger than the value of the house, particularly in depressed markets.
That invites the householder who runs into financial reverses to simply walk away, since he has no significant equity to lose. 

Which brings us back to the RTC and its task of disposing of all that foreclosed housing acquired from insolvent thrifts.
If it simply "dumps" the housing in those depressed markets where a glut exists, Congress will be getting anguished phone calls from local real estate interests.
Mr. Gribin's Realtors are 800,000 strong, a significant political force.
Look for the RTC to incur some substantial costs in carrying its real estate inventory and trying to maintain the properties as it steers clear of complaints from local interests about its disposal programs. 

The federal inventory does little for most house hunters for the simple reason that housing is not portable.
A surplus in Dallas or Denver doesn't lower prices in New Jersey or Southern California.
Those high prices, by raising living costs and property taxes, factor back into construction costs.
You have to pay workers more in places where it costs more to live. 

In short, the problems of federal housing policy are deepening.
The thrift bust itself, in essence, had its origins in efforts by Congress to foster home ownership.
While that is certainly a worthwhile social goal, the methods employed to achieve it have left a great deal to be desired.
The critics of the Cranston-D'Amato bill are fully justified by past events in worrying about this further effort to federalize the housing market. "Affordable housing" is certainly something we all want, but housing is going to be a lot less affordable for a lot of people if they find themselves paying ever higher taxes to remedy housing-policy mistakes. 

