.START 

Budget Director Richard Darman said the fight over the capital gains tax has dimmed hopes for a renewed bipartisan effort to cut the budget deficit and said such an effort might be postponed until after the 1990 elections. 

Mr. Darman, who earlier talked of a major budget summit this fall, said yesterday that "I don't think we'll have a grandiose summit right after" the bruising tax battle. "We'll have to let things cool down." 

The budget director said that "the disposition to negotiate could arise again next year," but that the "least likely time would be right before an election." 

Mr. Darman also heaped unusually harsh criticism on the House Democratic leadership for opposing a cut in capital gains taxes and for proposing an increase in tax rates on high-income earners. "The Democratic leadership strategy is inexplicable," he said. "They go on a retreat and say they don't want to raise taxes, then on an average of 4.3 days later, they decide to raise taxes." 

The budget director said the Democrats were pursuing "a kamikaze approach to national politics." 

House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) responded sharply to Mr. Darman's criticisms, calling them "stuff and nonsense." He and other Democratic leaders continued to press, in what they acknowledged is an uphill fight, for their alternative to cutting the capital gains tax. 

Throughout most of this year, Mr. Darman has refrained from harsh criticism of the Democrats, frequently arguing that a spirit of "bipartisanship" was needed to make tough budget decisions.
But his comments yesterday suggest the "kinder, gentler" strategy has been abandoned. 

"I regret that it has become so partisan," Mr. Darman said of the battle over capital gains. "I hope we will get this behind us." 

The budget director also said a failure to enact a capital gains tax cut would lead to across-the-board spending cuts, called a sequester, under the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law.
Those cuts are scheduled to take effect Oct. 15 if the government hasn't enacted laws to reduce the fiscal 1990 budget deficit to $110 billion or less.
A cut in the capital-gains tax raises government revenue in the short run by stimulating the turnover of taxable assets. 

The Bush administration backs a plan approved by the House Ways and Means Committee that would cut the top capital gains tax rate to 19.6% from the current 33%.
After two years, the top rate would rise to 28%, with the gains indexed for inflation. 

House Democratic leaders are pushing an alternative that would increase the top nominal income tax rate to 33% from 28% and expand the deduction for individual retirement accounts. 

The leaders staged an information offensive yesterday in support of their plan, saying it would reduce the deficit and would be better for the economy than the capital gains tax cut.
They also said it would help more middle-class people than the capital gains tax break, which would go mostly to high-income taxpayers. 

House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) said he expects votes on the capital gains issue tomorrow or Thursday. "It's an uphill battle for us," he conceded. "But I think we can prevail." 

The capital gains forces have both the momentum and the active backing of the White House.
They have the solid support of House Republicans and a slice of the conservative Democrats, particularly those from the Southeast. 

But the Democratic leadership is belatedly fighting back with personal appeals, union-sponsored radio advertisements and buttons that read "Bush Tax Plan: You're Gonna Pay." The leadership also won some surprise support for their alternative from conservative Democrat Charles Stenholm of Texas. 

"We are encouraged by the number of members who have changed positions because they have seen our alternatives," said Rep. William Gray of Pennsylvania, the House's third ranking Democrat. "There has been a significant movement, but it will be a close vote." 

Jeffrey H. Birnbaum contributed to this article. 

