.START 

Maybe we need a Parkinson's Law for arms-control proposals: A proposal's likelihood of enhancing national security or world peace is inversely related to the size of its press converage. 

Exhibit A would be the Kellogg-Briand Pact of 1928, in which 54 signatory nations outlawed war as a means of settling disputes.
We have similar doubts about President Bush's proposal at the U.N. yesterday to ban chemical weapons.
Over the weekend, the Soviet foreign minister received prominent attention for agreeing to commence START negotiations -- on the understanding that the Strategic Defense Initiative would never be deployed.
Finally, supporting the law's thesis, less publicized news stories noted last week that the U.S. had tabled in Vienna a comprehensive plan to reduce NATO's and the Warsaw Pact's conventional forces in Europe -- potentially one of the most militarily significant rearrangements in postwar Europe. 

At the U.N., Mr. Bush promised to eliminate 100% of the U.S. chemical arsenal within 10 years once all nations "capable of building" such weapons sign the treaty.
Laying aside what "capable of building" may mean, verification of such a ban is not possible.
The Soviet Union, for instance, has many millions of square miles.
Nor does the community of nations Mr. Bush addressed yesterday have means for dealing with accused chemical-arms violators who often tell them to get lost, as Iraq's Saddam Hussein did after bombing his Kurdish minority with chemicals. 

Moreover, when it has been well established that such a hopeful treaty can be neither verified nor enforced, past practice has been to assert that apparent violations are in fact not violations, as when arms-control enthusiasts argued several years ago that breaches in Laos of the Biological Weapons Convention were fecal bombardments by giant yellow bees.
In this setting, the most likely scenario is that many nations will in fact retain a chemical-weapons inventory to deter their less civilized adversaries.
The more immediate danger in the sort of publicized effort Mr. Bush made at the U.N. is that it becomes difficult to conduct serious business around more important matters. 

The Soviets' weekend proposal on strategic arms, for instance, is as much as anything an exercise in U.S. politics, a trademark of the Gorbachev era.
The Soviets let it be known that they'd no longer let strategic defense stand in the way of signing a START accord -- but that if the U.S. later decided to deploy SDI, the Soviets would abrogate START.
This is the sort of concession that Al Capone made famous. 

Mr. Gorbachev understands that elements in the U.S. Congress want to kill SDI; perhaps he has decided to let them do his negotiating for him.
Les Aspin, the hapless zookeeper of the House Armed Services Committee, acknowledged the mood of his colleagues on Sunday by attacking the White House for not having used SDI as a "bargaining chip." CBS's Lesley Stahl, playing devil's advocate, noted that perhaps the administration really does want SDI.
So what? replied Mr. Aspin; in the wake of this Soviet proposal, "they won't get it anyway." 

Mr. Gorbachev also understands, alas much better than Congress, that nuclear arms control is a good way to hamstring America's competitive advantage in high technology.
The 1972 ABM Treaty prevented research on nuclear defenses for a decade, until SDI research confronted the Soviets with a technological race they couldn't win.
With START, as the Soviets now describe it, he can achieve the same result, guaranteeing the Soviet nuclear threat another 20 years. 

Secretary of State Baker continues to insist that the Administration still wants SDI, but how much?
A House-Senate conference is debating House provisions that would fund strategic defense at levels so low (below $4 billion) that they'd effectively gut any practical SDI. Failure to veto such a bill would come very close to adopting Mr. Gorbachev's position. 

It would be a pity if the truly substantive conventional arms talks became hostage to the desire to complete a chemical-weapons or START agreement prior to the 1992 election.
Over all the years of Warsaw Pact force-level superiority, NATO didn't back down or break.
This resolve, enhanced by President Reagan's commitment to construct anti-missile defense systems, is the political strategy that brought the current Soviet leadership to the bargaining table. 

We suppose there might be something perversely appropriate in issuing a call for a chemical-weapons ban to an institution such as the United Nations.
But if there is a serious effort to be made in controlling arms, it belongs in the Vienna talks over the Soviet Union's tank armies.
Bagging that trophy would be a huge achievement for the Bush presidency. 

