.START 

Three top executives at Suzuki Motor Co. 's beleaguered U.S. sales arm resigned suddenly and a fourth accepted reassignment to an unspecified job with the auto maker in Japan. 

The sweeping changes are a further disruption for Suzuki, which hasn't rebounded from safety allegations last year against its Samurai sport utility vehicle.
The moves also come on the heels of Suzuki's inability this year to successfully sell its first car in the U.S. 

The three executives who resigned from American Suzuki Motor Corp., effective yesterday, are: Doug Mazza, vice president and general manager; John Dorsey, director of sales; and Larry Messelt, national sales manager.
American Suzuki officials also said that the company's president for the past five years, Yoshiyuki Arai, will return to a job in Japan at the beginning of October. 

The company said that Kenji Shimizu, who was brought in above Mr. Arai as America Suzuki chairman in July, will assume Mr. Arai's title.
Mr. Shimizu also oversees Suzuki's U.S. motorcycle, outboard motor and generator sales.
The company is also transferring Yoshi Fujii from Japan to become executive vice president of the U.S. subsidiary. 

No successors were named to replace the American executives who resigned.
Mr. Mazza, a former U.S. distribution manager for Mitsubishi Motor Corp., joined Suzuki in 1985 shortly before it launched the Samurai in the U.S. Mr. Mazza lured Mr. Dorsey from Mitsubishi and he, in turn, hired Mr. Messelt away from Chrysler Corp. 

Mr. Mazza said in an interview yesterday that the recent arrival of Mr. Shimizu and the pending arrival of Mr. Fujii had "no direct role" in his resignation. 

Speaking for the other two American officials, he said in a prepared statement: "As a result of changes in the company's operating goals and philosophies, we have decided the time is right to move on to new challenges." Mr. Mazza declined to state more specifically what changes caused the resignations.
But a spokeswoman for the company said the changes involved product-marketing priorities. 

Suzuki enjoyed impressive growth selling only the Samurai during its first three years in the U.S.
But last year, Consumer Reports magazine published an extensive story that condemned the Samurai as unsafe because of its alleged tendency to roll over during sudden turns. 

Although the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration refused to open a safety investigation into the allegations and Suzuki aggressively challenged its critics, Samurai sales evaporated. 

Last fall, Suzuki's U.S. officials hoped to improve their standing with the new Sidekick sport utility vehicle and the subcompact Swift, which was the first car sold by Suzuki in the U.S. Neither vehicle has met expectations.
Suzuki officials expected to ship 20,000 cars and 30,000 trucks a year at first.
But Suzuki has sold only 4,000 Swifts so far this year and watched its truck sales drop 65% from already depressed levels to just 17,419 units. 

