.START 

The Energy Department, in its first explanation of last week's agreement to end Rockwell International Corp. 's contract to operate the Rocky Flats nuclear-weapons plant, said the company had failed to make enough environmental, health and safety improvements. 

The agency's statements make clear that its dissatisfaction with the company's job performance played a bigger role than previously acknowledged by either party. 

It also indicates that the Energy Department was at least as interested in replacing Rockwell as the El Segundo, Calif., aerospace concern was in being replaced.
Rockwell several times had threatened to break its contract to run the Colorado defense plant, most recently in a dispute over waste disposal.
The announcement last week said the contract was ended by mutual agreement. 

Energy Department spokeswoman Catherine Kaliniak said Energy Secretary James Watkins "decided it was time to make a change" after Rockwell was given two chances this year to come up with a management plan for improving its operations at Rocky Flats, and both times the plans were found unsatisfactory. 

"We were not happy with their plans to address our issues of environment, health and safety," she said. 

After the second plan was found inadequate, she said, Mr. Watkins "decided something needed to be changed and that basically it {the contract} needed to come to an end." 

Ms. Kaliniak said Rockwell received a "less than satisfactory" rating in the environmental, health and safety area in its latest six-month evaluation for the period ended March 31.
As a result, it received less than 40% -- or under $3.1 million -- of potential operating fees of $7.8 million. 

A Rockwell spokesman declined to comment on the Energy Department assertions.
He said Rockwell had agreed with the Energy Department not to discuss cancellation of the contract. "We plan to honor that agreement," he said. 

Over the weekend, Rockwell said the agreement to exit Rocky Flats resulted from a dispute with the government over waste disposal. 

That dispute culminated last week in a lawsuit against the government.
A day later, the Energy Department informed Rockwell it wanted to break the contract.
Ms. Kaliniak said the department considered the lawsuit "needless" and said it was the "last straw" in its tense relationship with Rockwell. 

EG&G Inc., a Wellesley, Mass., scientific instrument company, has accepted the government's offer to take over Rocky Flats.
Its officials arrived at Rocky Flats yesterday afternoon to begin the transition. 

