.START 

and ex-brother-in-law -- for $90 million for allegedly mismanaging the pop star's finances. 

Frank Weber was fired as Mr. Joel's manager Aug. 30 after the entertainer's attorneys began reviewing various financial records.
Leonard Marks, a lawyer for Mr. Joel, said the alleged improprieties date back to 1980, when Mr. Weber became the singer's exclusive manager. 

"It's really quite a shocking story of trust," Mr. Marks said.
The former manager "had a very close, personal relationship with Billy Joel. . . . Billy Joel had total faith that he was dealing with someone who was totally honest." 

Mr. Weber became Mr. Joel's manager after the entertainer and his wife at that time, Elizabeth Weber, separated.
Ms. Weber, Mr. Weber's sister, had been Mr. Joel's manager; Mr. Marks said Mr. Weber sided with Mr. Joel when the couple split up. 

Among other things, the lawsuit claims that, against the singer's instructions, Mr. Weber allowed Mr. Joel's song copyrights to be pledged as collateral for loans.
The suit, filed in state court in Manhattan, also accuses Mr. Weber of double-billing Mr. Joel for song videos made by a Weber-controlled company. 

The suit says that because of the fees and commissions to Mr. Weber and his companies, the former manager made more money off some of the entertainer's tours and recordings than did Mr. Joel. 

Mr. Weber's commission as manager was 20% of Mr. Joel's gross revenue.
The commission amounted to about $12 million over the past three years, Mr. Marks said.
In addition, the suit says Mr. Weber drew on the entertainer's assets for unauthorized, interest-free loans.
The suit also claims that Mr. Joel sustained a loss of at least $10 million on risky investments in horse-breeding partnerships, oil and natural gas, and real estate transactions arranged by Mr. Weber.
Often Mr. Weber had a personal stake in the investments, the lawsuit says, though Mr. Weber's conflict of interest was never disclosed to Mr. Joel. "We believe Mr. Weber took substantial fees and commissions every time Billy Joel invested in one of his deals or partnerships," Mr. Marks said. 

Neither Mr. Weber nor his attorney could be reached for comment on the suit. 

JUDGE ORDERS LAWYERS to return $3.1 million in excess billings. 

U.S. District Judge Joseph C. Howard in Baltimore ruled that Annapolis, Md., attorneys David A. Levin and James T. Wharton "were vicariously liable" for overbillings submitted by their former partner, Edward S. Digges, even though they didn't participate in the fraud. 

Mr. Digges, former managing partner of Digges, Wharton & Levin, represented a Baltimore unit of Dresser Industries Inc. in asbestos litigation from 1984 to 1988 and submitted $4.5 million in total billings.
In his ruling last month, Judge Howard characterized Mr. Digges's billing practices as "grossly fraudulent and willful." 

The judge found Messrs.
Wharton and Levin liable along with Mr. Digges because the firm had no monitoring system in place to ensure the accuracy of Mr. Digges's bills or to prevent fraud.
The judge ordered that $3.1 million be returned to the Dresser unit, Harbison Davidson Refractories Inc. 

Lawyers for Messrs.
Wharton and Levin declined comment.
Mr. Digges couldn't be reached. 

A jury trial is planned to determine what, if any, punitive damages to assess. 

A WEEK OF AMNESTY for pilferers of court files pays off in Austin, Texas. 

The files weren't making it back to the county clerk's office after court proceedings, so Travis County Clerk Dana DeBeauvoir offered attorneys, law clerks and other courthouse personnel a chance to return the files last week with no questions asked. 

The clerk's office handles records for 47,000 misdemeanor criminal cases and 41,000 civil cases on an "open-shelf" system that allows lawyers and others to fetch the files themselves.
Trouble was, 10% of the files weren't being returned for days and sometimes weeks after a court proceeding. 

"I don't have any files that are permanently missing," Ms. DeBeauvoir said. "I just have a revolving door that got stuck." 

The clerk concedes she lacks enforcement power when a file is overdue but said the declaration of an amnesty week was a way of drawing attention to the problem.
And although she doesn't have hard data, Ms. DeBeauvoir said the amnesty did inspire many attorneys to return the files. "I just wanted to raise their consciousness that it's not okay to borrow a file for a while," she said. 

PERIPATETIC PROSECUTORS: Celia Goldwag Barenholtz, the former chief appellate attorney in the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan, has become a partner at Kronish, Lieb, Weiner & Hellman, a 78-lawyer New York law firm.
She will handle criminal and civil cases. . . . Morrison Cohen Singer & Weinstein has recruited Laura A. Brevetti as a partner and co-head of the 50-lawyer New York law firm's white-collar crime group.
She was formerly chief of the U.S. Department of Justice Organized Crime strike force in Brooklyn. 

QUOTABLE: In an opinion largely backing insurers in a Superfund toxic-waste cleanup case, state court judge Robert H. Dierker Jr. of St. Louis took the opportunity to comment on "loss spreading," a theory holding that those who share the benefits of industrialization must all share in its costs.
The judge said such notions "are merely 'critical legal studies' code words to disguise methods by which courts can be utilized as devices for imposing socialist or Marxist economics through perversion of the common law." Needless to say, the judge rejected this approach. 

