.START 

Institut Merieux S.A. raised the stakes in a bidding war for Connaught BioSciences Inc. with a plan to offer 37 Canadian dollars (US$31.31) for each Connaught share it doesn't already own, giving the company an indicated value of C$942 million (US$797 million). 

The offer will replace a proposal made by Merieux last March to combine its human health businesses with that of Connaught, a Toronto-based vaccine manufacturer.
That plan would have left Connaught shareholders with about 49% of the merged company, Merieux Connaught N.V., and drew criticism from shareholders and analysts, who said it was difficult to value. 

Earlier this month, a rival bid emerged in the shape of a joint C$30-a-share offer for all of Connaught's shares by Ciba-Geigy Ltd., the Basel, Switzerland, pharmaceutical concern, and Chiron Corp., a biotechnology company based in Emeryville, Calif. 

After a weekend board meeting, Connaught directors recommended shareholders reject the Ciba-Geigy/Chiron offer, and unanimously approved the terms of the proposed Merieux bid.
The bid was not publicly disclosed until yesterday morning. 

Connaught's chairman and chief executive officer, Brian King, said the Merieux cash offer was the French company's idea, but that the precise terms are the outcome of "negotiations and discussions" over the weekend. 

"Obviously, there was some skepticism about the short-term value of a merged Merieux-Connaught," Mr. King said, referring to the earlier Merieux merger proposal.
In contrast, he said, the market reacted favorably to Ciba-Geigy's and Chiron's joint cash offer. 

Following the announcement of the Merieux bid, Connaught shares jumped in active trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange to close at C$37.25 (US$31.53), up C$3.375.
In national over-the-counter trading in the U.S., the shares closed at $31.75, up $3.125.
Several analysts said investors expect Ciba-Geigy and Chiron to sweeten their offer for Connaught, or for a third bid to emerge. 

"People are trying to figure out what Ciba-Geigy's upper limit is," said Avi Dalfen, a Toronto-based analyst with Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion Inc. 

Ciba-Geigy is interested in acquiring the company to gain a foothold in the vaccines business, while Chiron appears most interested in Connaught's production and marketing capacity, Mr. Dalfen said. 

"The question is: Is the company worth as much to Ciba-Geigy as it is to Merieux?," which is trying to develop a critical mass in the increasingly competitive biotechnology market, Mr. Dalfen added. 

A spokesman for Ciba-Geigy and Chiron in Toronto said the two companies would review their options after Merieux's offering circular is mailed to shareholders later this week. 

"We've made a very good offer, considering the synergies we have that other (companies) don't have," said Jacques-Francois Martin, director general of Institut Merieux. 

Mr. Martin said the acquisition of Connaught would help resolve the problem of competing with companies that are able to spend $100 million to $200 million a year on product development. 

"There is no future for Connaught on its own . . . (Alone) we will disappear from the scientific world in a few years," he said, referring to each company. 

The Merieux offer is conditional on the French concern holding 50% of Connaught's shares, plus one, at the time the bid expires. 

Mr. Martin said the acquisition of Connaught would be financed by a letter of credit guaranteed by Merieux's majority shareholder, state-owned Rhone-Poulenc SA, which will be repaid with the proceeds of a planned equity issue. 

The Connaught offer is the second major transaction in as many weeks for Rhone-Poulenc, which owns 51% of Institut Merieux.
Last week it agreed to buy a speciality chemicals unit of GAF Corp. of the U.S. and the chemicals subsidiary of RTZ Corp. of Great Britain in separate transactions with a total value of about US$1.3 billion. 

