.START 

Federal drug agents here had identified a new cocaine gang by some of the usual signs: frequent contacts with New York suppliers, flashy imported cars, no obvious legal income.
But the agents didn't know the dealers' full names or where they lived, and gathering that information would cost valuable time. 

So the feds turned to local police assigned to work with them on a joint task force.
One D.C. cop had gone to high school with some of the suspects and immediately provided names and addresses. "With our own {computer identification} techniques, it would have taken much longer," says Andy Johnson of the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Now the task force is watching the gang members closely and planning imminent arrests. 

The federal-local team is one of the first operating units in William Bennett's war on drugs.
It's part of the "emergency plan" the White House drug czar announced in April to combat Washington's violent narcotics trade.
The nation's capital, he declared, would be a "test case" for future efforts in cities such as Houston and Miami. 

Nearly six months later, the test has yielded mixed results.
By combining the expertise of two dozen federal agencies and area police departments, the task force has notched more than 130 arrests since June.
Though it hasn't yet dented the city's drug problem, the 88-member group demonstrates that cops can set aside some turf battles and concentrate on catching pushers. 

But apart from the enforcement team, some critics say, the Bennett plan offers considerably less than it first appeared.
For example, Mr. Bennett promised federal money to train teachers that would have been granted anyway.
He also backed off building a new federal prison just for Washington. 

Local officials complain that his commitment to improve security in public housing turned out to be an empty gesture.
All that federal officials have done, says D.C. public housing administrator Roland Turpin, is "put us in touch with people we knew anyway." Mayors and minority leaders have criticized Mr. Bennett's efforts as inadequate.
The Rev. Jesse Jackson, who has moved here and hints about running for mayor, recently attacked the drug czar before Congress, saying, "We still have the emergency {in Washington} but no comprehensive action." 

Mr. Bennett declines to comment until he issues a formal report next month.
An aide says parts of the plan, such as building prisons, necessarily will take years. "There's a tendency for people to expect a silver bullet right away," the aide contends. 

Though focused only on nabbing criminals, the multi-agency enforcement team is considered a possible model for other cities.
Led by the DEA, the task force brings together such talents as federal marshals' knack for tracking fugitives and Washington cops' familiarity with local gang members' hangouts. 

Pursuing defendants who jump bail has never been a strength of either the DEA or city police. "Once we arrest the violator, we tend to want to move on to new investigations," says Douglas Ross, a DEA supervisor.
U.S. marshals, though, specialize in finding fugitives and escapees.
The problem, typically, is getting the paper work from arresting officers to the marshals.
The process often takes months; defendants, meanwhile, slip away. 

In response, the Washington task force established a special fugitive squad led by marshals.
Using sophisticated telephone surveillance, the squad tracked a drug hit man wanted here to a girlfriend's apartment in Miami and arrested him there.
In another case, the team used neighborhood informants to find and arrest two alleged leaders of what purportedly is Washington's biggest cocaine gang, just days before the group was put on trial this month. 

The key to the task force's success appears to be Mr. Bennett's decision to give one agency -- in this case, the DEA -- clear authority so that imaginative agents can solve bureaucratic problems.
The task force swiftly set up its headquarters in southwest Washington by routing $2.1 million in Justice Department money through the Arlington, Va., police department.
DEA supervisor William McMullan used the budgetary detour because the money-granting branch within Justice technically can't give funds to another federal agency. "Arlington was willing; we were in a hurry," he says. 

The DEA's eagerness to play a big role in the Bush administration's anti-drug program backfired in one case.
Agents from the Washington task force, including Mr. McMullan, concocted an undercover crack purchase in a park near the White House to provide a prop for a televised presidential speech.
The staged ploy, designed to show that drugs can be bought anywhere, embarrassed the administration because many Washington neighborhoods genuinely suffer from cocaine pushing.
After the Washington Post reported the incident last week, the suspect disappeared. 

More important for the long term, Mr. Bennett hasn't eliminated all federal rivalries with the enforcement group.
Although the drug czar said last month that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had joined the task force, in fact, the FBI "doesn't participate," because it doesn't want its agents reporting to the DEA, according to Mr. McMullan.
An FBI spokeswoman says that the bureau moved additional agents here, but she confirms that the FBI hasn't changed its policy of eschewing local cases. 

This isn't the only example of Mr. Bennett's advertising more than he has delivered.
The drug czar said in an August document entitled "Accomplishments to Date" that the Education Department had agreed to increase Washington's federal grants by 50% for such things as drug-education training for teachers.
About $1.4 million in new money did become available this summer, but the increase came from a previously planned 50% jump in such federal grants across the country. "There was no special increase for D.C. schools," says Dick Hays, an Education Department drug policy administrator. 

Similarly, Mr. Bennett promised that the federal government would build a 700-bed prison to ease Washington's inmate glut.
He quickly retracted that vow and instead says he will accelerate construction of a previously planned prison in western Maryland. 

The Maryland facility won't be completed for at least several years and even then won't necessarily take more convicts from the capital.
Federal courts send inmates to facilities all across the country, depending on security needs. "D.C. prisoners," says Greg Bogdan, a federal prisons spokesman, "may or may not" end up in the new Maryland prison.
Acknowledges a sheepish Bennett adviser: "Something got lost in the translation." 

The last three of the 10 Pentagon prosecutors the drug czar arranged to have loaned to Washington arrived last week.
But the U.S. attorney here, Jay Stephens, points out that the new 20-lawyer narcotics unit Mr. Bennett takes credit for in his "Accomplishments" report actually started before the drug czar took office. 

-- Drug Enforcement Administration launches a new federal-local enforcement team. 

-- U.S. marshals crack down on Washington-area drug fugitives. 

-- Pentagon lends prosecutors to U.S. attorney for one year. 

-- Federal authorities promise to take custody of 750 Washington inmates and to build a new jail. 

-- Health and Human Services Department plans three new treatment centers. 

