.START 

Commodity swaps, a little-known form of commodity trading for big-stakes players in oil and metals, are burgeoning following the Commodity Futures Trading Commission's decision not to regulate these off-exchange transactions. 

The swaps, which involve the exchange of money and not actual shipments of oil or metal, are designed to neutralize the uncertainties of volatile prices for businesses that produce or use commodities.
Swaps are now being written on a widening range of commodities including oil and oil products, as well as gold and base metals such as copper, zinc and aluminum. 

Banks typically act as go-betweens.
Chase Manhattan Bank, Bankers Trust and Banque Paribas are believed to be leaders in the commodity-swap business. 

The money exchanges in these swaps are actually a series of payments, called "payment streams," funneled through the bank or another middleman.
One of the streams is based on a fixed price for a commodity and the other on a floating price.
The effect of such an exchange is that producers can more accurately estimate future revenue and users can do the same with their raw-materials costs. 

Jack Cogen, vice president of risk management at Chase Manhattan Bank, says the total value of commodity swaps outstanding now is probably no more than $3 billion, but he predicts the market will grow tenfold over the next few years. 

It has started already, says David Yeres, former counsel to the chairman of the CFTC and a partner at Baer Marks & Upham in New York. "Commodity swaps have progressed faster and further in the two months since the CFTC policy statement than did interest-rate swaps in two years when they began," he says.
Until the CFTC ruling in July, commodity swaps had to be done offshore, often in London. 

Mr. Yeres thinks the commodity-swap market is taking off fast in part because of trading sophistication that has built up in the past five years in the much bigger swap markets for interest rates and currencies.
According to industry statistics, about $1 trillion in interest-rate swaps and $317 billion in currency swaps were outstanding at the end of 1988.
About 60,000 separate swaps were involved.
These swaps also involve exchanges of payment streams, which in effect transform a fixed-rate loan into a floating-rate one, for example, or yen income to dollar income. 

Futures markets also are used to hedge against adverse price moves by farmers, food processors and others.
But futures contracts, which the CFTC does regulate, rarely extend more than a year into the future, while some swap agreements range up to 12 years.
Moreover, specifications of the commodity futures often haven't closely matched those for which somebody wanted price protection; there isn't a futures contract for jet fuel, for instance, but swap agreements for it can be arranged. 

Swaps are generally big transactions, which limits this market to institutional traders rather than individual investors.
One of the disadvantages of swaps is that there isn't any centralized clearing organization such as those maintained by futures exchanges to guarantee both sides of every trade.
As a result, the credit of participants must be determined for each swap. 

How might a swap arise?
Suppose an oil producer decides it wants to receive $18 a barrel for its 1,000 barrels a day of crude oil production over the next three years.
It is willing to give up any higher price that might come along for the assurance it will never receive less than $18 a barrel. 

A bank that is offering to arrange the swap agrees to pay the oil producer that amount, on a monthly basis.
In exchange, the oil producer agrees to pay the bank an average oil price for 1,000 barrels, based on weekly data in Platt's Oilgram Price Report, an oil industry newsletter. 

Outcome: The oil producer receives $18 a barrel regardless of how low prices might drop, because the bank makes up the difference.
But the producer also never makes any more than the $18 the swap has locked in, no matter how high oil prices rise. 

The bank has now taken on the risk of falling prices previously shouldered by the producer.
The bank may escape that risk by seeking a user of oil that wishes to fix its cost over the next three years. 

"In most cases we are ready to take that transaction into our book and manage the risk while we look to lay off the risk with another customer," says Allen Levinson, managing director of derivative products at Bankers Trust.
In practice, the bank usually has to piece together several swaps to match its risks.
Mr. Levinson says the bank uses futures markets or other hedging vehicles in the meantime.
Suppose the bank locates a refiner that wishes to fix the price of its oil, perhaps because it has a customer who wants to buy its products at a fixed price.
In this swap, the bank agrees to pay the refiner the same average price of oil it received from the producer in the first swap.
In exchange, the refiner agrees to pay the bank a fixed price of, say, $18.20 a barrel. 

Outcome: The refiner has now fixed the cost of its crude oil at $18.20 a barrel.
If oil prices were to rise it would be compensated for its increased costs by the payments received from the bank. 

For its part, the bank has eliminated all risks except for the credit risk of the oil producer and refiner -- that is, the risk they may not pay their bills -- because it is now both receiving and paying out the average price for 1,000 barrels of oil. 

The bank has also locked in a gross profit of 20 cents a barrel to compensate it for bearing the credit risks.
Mr. Levinson of Bankers Trust says the swap arrangers don't charge fees when acting as a principal in a transaction: "Deals are priced similar to the way securities are priced in the secondary market," he says. "The cost of doing the deal is built into the offering price." And so, presumably, are profits. 

Besides banks, Phibro Energy Inc. a division of Salomon Inc., is also a major player in the energy swap market, according to David Hammer, a vice president. 

Mr. Hammer says Phibro has an advantage over most other swap dealmakers: It owns four refineries, giving the firm a continuous need to price crude oil and its products.
Mr. Hammer says that Phibro doesn't necessarily try to lay off a swap's risk to a customer with opposite needs. "A lot of what we do is just absorb the swap into our physicals trading position.
We can use it in the other side of our business." A typical Phibro swap is for between one and three million barrels and might be as short as three months or as long as six years. 

The structure of a swap is limited only by the ingenuity and commercial needs of the parties to them, says Mr. Yeres of Baer Marks.
Nor does he see them as a threat to the futures markets. "Standardization is what makes futures markets work.
Because of their customization, swaps are the flip side of that coin.
They are the perfect complement to the futures markets." 

