.START 

up to his elbows in blood -- that just seems irresistible to television.
From "General Hospital" to "Marcus Welby, M.D." to "St.
Elsewhere," doctors (like cops) have become the perennials of the small screen. 

This season, CBS brings us "Island Son" (Tuesdays, 10 p.m. ET), grafting the ever-successful doctor formula on the no less popular exotic-Hawaiian-locale formula ("Magnum, P.I.," etc.).
The result is the story of a sensitive, caring M.D. at Honolulu's Kamehameha Hospital. 

The real raison d'etre for "Island Son" is to be a star vehicle for Richard Chamberlain, to bring the veteran TV actor back to a one-hour dramatic series.
Mr. Chamberlain certainly knows his way around a hospital.
Although he reached mega-stardom as the king of the mini-series ("Shogun," "The Thorn Birds," "Wallenberg"), he first came to fame playing young Dr. Kildare, perhaps the most dashing thing ever in a white coat. 

As Daniel Kulani, M.D., in "Island Son," Mr. Chamberlain is looking somewhat the worse for wear, but with that handsome profile he's probably still going to raise some pulses as he makes his rounds.
So maybe he's a little past his prime to be considered a heartthrob -- just think of him as a cardiac infarction. 

There's no question he's a doctor.
Within the opening minute of the premiere episode, Mr. Chamberlain leaps out of his convertible at the scene of a car crash and announces, "I'm a doctor." By the second minute, he's giving mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
And in case anyone missed the point, by the third minute, he's administering CPR and doses of M.D.-speak: "No spontaneous pulse, no respiration . . . we have ventricular fibrillation]" 

But this is not just any doctor -- Dr. Kulani is idealistic, dedicated and warmhearted.
And soon enough, he's got a dilemma to torture himself with.
It turns out that the little girl he saved with the heavy breathing (Alice) is actually brain dead, and he must ask the mother for the child's heart so he can transplant it into a needy seven-year-old boy, Bobby Kochola.
But how can he ask the mother to pull the plug on her daughter, when the little girl is all she has? 

Confused, Dr. Kulani goes back to Nana and Tutu, his adoptive parents, for their advice -- some of that native folk wisdom: "The decision is difficult," he is told. "Listen to the voice inside, my son." 

As Daniel agonizes, Tutu gardens. "Your mother sometimes feels the spirit of her mother in the rush of the warm wind," Tutu says. "You mean the daughter will live through the boy?" exclaims Dr. Dan, catching on.
Tutu digs his spade into the earth. "Out of one plant, so many others will be born," he says. "It's a good feeling to make things grow." 

And just when you think "Island Son" is going to break the "Kung Fu" record for fortune-cookie philosophy, Dr. Dan leaps on a horse and rides off along the beach, stopping only to gaze up at a bird soaring free on the wind. 

Finally, he makes a decision, and returns to talk with the mother.
Staring deep into her eyes, he tells her the little girl won't make it.
But wait, he says, "When you see a bird flying in the sky, and then you no longer see the bird, the bird is still flying -- somewhere out there it's still flying -- it's not gone." Not surprisingly, the mother breaks into tears at this bit of stupefyingly bad dialogue. 

In the end, Alice's mother consents, the operation happens, and the closing shot shows her at little Bobby's bedside, giving him Alice's favorite stuffed dog. 

I guess the point of this exercise is to jerk some tears, but rarely have I seen anything so wooden.
The plot is predictable, the words are second-rate, and the acting is mediocre. 

To be fair, I guess I should mention that the episode also had several subplots, including a crusty old man with an adorable pooch, and a brash young doctor at odds with the establishment.
Leaving no cliche unturned, the series also proposes a beautiful love interest for Dr. Kulani. 

Only in one area does "Island Son" offer some surprises -- with its decision to portray the actual culture of Hawaii.
Unlike "Magnum, P.I.," or even "Hawaii Five-O," in which locale was more or less secondary, little Hawaiian tidbits are sprinkled throughout "Island Son," from the pidgin ("Howzit, bruddah?") to the food to the spirit of the place (where "haole," white, is the ultimate insult).
Although much of this, like the mystical mumbo-jumbo, doesn't work, and much feels as out of place as a hula in an operating theater, the local color is the one genuine element of "Island Son." The producers should do all they can to work with it and expand it, because -- make no mistake -- this show needs intensive care. 

There's a scene midway through the hour in which the little boy, Bobby, asks Dr. Dan, "If your name is Kulani, how come you aren't Hawaiian?" "It's a long story," says Dr. Kulani. "Want to hear it?" "No, thanks," says little Bobby.
Only seven years old, and already he's smarter than all the executives at CBS. 

