.START 

Much of the estimated $1.2 billion windfall from Coca-Cola Co. 's expected sale of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. is likely to be reinvested in the company's overseas soft-drink businesses, analysts say. 

The anticipated sale isn't likely, however, to put an end to the mixed reviews the soft drink giant has received since it made the leap into the movie business with the acquisition of Columbia Pictures Industries Inc. in 1982. 

Coca-Cola wouldn't say what it would do with the proceeds, or otherwise comment on the expected sale of its 49% stake, except to say that, as a Columbia shareholder, it will review any recommendation it receives from Columbia's board. 

But Coca-Cola has been restructuring many of its bottlers around the world, making them bigger and more efficient and, in some cases, buying bigger stakes in them.
Many analysts expect that activity to intensify with the Columbia windfall.
Analysts also expected the company, which will complete a two-year 40-million stock buy-back by year end, to repurchase more of its shares. 

Coca-Cola isn't likely to start looking for other major acquisitions, even though, as of June 30, it had only $2.6 billion in total debt and $1.42 billion in cash.
The company's chairman and chief executive officer, Roberto C. Goizueta, has said many times that the company intends to focus on its soft-drink business and isn't interested in taking any major, costly digressions.
Coca-Cola has "shied away from additional legs to the business and made it abundantly clear they have more than adequate uses for their funds in bottlers abroad," said David Goldman, analyst with Nomura Research Institute. 

The company's last major diversification foray was the acquisition of Columbia, which drew stinging criticism from analysts and investors who chided Coca-Cola for straying so far from its predictable soft-drink business and overpaying in a cash and stock transaction valued at $692 million. 

Some analysts still believe the venture was a mistake.
Under Coca-Cola, Columbia's management was fraught with turnover and its movie business, after several strong years, floundered.
The company never did accomplish its goal of making the entertainment business a predictably fast-growing third leg to its soft drink and food concerns. 

But several analysts and industry executives close to Coca-Cola say the company will emerge from its experience in entertainment smelling like roses. "Some people say they didn't make a successful go in the movie business," says an executive close to the company. "But if they didn't make a successful go, how did Columbia get to be worth so much?" 

Certainly, some of the runup in Columbia's stock has been on takeover rumors.
But he and others note that Coca-Cola made several clever acquisitions to build Columbia's entertainment business.
Then its creation of Columbia Pictures Entertainment in January 1988 was particularly advantageous to Coca-Cola.
Columbia Pictures Entertainment was formed through the merger of Coke's entertainment business sector, which included Columbia Pictures and Coke's 37%-owned Tri-Star Pictures unit.
Coke then reduced its 80% ownership of Columbia to 49% by issuing about 30 million Columbia shares to its holders. 

Those moves allowed Coke to retain some chunks of choice Columbia real estate, including its Fifth Avenue headquarters in Manhattan and $545 million in cash.
The timing of the deal was also astute, coming before some of Columbia's worst problems. 

The transaction has also proved valuable to Coca-Cola shareholders as well.
When Coca-Cola issued the Columbia stock to its shareholders, it was valued at $7.44 a share. "They will have multiplied the value of Columbia Pictures assets to three or four maybe more times their value," says Martin Romm, analyst with First Boston Corp. "I think they've done very well for their holders." 

In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Coca-Cola shares closed at $63, up 62.5 cents. 

