.START 

American Telephone & Telegraph Co. plans a news conference in London today to announce the acquisition of a U.K.-based data networking company, people close to AT&T say. 

Individuals close to the company said AT&T will announce the acquisition of Istel Ltd., an information technology and services company, for between $250 million and $300 million.
Robert Morris, a Goldman, Sachs & Co. analyst based in San Francisco, said Istel operates a data network similar to that run by Tymnet in the U.S. 

British Telecommunications PLC agreed last month to buy Tymnet from McDonnell Douglas Corp. for $355 million. 

Tymnet provides U.S. corporations with a computer-controlled network that shuttles electronic messages.
The messages vary widely and include electronic mail and credit card verification, among other things. 

Spokesmen for the telephone giant wouldn't confirm the expected announcement.
Asked how much money was involved, one AT&T spokesman said, "I've seen bigger deals." 

A spokeswoman for Broadview Associates, a small New Jersey investment bank that specializes in software and information technology acquisitions, said Broadview helped orchestrate the acquisition to be announced by AT&T today.
Neither she, nor officials of Broadview, would comment further. 

Besides data-communications services, analysts said Istel puts together computer systems for companies, much as General Motors Corp. 's Electronic Data Systems does in the U.S.
An Istel acquisition "would give AT&T more expertise in back-office networking and opens a door in Europe," said Jack Grubman of PaineWebber Inc. 

Analysts said they think Istel operates a packet network, which is currently the most efficient way to transmit certain types of data like electronic mail.
AT&T does sell some packet services in the U.S., but not to a great extent, analysts said. 

Such an acquisition would also be AT&T's first international expansion into so-called value-added networking.
Telecommunications executives believe a huge market will eventually exist for computerized information services that are delivered to businesses and homes over phone lines. 

British Telecom's Tymnet acquisition was viewed as a big push to compete with AT&T in the U.S. for information services.
AT&T only last month got court permission to expand in the market. 

Istel would also fit neatly into AT&T's vision of becoming a global leader in what it calls the information movement and management industry.
To do this, AT&T executives believe they must sell a rich variety of voice and data services, as well as equipment, that allow companies to build global networks to help them manage their business more efficiently.
Three years ago, AT&T tried to buy EDS from General Motors, but that deal fell through. 

