.START 

Government officials from Poland met with Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady and senior State Department officials to sketch out a severe program for restructuring Poland's crippled economy. 

Polish Finance Minister Leszek Balcerowicz used the occasion of the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank to provide Western leaders their first glimpse of the new Solidarity-led government's economic plan.
The program includes a tough anti-inflation policy, a sweeping program to convert state-owned industries to private ownership, and incentives to attract foreign investors. 

"It's a courageous plan," said Pierre Beregovoy, the French finance minister, who met with Mr. Balcerowicz Sunday. 

The IMF next month will send a "mission team" to Warsaw to begin work on a lending package designed to help Poland convert its centrally managed economy to a market-based system.
Officials close to the IMF program confirmed that the conditions the IMF would impose before extending credit track the plans laid out by the Polish officials this week.
Although the IMF has worked with many troubled economies, this would be the first time it has attempted to overhaul a centrally managed, Communist-designed one. 

Officials working on the IMF project say the most urgent task is clamping down on Poland's runaway inflation, which recently surged to a monthly rate of nearly 40% and which threatens to flare into hyper-inflation if left unchecked. 

Poland's economic reform has riveted world financial leaders gathered here because it represents the first comprehensive attempt to overhaul a command economy.
Moreover, the Polish reform program may be used as the model for retooling other communist economies. "The Poles are writing the textbook," said Robert Hormats, vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International. 

While describing their economic objectives, Polish officials didn't offer Western leaders many details on exactly how the goals would be achieved.
The specifics are likely to be worked out in consultation with the IMF.
It is expected, however, that the planned attack on inflation will include controls on wages throughout the Polish economy. 

British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson called for daring approaches to Poland's economic troubles and warned that "deliberate gradualism" would likely be counter-productive.
If there is any model to follow, he argued, it should be the rebuilding of the West German economy after World War II. 

In meetings with Mr. Balcerowicz, William Ryrie, executive vice president of the International Finance Corp., agreed to help Poland create a financial system.
IFC officials say they are negotiating with several large western banks interested in setting up joint-venture banks in Poland.
The IFC is an affiliate of the World Bank. 

Douglas Gustafson, the IFC's investment director, said it is hoped that once a reliable financial system is in place, new investment funds will flow into Poland.
The IFC also agreed to advise Poland on the planned campaign to turn industries over to private control and to consult with newly formed Polish corporations. 

Hanging over Poland's economic prospects is its $39 billion in foreign debt, of which $26 billion is owed a group of Western government lenders known as the Paris Club.
Although major debt-relief plans likely will await completion of the IMF reforms, there are already general assurances that some relief will come.
Britain's Mr. Lawson called for "a far-reaching rescheduling of Poland's official debts in the Paris Club," and hinted that if the IMF negotiations drag on, some debt relief could be offered in advance of a final package. 

