.START 

Unocal Corp. boosted its quarterly cash dividend by 40% and declared a 2-for-1 stock split, but analysts said the hefty increase in cash payout still leaves Unocal's yield below other major oil stocks. 

Unocal said the new quarterly dividend of 35 cents a share will be paid Nov. 10 on a pre-split basis to holders of record Oct. 10.
The company previously paid a 25 cent quarterly dividend. 

Stock certificates for the stock split will be distributed on or about Nov. 13 to holders of record Oct. 10, the company said. 

Analysts have speculated that Unocal, sometimes rumored as a takeover candidate, might boost its dividend.
Unocal stock slid in a sinking market for oil issues, falling 37.5 cents a share to close at $54.875 in consolidated trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday. 

Richard J. Stegemeier, Unocal's chairman, president and chief executive officer, said the dividend boost "reflects our strengthened financial position and our confidence in Unocal's future." He said the stock split follows a substantial increase in the price of Unocal stock over the last several years "and it is intended to expand the marketability of the stock to a broad range of investors." 

But financial analysts said the move, which at yesterday's closing price will boost the annual dividend yield to about 2.6% from 1.8%, still leaves Unocal's payout well below market averages and below most big oil companies.
Atlantic Richfield Co., for instance, has a dividend yield of 4.2%.
Chevron Corp. has a yield of 4.7% and Exxon Corp. a yield of 5.3%. 

"What you're beginning to see is an acknowledgment that, because of the debt issue, Unocal has been way behind the eightball," said Marc D. Cohen, an analyst at Kidder Peabody & Co. Mr. Cohen added that Unocal "likely will slowly build up the yield." Unocal cut its dividend to the 25 cent quarterly rate from 30 cents in 1986, when burgeoning debt taken on following a takeover battle led by oilman T. Boone Pickens Jr. pinched cash flow. 

Even before that, the company for many years had a notably low dividend yield.
Longtime chairman and chief executive officer Fred L. Hartley once cracked that shareholders wouldn't know what to do with the extra money if the dividend were increased. 

