.START 

According to the economist and historian Thomas Sowell, "Choosing a College" (Harper & Row, 224 pages, $7.95) is the second most important decision in life (ranking just behind choosing a spouse).
This might strike some as an overstatement, but it fairly well sums up the world view of many high school seniors.
It is an irony that as American universities seem to be getting worse by the semester, high school students seem to care more and more about which one they attend. 

There already are dozens of books peddling ways of getting Jack and Jill into the "best school," and one might wonder whether another is necessary.
But as might be expected, Mr. Sowell, whose previous writings have challenged the justice and effectiveness of affirmative action, brings a lively, conservative edge to his assessment of our universities. 

"The purpose of this book," writes Mr. Sowell, "is to start you on square one, before you even know what questions to ask, what colleges to read about, or what statistics to look up." Mr. Sowell mentions some schools by name, but only to sketch the pros and cons of the various types of schools -- large research universities, small liberal arts colleges, specialized institutions, black colleges. 

Students, Mr. Sowell argues sensibly, should choose not the "best school," but the school that best accommodates their individual abilities and interests: An aspiring poet's heaven can be an aspiring engineer's hell.
He is frank about what he thinks makes a school good or bad.
For instance: Requirements are good; exercises in consciousness-raising -- women's studies, black studies -- are a waste of time.
Mr. Sowell counsels students to consider how tolerant and genuinely open-minded a school is.
A good university, says Mr. Sowell, lets both a Sandinista and a Contra speak, and gives Galbraith and Friedman equal time. 

One man who liked school so much he decided to stay there, as a professor and administrator, is John Silber.
As the president of Boston University, Mr. Silber has grabbed headlines successfully battling student sit-ins and faculty mutinies, and reinstating visitation rules in dormitories.
More recently, he accepted an offer for B.U. to run the Chelsea public school system in Massachusetts. 

Mr. Silber, it is now whispered, is poised to embark on a new career -- in politics: "Straight Shooting" (Harper & Row, 336 pages, $22.50) presumably is his declaration of willingness to serve, if called.
When he catalogs the responsibilities of a university president -- from negotiating with unions to coping with drugs -- one hears the refrain of a future campaign speech: "I've done it for B.U.; I can do it for Massachusetts." 

Mr. Silber's targets in "Straight Shooting" are numerous, as one might surmise from the subtitle: "What's Wrong With America and How to Fix It." The afflictions include TV and drugs, hedonism and relativism -- and the prognosis is scary. "The degenerate society consumed in pleasure-seeking will not survive," warns Mr. Silber.
Roaming widely in this sorry land, he expresses his opinions on everything from abortion ("homicide"), arms control ("the illusion of peace"), the War on Poverty ("failure"), and Wall Street ("an automated casino").
Of lawyers, Mr. Silber writes: "If Big Brother comes to America, he will come not in jackboots but in the three-piece suit of a regulatory lawyer." 

But even those who might agree with Mr. Silber's worries may find his style off-putting.
Mr. Silber moves through his material with the soft touch of a linebacker, typically using caricature and moral outrage to make his points. 

Scattered through the book are Mr. Silber's remedies -- which are, predictably, as comprehensive as his diagnoses.
They range from legal "fee-shifting" (to discourage needless litigation), to educational day care for children three to 12 when school is not in session, to a tuition voucher system that places the burden of financing upon students rather than parents.
At the core of Mr. Silber's program for a nationwide renewal is education, which can return America to old-time moral values.
Mr. Silber emphasizes the need for better teachers but is vague as to exactly what is to be taught.
For an educator who often refers to himself as a philosopher, and wears his erudition on his sleeve, he seems oddly reluctant, for instance, to endorse the Great Books (rapidly disappearing from faddish college curricula).
While writing that education is "the best means by which to effect change in a democratic society," he shows scant appreciation of education as an end in itself. 

Mr. Silber is at his best when he focuses on and treats in detail what he knows best -- the mechanics of running a university.
He offers some sensible proposals for modifying the present tenure system, once a guarantee of academic freedom, now mostly a suffocating, back-slapping sinecure.
Perhaps the same energetic proselytizing that apparently has made Mr. Silber so effective as a university president would serve him well in politics.
But when it comes to writing, this book makes one want to wave the white flag and beg him to cease fire. 

Mr. Lerner, a graduate student, is a member of the Committee on Social Thought at the University of Chicago. 

