.START 

President Bush offered to cut U.S. stockpiles of chemical weapons 80% if the Soviets reduce their larger stocks to an equal level and if the two nations can agree on means to verify compliance with such an accord. 

Mr. Bush's initiative, delivered in his first address as president to the United Nations, was intended to give momentum to long-running efforts by 40 nations to sign a treaty to ban production of chemical weapons over a 10-year period.
The effort also was meant in part to answer Mr. Bush's critics, both domestic and foreign, who say he has been too timid in responding to changing international developments -- particularly to diplomatic initiatives by the Soviets. 

Although administration officials touted the initiative as a bold move, U.S. law already requires a substantial cut in chemical-weapons stocks by 1997.
As part of a compromise that allowed the Reagan administration to begin producing safer, so-called binary chemical weapons, Congress insisted that the U.S. destroy all of its older chemical-weapon stocks by that year.
Binary weapons consist of two separate chemical agents that are harmless until they mix after the shell is fired. 

Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, estimated that the weapons already earmarked for destruction roughly would amount to the 80% cuts Mr. Bush promised. "He is making a virtue out of necessity," said Sen. Nunn. 

But Secretary of State James Baker said in a news conference that the president's proposal could lead to a much quicker reduction in chemical-weapons stockpiles than the U.S. law requires.
He also noted that the plan would prevent a build-up in supplies of the newer weapons, which he said could grow under the law to levels "vastly greater" than current stockpiles of the older ones. 

National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft said Soviet leaders had been apprised of the U.S. proposal in advance.
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze later said the Soviets have a "positive view of the proposal." At a meeting last weekend in Wyoming, Messrs.
Shevardnadze and Baker signed an agreement under which the two nations will exchange information about their stockpiles of chemical weapons and facilities for producing them. 

The president's proposed cut in U.S. and Soviet chemical-weapon stocks would come even before a multilateral treaty to end production of chemical weapons is signed.
Mr. Bush also offered to eliminate all but 2% of such weapons within eight years of the signing of such a treaty.
And he said the U.S. would eliminate the remaining stocks in the next two years, but only if all nations capable of producing them -- including such intransigent countries as Libya -- agree to a ban. 

The White House said 20 nations currently are capable of producing the weapons.
The initiative doesn't include biological weapons, Gen. Scowcroft said. 

Although the U.S. refuses to disclose the exact level of its chemical-weapon stocks, many experts believe the U.S. inventory totals 30,000 tons.
The Soviets claim to have 50,000 tons of chemical weapons, but U.S. experts believe the number could be as high as 300,000 tons. 

U.S. officials admitted that the difficulty of precisely verifying current quantities of chemical weapons, or even which nations possess them, has been a major obstacle in reaching the multilateral agreement.
Gen. Scowcroft called the search for acceptable verification procedures a "daunting challenge." 

The chemical weapons proposal was the only new initiative in Mr. Bush's U.N. speech, which challenged the organization to confront the "global challenges of the 21st century" -- including economic growth and environmental problems, drug trafficking and terrorism.
He specifically called on the U.N. General Assembly to condemn the killing of U.S. Lt. Col. William Higgins, who was kidnapped and killed by a Shiite terrorist group while serving on a peace-keeping force in Lebanon. 

Mr. Bush also lauded what he called the ascendancy of freedom and market economies around the world, a theme he also sounded during his trip last summer to Poland and Hungary. 

Nevertheless, reflecting warming relations with the Soviet Union, the president made only positive references to Moscow.
Referring to last weekend's meeting between Messrs.
Baker and Shevardnadze, Mr. Bush said, "I am very pleased by the progress we made." 

Gen. Scowcroft said the new chemical-weapon initiative was meant in part to take advantage of Moscow's cooperative attitude on arms-control issues.
He noted, for example, that the Soviets have already offered to make far larger cuts than the U.S. in conventional weapons. 

Although Mr. Bush was a former U.S. representative to the U.N. in the 1970s, his reception by the General Assembly was tepid.
The 40-minute speech was interrupted only twice by applause.
But he and Mrs. Bush, as well as Secretary Baker, were greeted warmly by the delegates before the speech. 

Robert S. Greenberger contributed to this article. 

