.START 

Campbell Soup Co. is betting that the marketplace of the future is outside the U.S. 

For the past several years, the company that made its initial fortune putting condensed soup on U.S. grocery shelves has pushed hard to establish market niches overseas.
Campbell has bought about a dozen small and medium-sized food companies that make fancy cookies, frozen foods and "shelf-stable" products, such as pasta and other packaged and canned goods.
Many of the acquisitions have been in Europe, where the planned removal of trade restraints in 1992 offers a shot at 320 million consumers. 

Now Campbell wants to build up its overseas businesses even more aggressively, boosting their contribution to 40% of sales by the early 1990s from 27% currently.
R. Gordon McGovern, Campbell's president and chief executive, says he considers his company's ability to do business around the world "a matter of survival." 

But so far, Campbell hasn't convinced everyone that it knows what it's doing overseas.
Campbell's foreign presence is still small compared with that of other U.S. food companies, such as CPC International Inc. and H.J. Heinz Co.
And global competitors Nestle S.A. of Switzerland and the British-Dutch Unilever Group dwarf Campbell in both size and market share.
In such a tough environment, there is little room for costly errors, but Campbell has made plenty. 

International operations accounted for 45% of the $343 million pretax charge Campbell took last month against fiscal 1989 earnings when it announced a world-wide restructuring plan.
As part of the plan, five unidentified plants outside the U.S. will be closed and about 830 overseas employees will lose their jobs.
The pretax charge included a $116 million write-down of good will in Italy and Argentina. (For the year ended July 30, Campbell had net income of $13.1 million, or 10 cents a share, on sales of $5.67 billion, compared with year-earlier net of $274.1 million, or $2.12 a share, on sales of $4.87 billion.) 

Campbell's global push began in the early 1980s, when Mr. McGovern persuaded Campbell directors that the company had to act fast to counter moves by rival U.S. food companies, such as Heinz and CPC, which had been aggressively courting foreign consumers for decades. "We were extremely vulnerable," Mr. McGovern recalls. 

The company initially decided to expand quickly through acquisitions, rather than spend years building support for Campbell-brand products.
It also moved rapidly to acquire or establish affiliations with other companies to improve distribution. 

But some food-industry analysts fear that Campbell's recent problems may be a sign that the company tried to expand too fast, especially in Europe. "They haven't got a handle on their European businesses," says John M. McMillin, analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. 

Moreover, Wall Street speculates that the restructuring at Campbell is being prompted by members of the Dorrance family, who hold the 58% of Campbell stock that had been controlled by the family patriarch, Jack Dorrance, who died this spring.
The younger Dorrances are pushing for a greater say in company policy and are viewed as taking a harder line on the company's profitability than did the late Mr. Dorrance. 

Campbell's two most troubled overseas subsidiaries are D. Lazzaroni & Co., an Italian cookie maker, and Freshbake Foods PLC, a British frozen-foods producer recently consolidated into a new subsidiary called Campbell Foods PLC. 

Jack Argabright, president of the Campbell International division, says Lazzaroni has been hurt by overproduction and distribution problems, primarily in a seasonal cake business acquired last year that ran into trouble when it overestimated Italy's market for Christmas cakes.
The company had to slash prices to unload the excess supply. "You could buy cake cheaper than bread," Mr. Argabright recalls. 

Campbell says it has replaced Lazzaroni's top management and is looking at ways to improve distribution, possibly through a partnership with an Italian food company that has supply lines throughout the peninsula. 

Freshbake's difficulties may be tougher to solve.
Campbell says a new management team will soon take care of the short-term problem: consolidation of Freshbake's many small divisions with Campbell's other British operations. 

But Campbell won't have an easy time snatching market share in the British frozen-foods category from Unilever, the leader with a 22% share, and United Biscuits PLC, with 19%.
A distant third, Freshbake has about 12% of the market, most of it in the low-margin, "private label" segment, where it makes products for supermarket chains to sell under their own names. 

While Campbell says it intends to switch more of the division's output from private-label to more profitable brand-name products -- most likely under the Campbell name -- the high cost of competing in the U.K. food market worries some analysts.
A common complaint by investors is that the price Campbell paid for Freshbake -- $201 million, or 24 times earnings -- was too much for a company with little brand recognition. 

Campbell's international drive has had some successes.
In West Germany, for example, where Campbell has concentrated on the gourmet-food and import markets, business is booming.
Sales for the premium-food businesses rose 15% in fiscal 1989 as operating profit climbed more than 35%.
Cookies did even better, more than doubling profits on a 25% rise in sales.
Italian dishes are particularly popular among German shoppers, and Campbell has taken advantage of the demand by purchasing West Germany's leading supplier of imported pasta, Theodor Kattus G.m.b.
H. 

Campbell is also pleased with the performance of its French specialty candy company, Lamy-Lutti S.A., which has increased its share of the growing specialty sector to 45% from 30% in the past four years and increased operating profit more than 20% in the last year. 

Campbell believes its global operations are essential to developing markets for U.S. products abroad and vice versa.
It cites as an example its Pepperidge Farm subsidiary, which made a big hit in the U.S. with its international cookie collection.
The cookie designs came from N.V. Biscuits Delacre, a Belgian cookie company that Campbell later acquired. 

Now Campbell hopes to apply the formula in the opposite direction, with the export of Pepperidge's "American Collection" cookies to foreign consumers. 

Success is by no means guaranteed.
Competition in the European cookie market is very tight, and "there's going to be a shakeout one way or the other," Mr. McGovern recently told securities analysts in a private meeting. 

But Campbell executives are confident the company can prosper.
Campbell may have a modest world presence today, Mr. Argabright says, but "you start with niches and grow to notches and then grow to segments." 

