.START 

The stock price of United Airlines' parent UAL Corp. tumbled $7.125 a share to $274 amid concerns that the Transportation Department may force a change in the pending $6.79 billion labor-management buy-out of the airline. 

The drop, following a $5.125 decline Friday, reflected stock traders' fears that a $750 million investment in the UAL takeover by British Airways PLC may have to be reduced in a way that could delay the purchase or lower the $300-a-share price of the buy-out. 

The fears increased following a report in The Wall Street Journal that Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner has asked Northwest Airlines owner Alfred Checchi, a Los Angeles investor, to have KLM Royal Dutch Airways' $400 million investment in Northwest reduced. 

Although Mr. Skinner and his staff have voiced concerns about foreign ownership and the amount of debt involved in airline takeovers, the Northwest case is the first step the secretary has taken to back up his statements with action. 

"I think the United deal will still get done," said Helane Becker, an airline analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. "But it may get done at a different price." 

Foreign companies can't legally own more than 25% of U.S. airlines nor can they exercise control.
The stake by KLM and another foreign investor, Elders IXL Ltd. of Australia, totals only 20% of Northwest's voting stock.
But the foreign companies' $480 million investment accounted for 69% of the $700 million in equity capital raised by Mr. Checchi for the $3.65 billion leveraged buy-out of Northwest. 

Mr. Checchi isn't likely to contest a demand for a reduction in the KLM investment, according to people familiar with the situation, as long as he has enough time to replace the funds with those from other investors.
His purchase was completed in July. 

Transportation Department officials said Mr. Skinner will announce the outcome of a review of the Northwest buy-out soon, perhaps as early as tomorrow or Thursday.
Department officials and Northwest representatives have apparently been negotiating the specifics of a KLM investment reduction during the past few days. 

The situation is somewhat more precarious at United Airlines.
That takeover hasn't closed yet, and the purchaser is a fragile coalition of two longtime enemies, UAL management and the pilots' union, as well as British Airways.
Any delay could prove its undoing. 

In a letter to the UAL board Sept. 14 urging prompt approval of the buy-out, UAL chairman Stephen Wolf warned that its "chances of success easily could be hurt if momentum is lost." He called the labor harmony needed for the bid "inherently fragile." 

Yesterday, the Transportation Department made a formal request of UAL for information about the takeover, focusing on the financial structure and the degree of foreign ownership.
It set a deadline of Oct. 10 for a reply.
The pilot-management bid is scheduled to close in late October. 

Although British Airways is receiving only a 15% voting interest in United, the $750 million amount of its investment is 78% of $965 million in cash equity raised for the purchase.
The buyers plan to obtain bank loans for the remainder of the price. 

The buyers, led by Mr. Wolf and the UAL pilots' union, could argue that $200 million in annual cost concessions being made by the pilots represents equity worth $1 billion.
If that were counted along with a $200 million equity stake from the pilots' pension fund, the British Airways stake would represent a smaller percentage. 

If the department seeks a reduction in British Air's stake in UAL, the investment can be readily reduced.
British Air already plans to resell $300 million in preferred stock with an 18% dividend.
And it can convert that stock, as well as a $200 million preferred paying a 13% dividend, into debt. 

However, converting either of those two securities into debt would only further raise the debt leverage of the buy-out, possibly heightening Mr. Skinner's other concern about riskier airline capital structures. 

UAL declined to comment on the Transportation Department request for information, as did British Airways and the pilots' union.
British Air has an analysts' meeting scheduled for today to promote a stock offering that will help finance its investment. 

In an interview earlier this week, Mr. Wolf said he expected the Transportation Department to allow the transaction, partly because he believed the 85% employee ownership stake would count in UAL's favor.
He also defended British Air's 15% investment, noting that the London airline will receive only one UAL board seat. "I can't imagine how anyone can think one board seat can offset 14 others," he said. 

It was unclear how much Mr. Skinner's concern reflects a disapproval of airline buy-outs and how much is tied to negotiations with European governments over the allocation of routes. 

Jeffrey N. Shane, deputy transportation secretary for policy and international affairs, said in an interview last month that the department is reluctant to allow substantial foreign ownership stakes in U.S. airlines while the U.S. is still in talks over how the unification of European markets will affect the airline industry. 

European carriers are widely expected to seek the right to fly between U.S. cities.
Some U.S. officials fear the Europeans might use their ownership stakes in U.S. carriers to press that issue.
At the same time, U.S. carriers are seeking to expand their rights to European routes. 

In Washington, interest is building on Capitol Hill in leveraged buy-outs of airlines and foreign ownership.
The House Aviation subcommittee has scheduled hearings on the topics next Tuesday and Wednesday, and the Senate Aviation subcommittee will hold a hearing on foreign ownership on Tuesday. 

The Transportation Department may conduct reviews on whether an airline is fit to operate safely, and may revoke its operating certificate.
Senate leaders have introduced legislation giving the department authority over airline buy-outs as well, and may extend that effort to deal with the foreign-ownership issue. 

Even if UAL wins Transportation Department clearance, the buy-out faces thorny internal problems.
An official close to the International Association of Machinists, United's largest union, said the union has decided against participating.
The official said the union probably won't announce its decision until tomorrow or Thursday. 

He added that the machinists plan to lobby transportation officials, members of Congress and UAL's lenders in an effort to scuttle the buy-out.
The official said the union is more interested in negotiating "substantial new wage increases" than in owning a stake in United. 

