.START 

In the immediate aftermath of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's edict against Salman Rushdie, it was widely assumed that Islam, Iran and "The Satanic Verses" would be rendered off bounds as subjects for critical discussion.
Susan Sontag, for example, predicted "a globalization of fear and vulnerability." 

More than half a year after the edict, how do things look?
It is now clear that while Ms. Sontag and others may have overstated the problem, they did not do so by very much.
Not only do Salman Rushdie's life and career remain upended by the edict, but free speech remains imperiled in a host of ways, large and small, in distant places and at home. 

Writers and artists in Moslem countries have felt the chilling effect most severely.
In Egypt, for example, the prominent feminist Nawal as-Sa'dawi has abandoned a novel-in-progress titled "The Book of Satan," which imagines Satan's views on issues in the Bible and the Koran.
Not unreasonably, Ms. Sa'dawi decided that 1989 was not an auspicious year for such a book.
To make matters worse, even after her backtracking, she received so many death threats the police had to provide her with round-the-clock protection. 

The new atmosphere is even more obvious in Pakistan.
Fearful of more riots, deaths and anti-government sentiment, Interior Minister Atzez Ahsan in February summarily banned two books on the Prophet Mohammed.
Then Nazia Hassan, the exceedingly demure female star of a television show, "Music 89," became the center of a major controversy.
Although Ms. Hassan, a rock singer, always covered her hair and showed only her face and hands, fundamentalist Moslems so harassed her and the television authorities that the program was gutted in April.
As a weary Ms. Hassan explained, "Everything in Pakistan, even the way you sing a song, is highly politicized now." 

This change in climate has caused more than a few moderate Moslem writers and artists to resent Mr. Rushdie for bringing fundamentalist scrutiny to their activities.
As Dahmane Abderahmane, a young French Moslem, explained: "We condemn Rushdie because he was the man who permitted Khomeini to regain his breath." 

And what about the West?
To begin with, "The Satanic Verses" incident itself remains delicate for publishers.
William Collins Sons (a London-based division of Rupert Murdoch's publishing empire) commissioned Lisa Appignanesi and Sara Maitland to assemble a collection of documents on the Rushdie affair.
Then, just three weeks later, in May, Collins got cold feet and decided not to go ahead with the book.
Coming up with one explanation after another (Collins did not want to exacerbate problems for Viking, publisher of "The Satanic Verses"; the book was commercially not viable; the book was not objective), the company did whatever it had to do to renege on its contract. 

Shortly after, I had a similar experience with Harper & Row (another division of the Murdoch empire).
On May 8, the publisher and I signed a contract for a book on the Rushdie affair; the manuscript was submitted on May 31 and accepted for publication.
But then, on June 23, I was informed that the book had been discovered to be commercially not viable. 

Self-censorship, though unmeasurable, is widespread.
In the days immediately following Khomeini's threat, bookers for American television shows such as "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" and "Nightline" complained that prominent authors refused to discuss "The Satanic Verses." Nor were the famous alone in their fear of reprisals.
When the bookstore at Wayne State University in Detroit refused to stock "The Satanic Verses," faculty members drew up a petition calling for a boycott of the store.
A good number of professors refused to sign, however, fearful of becoming targets for fundamentalist Moslems. 

In West Berlin in March, the Akademie der Kunste refused to allow a reading from "The Satanic Verses" on its premises for security reasons.
In Vienna in May, the Austrian Students Association had to hold its reading in a tent because professors refused to allow the event to take place on university grounds. 

More broadly, a number of works critical of Iran or Islam have been withdrawn or altered.
Veronique Sanson, a French singer, announced in February that threats against her life forced her to retract her song "Allah," a protest against intolerance and religious fanaticism.
By this time, anyway, many record stores had already pulled the song. 

In Britain this summer, a BBC production celebrating renowned blasphemers, including Mr. Rushdie, was almost canceled because of protests.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Runcie, led the protests, which also mobilized Moslems in Britain. ("The Blasphemers' Banquet" was shown on July 31.) 

These and many other incidents make it clear that a chilling effect exists and is not abating.
Though small matters in themselves, they raise the important fact that a distant tyrant can censor works internationally.
They also confirm, once again, the fragility of free speech -- even here. 

Mr. Pipes is director of the Foreign Policy Research Institute in Philadelphia.
His book "The Rushdie Affair" will be published by Birch Lane Press in early 1990. 

