.START 

The dollar plunged on a round of concerted dollar selling by central banks.
The central-bank intervention backed up a weekend warning by major industrial nations that continued dollar strength could hurt the world economy. 

The dollar tumbled to 1.8993 marks and 142.13 yen in late New York activity, down sharply from 1.9510 marks and 146 yen late Friday.
The pound climbed to $1.6170 from $1.5715 Friday. 

In Tokyo Tuesday, the dollar opened for trading at 142.25 yen, down from Monday's Tokyo close of 142.95 yen. 

The Group-of-Seven major industrial countries -- the U.S., Japan, West Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada -- issued a communique in Washington on Saturday stating that the dollar's rise in recent months is "inconsistent with longer run economic fundamentals." 

The central banks launched their attack on the U.S. currency early yesterday with dollar sales by the Bank of Japan, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Bank of Canada in Far Eastern trading.
Dealers said the Bundesbank, West Germany's central bank, intervened in the Tokyo and Singapore markets through West German commercial banks. 

The assault continued later in European trading, as the Fed and Bundesbank, plus the central banks of Britain, France and Switzerland, intervened.
That, in turn, was followed by the Fed selling dollars in the U.S. market. 

The central banks sent traders, international investors and corporations scrambling to unload dollars. 

"Everybody and his brother were trying to sell dollars," said Herwig Prielipp, chief dealer for DG Bank in Frankfurt.
The central-bank dollar sales, he added, "took the market by surprise." Many analysts argue that the relatively high level of the dollar -- it has risen 14% against its Japanese counterpart and more than 7% against the West German currency since the end of last year -- threatens to undermine the four-year effort of the U.S. and its major trading partners to reduce the U.S. trade deficit and correspondingly large Japanese and West German surpluses.
That's because a rising dollar makes U.S. exports more expensive and reduces the price of imports to American consumers. 

But a stronger dollar helps reduce U.S. inflationary pressures.
By keeping a lid on import prices, a strong dollar inhibits the ability of U.S. manufacturers to raise their domestic prices. 

The G-7 and other governments have intervened frequently during the past six months to try to stem the dollar's rise.
But yesterday's action was different in several key respects.
First, the dollar sales were taken at a time when the U.S. currency was softening, rather than rising.
That suggests the G-7 nations are seeking to drive down the dollar from its recent levels, rather than merely stopping it from going higher.
Second, the intervention had full support from the Bundesbank, which had been resisting coordinated intervention prior to the G-7 meeting, officials say. 

"This was a demonstration that the process of coordination and cooperation is alive and well," one G-7 official said. 

The dollar sales were planned by the seven major industrial countries at their meeting Saturday, government sources said.
While the volume of intervention wasn't great, it nevertheless served as an effective protest against the U.S. currency's rise in recent months. 

Also, traders said reports that the Fed intervened in the Tokyo market for the first time since the Plaza Accord shocked Japanese institutional investors and dealers there.
At the Plaza Hotel in New York in September 1985, the U.S., Japan, West Germany, France and Britain agreed to cooperate on pushing the dollar lower. 

"Our Tokyo people are surprised because the Fed intervened in Tokyo," said Yoichi Sakaguchi, chief trader at Sanwa Bank in New York. "That was a key surprise." 

As is its policy, the Fed declined to comment on its currency actions. 

With yesterday's sales, the dollar is near the top of the trading band that many traders and economists say the G-7 strived to keep it in since early 1987.
While never publicly disclosed, those ranges are believed to be 1.70-1.90 marks and 120-140 yen.
However, central banks have repeatedly stressed that those bands are flexible.
Indeed, the dollar has traded above the upper limits for much of this year. 

Along with the intervention, Bundesbank President Karl Otto Poehl said the dollar's fall corresponded with the G-7 communique.
He also added to speculation that the West German central bank might raise interest rates.
That would tend to lessen the dollar's allure to international investors. 

Surprisingly, dealers said that with the possible exception of the Fed, the dollar sales were relatively modest.
They estimated the Bank of Japan sold roughly $450 million in Tokyo and that combined central-bank sales during European trading came to $400 million to $500 million. 

During New York activity, bankers said the Fed intervened at the 1.9055-mark and 142.85-yen level, spending as much as $800 million. 

The dollar bashing left currency traders and analysts divided over whether the U.S. currency will resume its climb toward the critical 2.00-mark and 150-yen levels.
Some say it will -- they argue that the dollar is solidly supported by the buoyant American economy and relatively low U.S. inflation, while U.S. inflation-adjusted interest rates are high compared with those in Germany and Japan. 

Others, however, contend that the U.S. currency's startling resiliency this year has run its course and that central-bank intervention, coupled with prospects of a worsening U.S. trade picture, will spell a weaker dollar by year end. 

The U.S. currency at one point yesterday traded as low as 1.8960 marks and 142.13 yen.
The dollar has declined steadily since Sept. 15 when a combination of central-bank intervention and wild unsubstantiated rumors, such as the shooting of President Bush and the collapse of a major U.S. bank, sent it tumbling. 

For most of last week, the market remained nervous while it awaited the results of this weekend's G-7 meeting.
From its intraday highs on Sept. 15 to yesterday's lows, the dollar plunged 5.4% against the mark and 4.6% against the yen -- in just over six trading days. 

Still, it isn't clear how committed the major industrial countries are to sustained intervention efforts.
Officials wouldn't comment as to whether any new agreements about a trading range for the dollar were made at Saturday's meeting. 

U.S. Treasury efforts to get the Fed to help bring down the dollar by lowering interest rates clearly haven't born fruit.
Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan has made it clear to his G-7 colleagues that his policies will be geared to containing inflation in the U.S., not to pegging the dollar at any particular level. 

"The verbal intervention and actual intervention G-7 is taking to push the dollar lower is working so far," said Mr. Prielipp of DG Bank. "A month ago, everybody was telling me 2.20 {marks} was just around the corner." 

The big question is whether the major central banks can hold the dollar without having to resort to adjusting interest-rate policies.
For the moment, Mr. Prielipp says they can if they want the dollar to trade in a range of 1.80-1.90 marks. 

Similarly, Werner Gerbig, chief dealer at Commerzbank in Frankfurt, predicted the dollar would fall further during the next two weeks to 1.85-1.87 marks and end the year near 1.95 marks. 

Nearly everyone expects the central banks to continue selling dollars as long as they feel it necessary.
But many say those tactics, plus jawboning by officials, can only go so far.
If West Germany and Japan don't raise domestic interest rates and the U.S. lowers rates "this week, the dollar will resume going up slowly to the highs of two marks we had a few days ago," said Roberto Bianchi, a vice president at Union Bank of Switzerland in Zurich. 

Richard Witten, vice president in charge of foreign-exchange operations at Goldman, Sachs & Co., New York, doubted whether even interest-rate changes would do the trick. "The battle to get the dollar lower seems to be limited to conventional weapons: intervention and jawboning; we sense a reluctance to use monetary policy to affect exchange rates," he said. 

He and others also said that eventual interest-rate boosts abroad and lower U.S. rates had been discounted in the market. 

Mr. Witten argued that higher West German and Japanese rates would only slow their respective economies, "which will hurt trade." He added: "Therefore, what you giveth to the U.S. trade structure by adjusting monetary policy, you take away by slowing down the European and Japanese economies." 

On New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery rose $3.60, to $369.80 an ounce, in moderate trading.
Estimated volume was 3.4 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Tuesday, gold was quoted at $367.45 an ounce. 

(See related story: "Monday's Markets: "Industrials Drop 22.42 in Slow Day" -- WSJ Sept. 26, 1989) 

