.START 

Swedes Start Dabbling 

In the U.S. Market 

THE LATEST WORD in foreign investment is "fastigheter." That's Swedish for real estate. 

Few properties change hands in Sweden's small real estate market, but last year's relaxation of that country's currency laws freed private Swedish investors to buy real estate abroad. 

"We started by investing in Belgium, Holland, and later, Germany and Spain," says Swedish businessman, Torbjoern Ek. "But now we are looking for American office properties." 

In May, Swedish investor Lars-Erik Magnusson signed an agreement valued at $630 million to acquire a Chicago office building and lease two New York properties with options to buy them.
Other Swedes are following his lead, and some are pooling capital in investment funds. 

"The Swedes are proceeding cautiously and are remaining open-minded about the U.S. market," says Steven Posner, a partner in the Real Estate Services Group of Arthur Andersen & Co., a national accounting firm.
Stockholm's SwedBank is among Andersen's clients. 

Mr. Posner says Swedish investors have been considering a broad spectrum of real estate buys, from new projects to existing office, retail and hotel properties in various locations. 

The Swedes' strategy is different from that of Japanese investors who made their mark in the U.S. by buying high-profile office buildings in major cities. 

Mr. Ek, for example, is part of a group of Swedes who have purchased shares in Tishman Holding Corp., a New York-based fund formed to acquire and turn around underperforming properties.
He says his group is ready to add to its initial $2 million investment.
The fund offers a way to ease into the U.S. market before investing directly, he says. 

U.S. Developers Neglect Long-Term Planning 

REAL ESTATE companies may admire Japanese businesses' long-term planning, but American developers do little to emulate their approach, a new survey of the real estate industry suggests. 

The national accounting firm of Laventhol & Horwath, which conducted the study, also found U.S. developers more concerned about how local government regulations and community sentiment limit their profitability than about the impact of federal rules, such as tax-law changes. 

Most of the 750 development companies surveyed lacked "the traditional characteristics of a well-organized business," Laventhol's report says.
They typically don't have formal job descriptions, performance reviews or set compensation policies. 

More than 90% of the firms said an inability to identify goals hampered planning.
Overall, developers are pessimistic about the real estate industry, the survey showed.
Close to 86% believe it is tougher to do business today than two years ago, and more than 53% said it will be even harder two years from now. 

"If this lack of long-term planning goes unchanged, these companies' feeling of pessimism may prove to be well-founded," says James D. Noteware, Laventhol's national director of real estate. 

While 81% of the firms update their goals annually, only 59% said they had three-to-five-year plans.
Without such stated objectives, said Mr. Noteware, the developers will have trouble meeting the industry's greatest challenges -- overbuilt markets and increased environmental rules and other restrictions. 

Customized Condos 

Marketed to the Elderly 

THERE'S a condominium glut in the Northeast that has developers scrambling to differentiate their projects.
Instead of focusing solely on traditional markets -- first-time buyers and new empty nesters -- builders are pitching to the elderly. 

Vinnin Associates, a Salem, Mass., developer, has advertised its condos in Florida newspapers, a twist on the common practice of selling Sun Belt units to northerners.
The company is building homes that can be customized by affluent "snowbirds" and "older empty nesters." 

Adrienne Albert, president of Marketing Directors Inc., a New York real estate marketing firm, says developers are inquiring about how to sell to the elderly.
She tells them to add amenities that emphasize safety and convenience, such as alarms, tub and shower handles, and easy-to-turn door levers instead of knobs.
Older buyers may also prefer single-level units with low-maintenance grounds; there should be room enough to garden but little grass to mow. 

"It {the condo market} really is a niche market and forgetting that is what has gotten some developers into trouble," says Brian H. Bragg, editor of U.S. Housing Markets research reports.
Too many cookie-cutter condos were built with no attention to consumer needs and demographics, he says. "Now we're seeing more homes targeted to a specific buyer right from the start." 

Odds and Ends 

LOWER ECONOMIC growth rates will reduce office space demand by an average of about 12% to 17% annually in the next decade, according to a study by the investment research department of Jones Lang Wootton U.S.A., real estate advisers. . . . Moving from Chicago to New York?
Expect a 91% cost of living increase, compared with a 14% jump 11 years ago.
Corporate transfers from Dallas to San Francisco mean a 114% expense rise, up from 18% in 1978, according to PHH Home Equity, a Wilton, Conn., firm that tracks home prices, mortgage rates, taxes, insurance, utilities and food costs in 2,200 communities nationwide.
The biggest cost difference between locations: housing. 

