.START 

Prices of pork belly contracts for future delivery dropped because the White House's food aid package to Poland doesn't include as much pork as rumored. 

After several weeks of speculation, the Agriculture Department announced after the close of trading Friday that it plans to donate 15 million to 22 million pounds of refrigerated U.S. pork bellies to Poland this winter. 

Since August, the prices of some pork belly futures contracts have risen by roughly one-fifth on rumors that the nation's hog farmers were lobbying the Bush administration to ship as many as 30 million pounds of pork bellies this fall to Poland. 

"That's not as many or as soon as many traders had expected," said Jerry Abbenhaus, a livestock analyst at A.G. Edwards & Sons, St. Louis. 

In trading at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange yesterday, the price of the pork belly contract for February delivery fell one cent a pound to settle at 48.20 cents a pound. 

The Des Moines, Iowa-based National Pork Producers Council pushed the idea of a shipment to Poland because U.S. stockpiles of pork bellies this summer had risen to the highest level in 18 years and had pushed down the price of fresh pork bellies to the lowest point since 1971. 

Pork bellies, which are used to make bacon, aren't a big export item because refrigeration makes them expensive to ship.
Indeed, the U.S. rarely includes pork in food aid.
However, pork was one of several farm products requested of the U.S. by the Polish government to ease food shortages there.
The Bush administration is donating food to Poland in order to help prop up the newly elected government there. 

Analysts are divided over whether the donation will drive up the consumer price of bacon in the U.S.
The U.S. stockpile of pork bellies has been falling rapidly in recent weeks.
On Friday, the Agriculture Department said about 50 million pounds of pork bellies were in cold storage on Sept. 1, down 48% from 96.4 million pounds on Aug. 1.
According to some industry officials, the price of bacon might increase as much as ten cents a pound if the U.S. government moved the pork bellies to Poland over a period of a few weeks.
However, most analysts expect the Agriculture Department to space the shipments over several months. 

The retail price of bacon in the U.S. ranges from $1.29 a pound to $2.79 a pound, an industry executive said yesterday. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

COTTON: Prices recovered from recent weakness and rose on concern over possible damage from cold weather in growing areas.
The December contract ended 0.90 cent a pound higher at 73.45 cents.
At one point, the December contract rose its daily permissible limit of two cents a pound to 74.55 cents and more deferred positions were strong to near-limit higher at their best levels, before selling developed and trimmed advances.
The October contract, which will cease trading Oct. 9, and has no limit, at one time posted a gain of 2.12 cents at 74 cents, before easing.
Yesterday was the first day in which notices for delivery of cotton against the October contract were issued.
There were 357 notices, regarded as a large amount, according to Ernest Simon, cotton specialist for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York.
Record low temperatures in the cotton growing areas, such as the Texas High Plains and the Mississippi Delta, prompted buying of futures contracts, Mr. Simon said.
The low temperatures could retard growth, eventually creating smaller yields and poor grade of cotton, he said.
Peter Leavitt, meteorologist for Weather Services Corp., of Bedford, Mass., said there were readings in the upper 30s in the Texas High Plains.
In the Delta, temperatures dropped into the low 40s, with some readings in the upper 30s in northern sections of the area, he said.
James Roemer, meteorologist for Weather Trades, Inc., of Des Moines, Iowa, said there was some light frost east and north of Lubbock, Texas. 

COPPER: Futures prices eased on a higher-than-expected increase in copper supplies.
The December contract ended 2.60 cents a pound lower at $1.2280.
London Metal Exchange warehouse inventories of copper last week rose 13,500 tons to 110,700 tons, the largest quantity in four weeks.
Expectations had been for a rise of about 10,000 tons, an analyst said.
As a result, he said, the price of the December contract fell below the $1.24 level, triggering further selling orders that had been placed there, carrying the price to as low as $1.22.
At that point the price leveled off and recovered slightly, he said.
Negotiations in the Highland Valley mine strike in Canada may resume soon, possibly after the Canadian Thanksgiving Day, Oct. 9, according to Ron Killow, the negotiator for the company, an analyst said.
This raised hopes slightly that there may be a move toward settlement, the analyst said.
Apparently the key remaining issue is the contracting out of some work by the company, an issue that apparently has created concern that some Highland Valley workers may lose their jobs, according to the analyst.
He said that Richard Boyce, head of the American Steel Workers union, was quoted in a news report as saying, "What good is a wage settlement if you don't have a job?" Highland Valley employs about 1,300 workers, the analyst said. 

PRECIOUS METALS: Prices were mixed, with gold and platinum rising and silver falling.
December delivery gold settled with a gain of $3.90 an ounce at $374.60.
October platinum was up $8.10 an ounce at $488.10.
December silver was down 0.5 cent an ounce at $5.3750.
Gold and platinum ended only slightly off their best levels for the day, while silver was down 5.5 cents from its high of the day.
The dollar continued to be the dominating factor in precious metals, analysts said.
In particular, there was concern as to what the group of seven major industrial countries would do to bring the dollar down after indicating they were unhappy with its persistent strength.
Nina Lipton, economic research director for the Platinum Guild, an industry body, said, "It's one thing to have massive intervention in currency markets, as we've had in the past few months, but it's really another situation when you have public acknowledgment and agreement among major industrial nations that the dollar is too strong." There is growing interest among precious metals traders as to what the nations will do to depress the dollar, she said, and it appears they want to reduce it substantially, "which would be favorable not only for precious metals, but for the U.S. economy as a whole." Another analyst said the divergence between silver and gold and platinum prices was a matter of "catching up." Last week, he said, "silver attracted demand from computer-guided commodity funds and was the market leader; yesterday, gold and silver were in demand and closed the gap.
There was some profit taking after they all reached their technical resistance levels." 

