.START 

Newsweek Inc. named a new president, Alan Spoon, who is part of a new generation of executives at the newsweekly's parent, Washington Post Co. 

Mr. Spoon, 38 years old, will oversee Newsweek magazine, whose circulation recently reached a record high, but which is engaged in an ever-more costly battle for advertising dollars with its rival, Time Warner Inc. 's Time magazine. 

The post at Newsweek has been vacant since January, when Christopher M. Little abruptly resigned to become president of the much-smaller Cowles Magazine Inc., a publisher of special interest magazines. 

Since last spring, Mr. Spoon has served at Newsweek in an unofficial troika, which included Howard W. Smith, Newsweek's publisher, and Gerard Smith, Newsweek's vice chairman. 

Mr. Spoon was a partner at Boston Consulting Co. when he joined Washington Post in 1982.
Currently a vice president at the parent company, he has been head of its new business development and of marketing and finance for the Washington Post newspaper. 

Richard D. Simmons, president of Washington Post, said Mr. Spoon was chosen "because he's the best conceivable person to continue Newsweek's growth." Mr. Simmons said Newsweek's earnings this year will be the highest ever. 

Newsweek has not been a major contributor to the earnings of Washington Post, whose other properties include television stations, cable operations and Stanley Kaplan Educational Centers.
Newsweek recorded about $20 million in operating profit last year, or only about 8% of the parent's net income, compared with $140 million in operating profit recorded by the Washington Post newspaper. 

While Newsweek circulation has been holding steady at about 3.2 million, the newsweekly's advertising performance in the last two years has been hurt by flat spending patterns by national advertisers in consumer magazines.
Newsweek has also found itself at a disadvantage against Time Warner's advertiser incentive program, Max Plan, which offers Time's stable of magazines in combination packages to advertisers. 

In 1988, Newsweek's ad pages totaled 2,479, a drop of 3.3% from 1987, while ad revenue increased slightly to $242 million.
For the first six months of 1989, Newsweek's ad pages totaled 1,176, a drop of 0.5% from the same period in 1988, while ad revenue in the first half was $119 million, an increase of 6.9% from last year. 

"Our pages are down from last year, but our revenue is up nicely," said Mr. Spoon. "The bottom line will look very good this year." 

Mr. Spoon said he expected no great changes at Newsweek, except that he would continue efforts to extend the magazine's name to new media properties. 

In early 1988, Newsweek folded two specialty editions, Newsweek on Campus and Newsweek on Health, largely for lack of national advertising.
However, Newsweek launched in January a specialty edition called Newsweek Business, which replaced two previous editions.
With a circulation of 750,000, Newsweek Business carries ads targeted specifically at an audience that regularly reads business magazines such as Forbes and Time Warner's Fortune. 

Mr. Spoon labeled as ridiculous recurring industry rumors that Washington Post Chairman Katharine Graham would consider selling Newsweek. "The Grahams have told me, 'Do your best.
We are behind you, '" said Mr. Spoon. 

