.START 

A Whittaker Corp. unit has agreed to plead guilty to bribery-related charges and to pay the government about $3 million for the unit's role in the Pentagon procurement scandal, according to people familiar with the investigation. 

These people also said prosecutors have decided to seek an indictment of veteran consultant Thomas Muldoon -- who worked for Whittaker and a batch of larger defense contractors -- on charges including bribery and conspiracy. 

Both moves, likely to come as early as today, are expected to provide an important boost for the three-year investigation of alleged corruption and widespread influence-peddling involving defense contracts. 

Whittaker and its lawyer, Daniel Bookin, declined to discuss the matter.
Albert Ahern, Mr. Muldoon's lawyer, said his client denies any wrongdoing and "is planning on going to trial" on any charges stemming from the scandal. 

Mr. Muldoon had close ties to some of the country's biggest defense contractors, a number of prominent industry consultants and various senior Defense Department acquisition officials.
Some of his associates are considered to be central targets of the government's inquiry. 

Mr. Muldoon hasn't agreed to cooperate with the government.
Still, prosecutors hope that by seeking a sweeping indictment against him, they eventually will force Mr. Muldoon to provide information about the activities of some of those associates. 

As part of a settlement worked out yesterday, law enforcement officials and others said the unit of Los Angeles-based Whittaker has agreed to pay about $3 million in civil and criminal penalties and fines.
The U.S. attorney's office in Alexandria, Va., has told Whittaker it will file papers charging that the firm used contacts with government officials and various middlemen in an alleged scheme to improperly influence Marine Corps contracts stretching back to the mid-1980s. 

The case against Mr. Muldoon, according to the law-enforcement officials and other people familiar with the investigation, focuses on inside information that he allegedly obtained illegally about a Marine Corps air-traffic control and communications contract potentially valued at $120 million.
The information eventually was passed on to Unisys Corp. and at least one other company for which he worked which also bid on the contract, according to prosecutors and court documents previously filed by the Justice Department. 

In January, Whittaker said it expected to be charged in the inquiry, code-named "Operation Ill Wind." Last week, Edward Muller, the firm's general counsel, indicated in an interview that Whittaker fired two employees as soon as it was presented with evidence that they had bribed government officials in order to secure information about Pentagon contracts. "As far as we know, anyone affiliated with those payments is no longer affiliated with the company," Mr. Muller said. 

The Whittaker unit currently under investigation was created by the firm's acquisition of Lee Telecommunications in mid-1986.
Mr. Muller and federal investigators said the suspect activities began before the acquisition and continued afterward. 

In Mr. Muldoon's case, government documents filed or unsealed over the past year in federal courts around the country depict him as a central figure in a covert network of consultants, contractor executives and defense officials who improperly swapped sensitive procurement data that should have stayed within the government.
One government affidavit, for instance, indicates that when an associate pressed him to provide more detailed information about the status of the Marine Corps contract, Mr. Muldoon allegedly "asked . . . for more money" and eventually received part of a consulting fee Unisys paid to another consultant. 

A separate government filing indicates that Mr. Muldoon allegedly obtained the "relative positions" of all of the firms -- including Unisys -- initially bidding on the Marine Corps contract.
A fellow consultant who provided Mr. Muldoon with this and other details about the contract warned that the information was "extraordinarily private," according to the same document.
The procurement scandal erupted before the contract was awarded. 

Action against Mr. Muldoon is bound to turn the spotlight on Unisys, which has acknowledged it is discussing a separate, multimillion-dollar settlement with the government involving possible charges stemming from the procurement scandal.
Federal officials have said they are demanding as much as $100 million as part of a comprehensive Unisys settlement.
But the company has balked at that proposal, and any agreement appears to be at least several weeks away. 

Rick Wartzman in Los Angeles contributed to this article. 

