.START 

If you've ever flown TWA into St. Louis or Northwest Airlines into Detroit you've encountered an anomaly of airline deregulation: the "fortress hub," where a single airline handles most of the traffic going in and out.
Deregulation has saved consumers billions of dollars in lower fares, but in some cities dominant airlines have used their clout to restrict competition and charge higher prices. 

The solution lies not in re-regulation, but in breaking up the advantage dominant carriers have at publicly owned airports.
Currently airlines are able to lock airport managers into long-term leases that tie up most of the gates.
New entrants are barred by rules that the incumbent airlines must approve any lease-funded airport bond issues to build new gates.
Continental and United, which dominate Denver's airport, vigorously opposed building a new airport largely because it would break up their duopoly.
One solution is to sell the airports to private buyers, who would have much more freedom and incentive to add capacity. 

That's exactly what Albany, N.Y., may be doing.
Next month, city officials will decide which of two bidders will buy or lease the nation's oldest commercial airport.
The leading bidder -- at $30 million -- is a private partnership of Lockheed Air Terminal Inc. and British-American, a real estate firm.
A lower rival bid has been offered by the public agency that runs the local bus system. 

The city of Albany stands to gain a lot from any sale.
Not only would it collect the proceeds, but both bidders have promised new terminals and improvements at no cost to local taxpayers.
And if a sale is made to a private firm, the airport's 900 acres will go back on the property tax rolls. 

For some people the concept of private airports is an unusual one.
But Viggo M. Butler, president of Lockheed Air Terminal, points out that it is public airports that don't make sense: "In travel, you stay in a private hotel.
You rent a car from a private company.
You fly on an airline that's privately owned, with airplanes built by a private manufacturer.
So why does the airport, in the middle of this system, have to be publicly owned?" 

Robert Poole of the Reason Foundation points out that foreign countries are way ahead of the U.S. in privatizing their airports.
In 1987, Britain sold Heathrow and Gatwick airports.
Denmark has announced it will sell Copenhagen's airport.
Turkish Airlines will soon turn over the operation of Istanbul's airport to Lockheed.
Here in the U.S., local officials are debating a 1992 sale of Los Angeles International Airport to private investors. 

Critics of deregulation forget that it freed up only one of the three major components of air travel: the fare and route structure.
The airports and the air-traffic control system remained under centralized and inefficient federal control.
Even AFL-CIO president Lane Kirkland has said the air-traffic control system would work better if managed by a private company. 

The U.S. is facing a critical shortage of runway capacity; no new airport has been opened since 1975.
Airports that are either sold or leased to private companies could circumvent the politicized bureaucracy that is now retarding airport development. 

Currently, Congress forbids public airports from charging airlines a per-passenger fee to finance operations or expansion.
They also can't ease airport congestion by charging higher landing fees during peak hours. 

There are serious proposals to deal with current problems, the biggest being the mismatch between airport capacity and the high number of people wanting to fly.
Putting airports in the more market-sensitive hands of private owners would be a logical initiative. 

