.START 

BUSH PROPOSED slashing U.S. and Soviet stockpiles of chemical weapons. 

Saying it was time to "rid the Earth of this scourge," the president offered to cut U.S. supplies of chemical weapons by 80% if the Soviets reduce their stocks to an equal level and if the two countries can agree on means to verify compliance with such an accord.
Bush's initiative, delivered in his first presidential address to the U.N. General Assembly, was intended to give momentum to efforts by a 40-nation conference in Geneva to ban production of chemical weapons over a 10-year period. 

The president also lauded what he called the ascendancy of freedom around the world, and cited progress on U.S. and Soviet arms-control issues. 

THE SOVIET UNION UNVEILED a draft budget that includes military cuts. 

In an attempt to halve the nation's $200 billion budget deficit next year, the Kremlin presented a budget to the Supreme Soviet that includes selling unprofitable state companies and issuing government bonds, as well as trimming defense outlays by about 9% of gross national product.
The draft also calls for increased purchases of consumer goods, medical supplies and raw materials for light industry. 

Gorbachev said Moscow would take "concrete" steps to settle an ethnic dispute unless Armenia and Azerbaijan resolved the issue within days. 

Thousands of Vietnamese troops jammed Indochina's main highway as they headed to Cambodia's border after leaving Phnom Penh.
Hundreds of army vehicles, including artillery and tanks, paraded past the Royal Palace in the Cambodian capital on the eve of the Hanoi government's pledged withdrawal from a nearly 11-year-old war. 

Senate negotiators tentatively agreed to an estimated $3.1 billion anti-drug program, adding $900 million to Bush's proposals for fiscal 1990 and imposing cuts on defense and domestic accounts.
The bulk of the increases would go to treatment and education programs. 

Electricity returned to parts of Charleston, S.C., which was battered last week by Hurricane Hugo.
Banks also reopened, some mail was delivered and trash collection resumed.
But thousands of people were without power and short of food, water or cash for a fourth day.
Rain hindered recovery efforts and worsened some storm damage. 

A judge in Washington, D.C., ordered the release of a physician jailed since 1987 for refusing to let her daughter visit the girl's father.
Elizabeth Morgan, who was imprisoned for contempt of court, had accused her ex-husband of sexually abusing the child.
Bush signed a law over the weekend aimed at freeing the 41-year-old doctor. 

Federal investigators examined the wreckage of a USAir jetliner after salvage crews completed removing the plane from New York City's East River.
As the officials checked for evidence of a possible mechanical flaw that might have caused last week's crash, authorities in the borough of Queens conducted a separate criminal inquiry. 

NASA launched the last of its unmanned rockets from Cape Canaveral, Fla., where responsibility for sending payloads into orbit is being transferred to private industry after more than 400 liftoffs in 31 years.
The space agency's Atlas-Centaur carried a $125 million communications satellite. 

Syrian gunners bombarded Lebanon's Christian enclave, violating a two-day-old cease-fire that has drawn about one million refugees back to Beirut.
An Arab League mediator urged rival factions to honor the truce, and the Lebanese Parliament agreed to meet this weekend to debate political changes aimed at ending the civil war. 

A congressional leader in Colombia urged the Bogota government to open negotiations with drug traffickers in an attempt to reach a peaceful settlement in the country's escalating drug war.
A leading presidential candidate, meanwhile, was quoted as saying Colombia might have to legalize narcotics. 

Quebecers voted in an election that was considered a test of their willingness to secede from Canada a decade after they rejected independence.
Recent opinion polls showed, however, that the Liberals would defeat the separatist Parti Quebecois. 

Israel's ruling coalition moved toward a compromise on Egypt's peace proposals, with members of the divided government suggesting further talks with Cairo before pursuing Mubarak's plan for direct Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
Underground Arab leaders urged Palestinians to continue their uprising in the occupied territories. 

Teachers in Utah staged a one-day strike, leaving classrooms empty in nearly every school district in the state.
The walkout, over low funding and overcrowded classes, involved nearly 20,000 teachers and affected 450,000 students in about 800 schools. 

