.START 

Something funny is happening to the gold stocks, Homestake Mining in particular. 

With the price of gold not far above its recent three-year low, shares of gold producers could easily be in the doldrums.
Yet they're up about 10% this month.
Homestake, the second largest U.S. gold-mining company, has shown puny earnings lately, yet it rose to a series of new 52-week highs last week. 

Homestake advanced 1 1/4 points for the week to 16 3/8.
Daily volume, which averaged only 250,000 shares last month, exceeded 700,000 shares both last Wednesday and Friday. 

Yesterday, while most stocks declined, Homestake rose another 1/4 to 16 5/8, on volume of more than 900,000 shares. 

The price of gold, which hit a three-year intraday low of $356 an ounce on Sept. 15, has bounced back 3.5%.
And Homestake, long regarded as a high-cost producer, is making progress in narrowing the production-cost gap between it and its major rivals. 

But skeptics say those are frail reeds on which to build an investment.
Mining company shares, they say, are already priced to anticipate $400-an-ounce gold.
So anyone betting on Homestake, or several other gold producers whose shares have edged up recently, had better be anticipating prices even higher than that. 

Besides, they say, Homestake is still a high-cost producer, just less so than before.
John Tumazos, precious metals analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, points out that the cost gap has closed mainly because rivals' costs have risen, not because Homestake's costs have come way down. 

In talks with analysts touring two of its mines earlier this month, Homestake said it is producing gold at a cost (on a "cash basis," which doesn't include depreciation and some other items) of $260 an ounce. 

"That certainly is a positive development," says Vahid Fathi, an analyst with Prescott, Ball & Turben in Cleveland, who considers Homestake a buy.
He had previously been estimating Homestake's production cost at $275 an ounce. 

Even so, Mr. Fathi says, rivals can produce gold more cheaply.
The lowest-cost producer among the big five North American gold mining companies, he figures, is Newmont Gold, at $220 an ounce (cash basis).
Then comes Echo Bay Mines at $235, followed by Placer Dome at $245 and American Barrick Resources at $250.
Some smaller competitors have costs below $200 an ounce. 

Homestake is "a stock that many people criticized, from the mid-1980s until now, as a high-cost producer and a slow grower," says Amy P. Gassman, a Goldman Sachs analyst.
She thinks the company is making progress, and calls it "attractive long term." 

But skeptics object that Homestake is selling for 20 times the consensus estimate of next year's earnings, and 35 times this year's probable earnings.
By contrast, stocks in general are selling for about 13 times this year's expected earnings. 

"The major North American gold companies are trading at about 30 times {estimated} 1990 earnings at $400 gold," says Mr. Tumazos. "While I expect gold to rebound to $400 next year, I don't think the stocks have a particularly large upside." 

Rivals such as Echo Bay, American Barrick and Newmont Gold made big discoveries in 1987, Mr. Tumazos says, and can afford to cut back considerably on exploration if they wish.
He gives those stocks a neutral rating.
Meanwhile, he says, Homestake is spending about $35 million (or about $35 per ounce of gold it produces) on exploration and can't cut back without undermining investor confidence.
He rates it "unattractive." 

For people who want gold shares, "there are better stocks to own," says Nicholas Toufexis, analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert.
He likes Freeport McMoRan Gold, Battle Mountain Gold, FMC Gold and Pegasus Gold. 

But if the price of gold rises well above $400 an ounce, Mr. Toufexis notes, shares of high-cost producers like Homestake would benefit the most: Their profit margins would surge.
For that reason, he says, sophisticated gold-share investors sometimes hold a mixture of three low-cost producers and one high-cost producer. 

Still there.
Yesterday's edition of Securities Week, an industry newsletter, said that John Connolly, chief strategist for Dean Witter Reynolds, had resigned.
That was news to Mr. Connolly, whose authority as a Dean Witter spokesman actually was strengthened by the recent departure of veteran strategist John Mendelson. "I'll have to call {Securities Week} and find out where I went," Mr. Connolly quipped. 

Homestake Mining 

(NYSE; Symbol: HM) 

Business: Precious metals mining Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Revenue: $432.6 million 

Net income: $66.4 million; or 68 cents a share 

Second quarter, June 30, 1989: 

Per-share earnings: 22 cents vs. 19 cents* 

Average daily trading volume: 

258,046 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 96 million 

*Figures include discontinued operations. 

