.START 

The recent history of Columbia Pictures has all the makings of some of the bad movies this Hollywood studio has been churning out the past several years.
Columbia has been losing tons of money on such monumental box-office bombs as "Ishtar" and "Leonard Part VI." Casting for new studio executives has been almost a constant exercise as frustrated 49%-owner Coca-Cola Co. tried in vain to convert its legendary ability to sell soft drinks into making and marketing films. 

So is Coke wringing its hands over this experiment in diversification?
Hardly.
It looks as if Coke could reap about $1.2 billion in proceeds from its adventure in filmmaking. 

Yesterday, Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., the studio's parent company, announced that it is in discussions with a company it wouldn't identify involving a cash purchase of all of Columbia's outstanding shares.
Entertainment industry sources identify the bidder as Sony Corp. of Japan.
Sony, after a year of on-again, off-again haggling over price, has offered about $26 to $28 a share for Columbia, or more than $3 billion, according to people in the entertainment industry.
They say Coke is prepared to accept that price unless it gets a better offer fast. (Sony itself declines to comment.) 

Analysts suspect there may still be more bidders, as the entertainment industry goes through a period of global consolidation.
Columbia stock jumped $5.25 on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, to $26.375.
Rumors swirled that Rupert Murdoch might enter the bidding for Columbia, but through a spokesman he said he wasn't interested. 

With the recent sales of MGM/UA Entertainment Co. and Warner Communications Inc., and the purchase three years ago of 20th Century Fox by Mr. Murdoch's News Corp., "there are only really three players left to go -- MCA, Paramount and Orion" -- in addition to Columbia, says Mara Balsbaugh, an analyst at Smith Barney Harris Upham & Co. "This refocuses attention on these companies as valuable and increasingly rare." 

The floundering Columbia studio notwithstanding, the parent company is full of valuable assets. 

Among those assembled by chief executive Victor Kaufman are one of the most successful television production and distribution businesses in Hollywood, with a wide array of episodes of such popular series as "Who's the Boss?" "Designing Women" and "Married . . . With Children." Columbia Pictures Television has five new series on the networks this season, more than any other studio.
Such an operation is increasingly lucrative as the demand grows world-wide for U.S. television shows and films. 

Columbia also owns a vast library of theatrical films, a large distribution network and one of the nation's largest chains of movie theaters. 

For Sony, which in 1987 spent $2 billion to buy CBS Records, getting Columbia Pictures would cap an ambitious campaign to marry its consumer electronics hardware products with the crucial entertainment "software" that drives sales and new products. 

The risks for Sony or any other potential purchaser of Columbia lie mainly in the unpredictable losses of the film studio.
With that in mind, Sony last year bid in the low 20s per share for Columbia.
But talks broke down after Coke, which along with Columbia management and directors, actually controls 54% of Columbia's voting shares, indicated it would hold out for as much $35 a share.
By now making a higher bid, Sony, which has been getting more and more eager to acquire a studio, has apparently decided to accept Columbia's projections that it will substantially improve its results and its cash flow in 1990.
For the first quarter of fiscal 1990 ended May 31, Columbia's earnings were down 53% to $2 million, and revenue fell 14% to $351.1 million. 

While Columbia increased its market share at the box office this summer, the turnaround at the studio is far from complete.
New studio chief Dawn Steel has yet to release most of the films she has put into production since she was hired to replace David Puttnam in late 1987, and many of the films she has released or has in the pipeline are remnants of the Puttnam era. 

Mr. Puttnam was a successful British film producer of such tony movies as "Chariots of Fire" and "The Killing Fields," but his 18-month reign at Columbia was a disastrous setback for the company despite some critical acclaim.
In addition to alienating many key Hollywood producers, actors and agents, he put into production a number of films that were either complete flops or unreleasable in most U.S. markets. 

Ms. Steel has worked to put Columbia back in the mainstream this year, producing two big sequels to previous Columbia hits.
But while "Ghostbusters II" and "Karate Kid III" combined have sold about $150 million of tickets, neither was as successful as expected.
Another Columbia summer film, "When Harry Met Sally," is a big success with more than $78 million in ticket sales, but Columbia has to share its revenues with the producer, Castle Rock Entertainment. 

Meanwhile, the first major original film that Ms. Steel put into motion when she arrived at the studio, the $25 million "Casualties of War," has been a major disappointment, selling less than $18 million of tickets in the U.S.
And Columbia's Tri-Star Pictures unit -- which until this year was a stand-alone studio -- has had its share of disappointments, including the expensive flop "Lock-Up," starring Sylvester Stallone. 

Karen Firestone, who oversees the entertainment investment fund at Fidelity Management & Research Co., estimates the studio could lose $75 million or more on its motion-picture lineup in fiscal 1990.
As for the coming schedule, she says "they could have some hits and some misses," with such movies as "The Old Gringo," starring Jane Fonda, and "Revenge," starring Kevin Costner. 

But Ms. Firestone says Columbia has made "a convincing case" that it will produce a hefty $300 million in cash flow in the 1990 fiscal year from its various businesses, and from selling movies into video, television and foreign markets. "They have a growing backlog of production to sell into secondary and tertiary markets," says Ms. Firestone. 

Wall Street and Hollywood are much more impressed by Columbia's television business.
Like many studios, Columbia Pictures earns far more money from television than movies, but the discrepancy is even more stark at Columbia. "Movies lose money for Columbia most years," says a former Columbia executive, "and even in the so-called great years, the movie division has been a drain.
Columbia Pictures Television is a real workhorse." 

Indeed.
Sony would be acquiring one of the best track records around at getting popular sitcoms on the air, keeping them there and aggressively marketing their reruns.
The studio also produces the top-rated soap opera on television, "The Young and the Restless," and derives enormous profits from "Wheel of Fortune" and "Jeopardy," acquired with Merv Griffin Enterprises a few years ago.
Coke bought much of Columbia's success in television by acquiring companies like Merv Griffin and Norman Lear's Embassy Communications over the last five years. 

Comedy is king in prime time now, and Columbia's management was smart enough to shift the studio's emphasis to comedy and away from one-hour dramatic shows in recent years.
Although some of the new prime-time series Columbia has on the air look like good candidates for quick cancellation, "The Famous Teddy Z" on CBS is already a big hit with critics.
Counting its five returning series, Columbia is producing a total of 10 shows at once. 

All together, Columbia has 23 sitcoms in syndication, of which nine are among the top 20 in national ratings.
Columbia says that only about 9% of series that get on the networks last long enough for reruns, but that its track record is more than 30%. 

Columbia's biggest syndication success is "Who's the Boss?" -- second only to "The Cosby Show" in fees paid by television stations.
Counting all the stations carrying "Boss," each episode will be sold for an estimated $2.5 million, bringing Columbia more than $250 million over four years.
That's more than twice the syndication fee for popular, award-winning "Cheers," according to industry estimates.
Still, to succeed over the long term and minimize the risk for Sony, Columbia has to prove it can maintain a healthy market share at the box office and return the studio to the glory it boasted before the management turmoil of the past decade or so. 

Company insiders note that despite its share of flops, the studio has produced and distributed such Academy Award winning films as "Gandhi" and "The Last Emperor." And it has had its share of commercial hits in recent years, including "Ghostbusters," "Karate Kid," "Tootsie" and "The Big Chill."Those movies continue to be valuable pieces of the library -- and are fodder for sequels and remakes. 

If its bid succeeds, Sony is likely to keep the current team on board; the Japanese company has said it is interested in buying a studio with management in place.
It bought both a company and a management team when it acquired CBS Records.
There, Sony kept on chief executive Walter Yetnikoff and his hand-picked staff; while the record company has been struggling to regain lost market share this year, Sony stays out of day-to-day involvement in the record business. 

Columbia's Mr. Kaufman and other top executives would do rather nicely from a purchase of the company at the price Sony is offering.
Mr. Kaufman's various stock and options plans could net him about $30 million in a sale of the company.
Allen & Co. chairman Herbert A. Allen owns just over three million shares, worth more than $80 million at the price on the table. 

As for Columbia shareholders, they too could benefit handsomely.
Just a year ago, the stock was trading at $11 per share. 

Still, analysts note that had Columbia been able to produce a steady stream of hits the way rivals Paramount Communications Co. and Walt Disney Co. did, the investment might have proven a far more profitable one for Coke and the other Columbia shareholders.
Paul Kagan, who runs media investment concern Kagan Associates, notes that Coke originally purchased Columbia seeking another stream of earnings; Columbia produced cash flow, but no steady profits. 

"It was destined to change hands once that happened," Mr. Kagan says. "Had they owned Disney or Paramount, they wouldn't have had the same problem, of owning a company which didn't generate enough hits to justify being the entertainment subsidiary of an earnings-driven company." 

Meg Cox contributed to this story. 

