.START 

Senate negotiators tentatively agreed to an estimated $3.1 billion anti-drug initiative, adding $900 million to proposals by President Bush for fiscal 1990 and imposing a 0.43% cut on defense and domestic accounts. 

Although the accord promises added flexibility the administration sought for the Pentagon in meeting its share of the required savings, it still would cut military spending by an estimated $1.31 billion from the level in last spring's budget summit. 

The bulk of the increases would go to treatment and education programs favored by the Senate's Democratic majority, but the total spending reflects a middle ground between the president's plan and an alternative outlined by Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.). 

The agreement, for which the administration has indicated its approval, promises to end an impasse that has blocked final Senate passage of major fiscal 1990 appropriations bills.
But the time lost already makes it impossible for Congress to complete legislative action on most of the budget before the new year begins this Sunday. 

The House Appropriations Committee yesterday approved a stopgap spending bill to keep the government operating through Oct. 25, and the next few weeks will force the budget debate again to the forefront as lawmakers struggle to live within tax and spending assumptions made last spring. 

Apart from the added costs of the new drug initiative, damage from Hurricane Hugo threatens to significantly increase required spending for federal relief operations.
The demand for offsetting cuts invites wholesale posturing, and a House-Senate conference on Congress's own budget fell into bitter wrangling yesterday before negotiators agreed to cut by half the number of newsletters each lawmaker is permitted to send to constituents each year. 

Sen. Byrd said he hopes to add the compromise anti-drug package to one of the spending bills stalled in the Senate as soon as today. 

The tentative accord, reached just days after talks were abruptly broken off, would allocate $800 million of the increase to treatment and education programs and $100 million to state and local law-enforcement grants. "The American people wanted more than the president requested and this gives them more," Mr. Byrd told reporters. 

Under the agreement, spending authority for anti-drug and law-enforcement programs would grow to $8.8 billion from the same accounts' current level of $5.7 billion.
Of the total increase, analysts say about one-third is already accommodated in pending appropriations bills, and the negotiations have focused on how to offset the remainder of nearly $2.1 billion. 

The plan calls for $1.3 billion to be taken from defense in new budget authority, or about $797 million in direct spending.
The rest of the budget, largely domestic accounts, would be cut by $700 million to $800 million in budget authority, or about $440 million in outlays. 

Budget authority measures the level of money appropriated by Congress to fund federal programs; outlays represent the rate of direct spending that results as these accounts are drawn down.
For example, a major piece of the drug package will be for new prisons, but the appropriations or budget authority for fiscal 1990 are much larger than outlays because construction will take several years. 

While defense would absorb the larger share of the cuts, it would have greater flexibility in achieving the reduction as well as some credit for what appropriators have already allocated from Pentagon spending for the drug war.
The immediate vehicle for achieving most of this reduction will be the $279.6 billion defense appropriations bill now pending on the Senate floor, and analysts estimate about $1 billion must be found from this measure to satisfy the accord. 

Under the agreement, all domestic accounts would be cut across-the-board by 0.30%.
An additional 0.13% in savings would be achieved by the 13 Senate Appropriations subcommittees with across-the-board cuts; selected, individual reductions, or a mix of the two. 

In defense, all of the 0.43% reduction would be determined by Sens.
Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii) and Ted Stevens (R., Alaska), the chairman and ranking GOP member of the Senate Appropriations subcommittee on defense, and Sam Nunn (D., Ga.) and John Warner (R., Va.), the chairman and ranking Republican member of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
The administration had sought the arrangement to protect personnel, readiness and ongoing procurement accounts. 

Language dealing with Senate consideration of the president's legislative law-enforcement proposals couldn't be resolved last night because Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Joseph Biden (D., Del.) was out of town. "I don't think it will be a major encumbrance," said Oregon Sen. Mark Hatfield, the ranking GOP member of the Senate Appropriations Committee and the head of his party's negotiating team.
In addition, Senate GOP Leader Robert Dole of Kansas hadn't approved the deal, but was expected to do so today. 

Even before the current drug debate, the rising costs of congressional mail had become a sore point in House-Senate relations, and this year the Senate took the lead by imposing new disclosure and cost-containment requirements and eliminating all unsolicited mailings.
Part of the savings was to be reallocated to assist pregnant women addicted to drugs, and given the current mood, majorities in both houses backed the cut even as many lawmakers hoped privately that appropriators would save the franking, or free-mail, privilege. 

This was the end result yesterday, and just hours after the House voted 245-137 to endorse the Senate-passed ban on unsolicited mailings, negotiators from both sides agreed to preserve three of the current six newsletters permitted annually.
An exemption is allowed for "town meeting" notices of a lawmaker's appearance at home, and in any case, based on 1988 mailings, only about a quarter of House members currently send more than three newsletters a year. 

New procedures would be adopted to highlight the House's larger mailing expenditures and any future overruns, but the House-Senate conference watered down a proposal to amend the postal laws directly to enforce an annual cap on spending.
Sen. Don Nickles (R., Okla.), the ranking minority member in the conference, said he would resist the settlement on the Senate floor, but House members warned that unless the agreement is upheld, they would press for new limits on how senators now use campaign funds to supplement their office expenses, including mailings. 

The new rules governing mailing are incorporated in a more than $1.9 billion legislative appropriations bill funding both chambers as well as the daily operations of the Capitol and such related agencies as the Library of Congress and the General Accounting Office.
Tucked away in the same measure is a $140,000, or a nearly 90% increase, for the office of the Senate's "president pro tempore," -- a title now held by the chairman of the Senate appropriations panel, Mr. Byrd. 

