.START 

{Second of two articles on the religious right.} 

SPRINGFIELD, Va. -- The leaders of the religious right no longer are the Rev. Jerry Falwell and the Rev. Pat Robertson.
Instead, they are people like Walter Barbee and Andrea Weiss Horn. 

Mr. Robertson's presidential campaign ended in disappointment last year, and Mr. Falwell disbanded his Moral Majority last month.
In their place -- without television shows, without formal religious trappings, without even the mention of God in their handbills -- are hundreds of little-known evangelical Christians such as Mr. Barbee and Mrs. Horn, and they are reshaping one of the most formidable political forces of the decade. 

In only 18 months, the religious right has undergone a drastic transformation.
Just as the evangelical church has moved away from high-profile, mass-audience ministers such as Jimmy Swaggart and Jim Bakker -- both now tainted by scandal -- the Christian political movement itself is shifting its focus to the local level, working in ways that are less flamboyant and less threatening to conservatives outside the movement. 

Mr. Barbee, the chairman of Virginians for Family Values, and Mrs. Horn, a founder of the Fairfax Citizens Council, are part of this decentralized army of local activists.
They are fighting a new state-mandated sex-education program, working for local control of the schools and trying to keep government out of day care. 

"The people are taking the lead because the leaders haven't led," says Mrs. Horn, a mother of two.
Mr. Barbee, an American Airlines pilot, adds: "The Falwell-Robertson phenomenon was the first wave.
The second wave is forming.
It's grass-roots activism.
It's not coordinated; it's not national." 

These foot soldiers of the religious right are behind many of the attacks on school curricula, school library books and sex-education courses that, according to People for the American Way, a liberal group, broke out in all but eight states last year.
In recent months, religious-right groups have been able to remove books such as "Death of a Salesman" and "The Catcher in the Rye" from school libraries.
They have successfully challenged sex-education programs in places such as Kenosha, Wis.
And in California they are pressing their argument that science textbooks should include Biblical creationism. 

"The tactics may be more conventional, but the goals are no less threatening," contends Arthur Kropp, the president of People for the American Way. "There's less effort to burst into a school library and seize some book, and more to set up a local lobbying effort or even to get on the school board." 

Don Eberly, the president of the Commonwealth Foundation, a conservative think tank that concentrates on state issues in Pennsylvania, says the religious right is "advancing under different labels, but it's still there and still working." He adds: "It's less susceptible to political pigeonholing than before because the message is less overtly religious.
But it's more powerful than ever because it's gone mainstream." 

In this major shift in strategy, these groups have taken on a new tone, less shrill and less righteous than their predecessors, less eager to sweep into politics and take over the Republican Party or the government. 

"The 'takeover' mentality came out of the idea that things were really wrong," says Michael Geer, the new president of the Pennsylvania Family Institute. "Now, we've realized we can be more effective integrating ourselves into a broader movement.
We can win people over in a different way." 

Playing down their religious views is allowing members of the Christian right to form new alliances. "You can't influence if you antagonize," says Ann Kinkaid, who is prominent in evangelical political circles here in Virginia. "'Onward Christian Soldiers' does nothing but scare people away." Peggy Luksik, the chairman of the Pennsylvania Parents Commission, a group fighting the government's role in sex-education and health-care issues, adds: "We had a conscious effort to make this as broad as possible.
We weren't looking to be easily identified as the Pat Robertson campaign reinvented." 

As a result, the religious wars that were roiling the Republican Party only a year ago have largely subsided.
But some hostility to evangelicals lingers on within the GOP: Former Georgia Republican Chairman John Stuckey argues that "people who have 'the word' and 'divine direction' aren't really well-fitted emotionally or intellectually" for politics.
But members of the religious right have concluded that they will gain influence not by going their own way but by working within other groups, especially the GOP. 

"This is the maturing of the Christian political movement," says Daniel Fleming, the Republican state chairman in Maryland, who once was attacked for his fundamentalist opinions.
The Republican Party is moving to consolidate what James Guth, a Furman University political scientist specializing in the religious right, calls "the transformation of the Christian right from a social movement to a constituent unit of the Republican Party." 

This autumn, the GOP is preparing a huge effort to forge ties between the party and operators of local religious radio stations, local church figures and community leaders.
It will try to bring into the party what Marc Nuttle, the former Robertson campaign manager and now the executive director of the National Republican Campaign Committee, calls "the large segment of society that takes part in politics and never sets foot in a party hall." 

Some Republican strategists are wary of courting evangelicals too openly, however. "You can appeal to them on a whole lot of economic and defense issues without appealing to them on a strictly religious basis," says Roger Stone, a GOP political consultant. 

But easing the process of integrating them into the GOP is the fact that an entire cadre of religious-right activists has developed a brand of sophistication seldom evident in the movement's early years. "The people who came into the process through Falwell and others have developed a lot of nuts-and-bolts savvy and made themselves marketable," says Mr. Eberly, the Commonwealth Foundation president. 

They are people such as Roy Jones, a former legislative director for Moral Majority and now a Washington political consultant. "There's a network of guys like me," Mr. Jones says. "I believe the same things I did when I worked for Moral Majority.
What has changed is the technique and approach.
We've gone into the system and shown people we don't have horns or halos." 

Or they are like Wayne Sullivan, a retired chemical engineer in Chesterfield County, outside Richmond, who is aiding the Virginia gubernatorial campaign of Republican Marshall Coleman.
He was drawn into politics by the Robertson campaign and now, he says, "I feel like I know what I'm doing." He says he is in the "snag 'em, bag 'em and tag 'em game," getting other evangelicals into politics. 

Some activists, including Gary Bauer, who was President Reagan's domestic-policy adviser, are forming state coalitions, bringing together groups favoring restrictions on pornography and abortion and working for educational choice. "We're trying to get them into the same room and get them to compare strategies," says Mr. Bauer, who heads the Family Research Council. "We found that a lot of these organizations, because they were single-issue oriented, never talked with each other." 

In Minnesota, for example, the Berean League, an evangelical think tank concentrating on state issues, is uniting groups fighting abortion and pornography, activists favoring home schooling, people who run adoption agencies and associations of evangelicals.
Their goal: to stop the "enhancement" of the homosexual life style in school programs dealing with AIDS and to promote chastity among young people. 

"We are realizing that there are unholy alliances on the other side, and we have to have alliances of our own," says Robert Heinrich, the league's executive director.
Evangelical state legislators have become an active component of the American Legislative Exchange Council, a group of conservative lawmakers across the country. "The 'separatist' idea seems to be gone," says Michael Tanner, the council's legislative director. "They're very willing to work within larger structure like ours, to make compromises and to work with people who may not agree with them on everything." 

Unlike the earlier, well-endowed TV ministries, many of today's religious-right groups are poorly funded and depend almost entirely upon volunteer workers and tiny donations. "People are giving money out of their pocket," says Mrs. Horn, the secretary of the Fairfax Citizens Council here in Virginia. "Sometimes, we actually pass a basket so we can get the next newsletter out.
We live mailing to mailing." So, the council, like dozens of its cousins scattered about the country, has a part-time staff and post office box but no office. 

Mr. Nuttle, the GOP strategist, recognizes that such evangelicals still have few formal ties to the Republicans despite the support they gave to Ronald Reagan and George Bush in the past three elections. "You can't reach them the way you traditionally reach political people," he says. "You get to them through their church and their bowling-league newsletters." 

Once attracted to the party, they often follow the pattern established by Mr. Fleming, the Maryland GOP chairman, who doused the flames of resentment against him by going out of his way not to graft "any kind of radical personal agenda" onto the state party.
Thomas Bowman, a Coudersport, Pa., political consultant who was Pennsylvania chairman for the Robertson campaign before working for Mr. Bush's election, says party regulars have been relieved that the Robertson forces "weren't off the wall." 

"It was a bit of a revelation," says Mr. Bowman, who is trying to keep Pennsylvania's Robertson workers politically active. "These people were hardworking Republicans, not people who spent all day talking about what God told them to do." 

