.START 

Six bidders, including the rail units of Canadian Pacific Ltd. and Guilford Transportation Industries Inc., offered to take the financially troubled Delaware & Hudson Railway out of bankruptcy. 

Also bidding were Delaware Otsego Corp., newly formed Rail Port Inc., an investor group associated with Wertheim Schroder & Co. and D&H Railway Acquisition Corp., led by Robert Serlin, a Phoenixville, Pa., investor.
In addition, several other bidders expressed interest in buying some of the Delaware & Hudson's assets rather than the entire railroad. 

The multiplicity of bids sent a strong signal that the Delaware & Hudson won't be liquidated.
The carrier filed under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code in June 1988, protecting itself from creditor lawsuits while it worked out a plan to pay its debts. 

The ailing line's trustee last summer set a Sept. 1 deadline for bids before extending it to yesterday. 

"Fifteen months ago people said we would be lucky to find a single bidder because of the railroad's long history of losses and problems," said Francis Dicello, trustee of the ailing carrier. "Now, it looks like we have the basis for a reorganization to keep this railroad running." Mr. Dicello declined to comment on rail industry speculation that the bids ranged from $25 million to $60 million in cash and debt assumption. 

The outcome is important to shippers and government officials concerned about preserving rail freight competition in the Northeast.
The 1,200-mile line in New York and eastern Pennsylvania provides some of the last remaining rail freight competition to Philadelphia-based Consolidated Rail Corp. 

Although Mr. Dicello said he will report to the Bankruptcy court in Wilmington, Del., next Monday on how long it may take to reach a final agreement with one or more of the bidders, a speedy resolution isn't likely.
Prospective bidders face possibly lengthy negotiations with the Watervliet, N.Y., carrier's labor unions to reduce the size of crews and change costly work rules.
The proposed acquirer's plan also is subject to approval by the Interstate Commerce Commission, the railroad's creditors and the bankruptcy court. 

The Delaware & Hudson's tracks extend to Albany and Binghamton, N.Y., and Sunbury, Pa., from Montreal.
More important, the line has trackage rights on Conrail that allow its trains to reach connecting railroads at Buffalo, N.Y., and Washington.
But the Delaware & Hudson suffers from circuitous routes, high labor costs and few major shippers. 

An official of CP Rail, a unit of Montreal-based Canadian Pacific, declined to discuss the price and terms of its bid.
The company previously said it would boost the Delaware & Hudson's north-south traffic between the U.S. and Canada. 

Closely held Guilford, North Billerica, Mass., operated the Delaware & Hudson prior to the D&H's bankruptcy filing.
Guilford, one of the line's largest creditors, said it would seek to reorganize the Delaware & Hudson under Springfield Terminal, a Guilford unit with flexible work rules.
Guilford's proposal is likely to draw opposition from D&H's 850 employees, who fear job losses and a resumption of rail labor-management strife. 

Delaware Otsego, which has operated the D&H on an interim basis since the bankruptcy filing, has won praise from the line's shippers for improving service.
The regional railroad said it would substantially boost the number of coast-to-coast container trains that use the D&H as part of a rail route involving Delaware Otsego and other railroads between New York and West Coast ports. 

Among the other bids was one presented by the chief executives of Holt Cargo Systems Inc., a closely held Gloucester City, N.J., marine terminal, warehouse and trucking concern, and of freight broker Wolf D. Barth, Philadelphia.
Rail Port, the joint venture, seeks to use D&H trackage rights to Philadelphia to move import freight from Delaware River ports now going by truck to the Northeast and Canada. 

Kent P. Shoemaker, a former president of the D&H, leads another bidder group that includes investment bank Wertheim Schroder and other interests.
The group seeks to boost the line's traffic by hauling merchandise freight to Eastern markets and solid wastes to various landfills in the South and Midwest. 

