.START 

Loose talk about the special relationship between the U.S. and Britain was once again in the air when I found myself here in Northamptonshire recently.
As an antidote to the pseudo-history in the press, I decided to walk two miles down a country road and visit this village, where George Washington's ancestors are buried and where the Tudor manor house from which his great-great-grandfather emigrated to Virginia in 1656 still stands. 

Were it not for this historical connection Sulgrave would no doubt be as unvisited as its neighboring small villages, tucked away in rolling farmland, but in 1914 a body of British subscribers, headed by King George V, bought Sulgrave Manor and presented it to the peoples of the U.S. and Great Britain to celebrate 100 years of continuing peace between them.
Subsequently the National Society of Colonial Dames of America endowed the house with the proceeds from an appeal in the U.S. that enlisted 35,000 subscribers and exceeded its target of $100,000 by an additional $12,000.
Since then it has become a focal point for a small but persistent stream of visitors willing to make the huge leap of imagination needed to associate this peaceful spot with the whirlpool of today's America. 

The stained-glass panels in the window of the manor's Great Hall give them some help.
They bear the arms of members of the Washington family (again represented in the carved spandrels over the South Porch doorway): three mullets (stars) and two bars (stripes).
On the lawn flies the Star-Spangled Banner, and no one connected with the manor and its history believes this similarity in design is a coincidence.
Col. John Washington took his family crest with him when he left England after having backed the wrong side in the Civil War. 

It can be seen again in the little church of St. James-the-Less.
Above the Washington Pew are four panels of Elizabethan glass, depicting the coats of arms of three generations of Washingtons: John, Lawrence and Robert.
Also here are the memorial brasses of Lawrence and Amee and their four sons and seven daughters.
To see them you must carefully roll up a slab of red carpet, protecting brasses now worn as thin as tissue paper.
Behind the pew is a family tree, tracing George Washington's line back to King John and the barons of the Magna Charta.
The Colonial Dames have been active in the church too, presenting an organ in 1931.
A further reminder of Anglo-American links is the tower screen, light oak picked out in blue and red, a gift of visitors from the States, beside which hang the Union Jack and the Stars and Stripes. 

It is all very quiet and beautiful; golden marjoram bushes flame along the church path, and in the Deed Room at the manor daguerreotypes of George and Martha look down on General Washington's inkstand, snippets of Mrs. Washington's wedding dress and a ball gown, Washington's coat, his saddlebags and a shell button from the velvet coat in which he delivered his first presidential address.
In addition there are a fine framed 19th-century Picture History of the United States, letters from Washington and other documents, as well as a square, squat and serviceable box: his liquor chest.
Downstairs too there is a touching memorial.
Installed by the Stars and Stripes Club of Manchester, it is inscribed with the names of 112 American soldiers who died and were buried in Manchester during the Great War. 

But even in Sulgrave the 20th century has intruded.
Not long ago thieves broke into the manor at night, planting their ladder in the exquisite herbaceous border and making off with 89 of the finer pieces from the collection.
Rooms lovingly refurnished with fine period pieces now are missing clocks, chandeliers, chinoiserie, mirrors, a tea service and a set of early pewter plates.
The carved Jacobean wooden wassail bowl that stood where Lawrence Washington once sat at table is gone, as is the famous Sulgrave clock.
Fortunately the gilt frame of the Gilbert Stuart portrait of Washington was being cleaned at the time, and the thieves did not bother with the unadorned canvas.
But their haul was worth comfortably more than a million pounds (about $1.6 million). 

The Director, Martin Sirot Smith, is hopeful that at least some of the pieces will return: They all were catalogued and photographed and in 1972, after an earlier theft, the Sulgrave clock was returned from Berlin.
But many of the smaller pieces may well not come home to roost and will have to be replaced, a painstaking and expensive task. 

Nor is this the only problem that confronts the manor.
Although the Colonial Dames actively maintain their interest -- 160 of them come every two years to take tea on the lawn -- upkeep is a problem.
The original endowment leaves the house underfunded, deathwatch beetle and woodworm have to be contended with, and the demands of conservation are continually on the increase.
No help is forthcoming from either government, nor from the British National Trust. 

Mr. Sirot Smith has worked hard to improve the situation, notably with receptions this summer for members of the American Embassy in London and for firms with Anglo-American connections, celebrating the 200th anniversary of Washington's inauguration.
Mr. Sirot Smith's earlier experience as an educationalist also was brought into play in July, when the manor hosted Histrionix, a history-reenactment society.
Members lived in the house and grounds as they would have in the 18th century, including eating and sleeping] 

With such efforts and with the steady stream of paying visitors it is hoped that Sulgrave Manor will remain, to quote the Marquess of Cambridge's opening speech: "A shrine for all Americans who visit the old country and a centre from which sentiments of good will between the British and American peoples will ever radiate; these sentiments we believe to be the greatest security for the world's peace." 

About 15 miles from Sulgrave as the crow flies is Upper Heyford, a USAF base with an F111 nuclear force.
With luck the special relationship that started with the Washingtons and that visibly flourished during President Bush's recent visit will survive to assist in rendering it obsolete. 

Ms. Weissman is a free-lance writer who divides her time between London and New York. 

