.START 

At a London cocktail party this year, David McCabe was approached by a British lawyer who asked about rumors that Mr. McCabe's New York law firm, Shearman & Sterling, would merge with a British counterpart. 

Moments later the two were joined by a lawyer from the British firm they were just discussing.
He immediately asked whether they were plotting a merger. 

Shearman & Sterling wasn't negotiating to affiliate with either firm.
But the incident reflects the uproar that U.S. law firms are creating on the international legal scene as they scramble to take advantage of the dismantling of internal European trade barriers by 1992. 

For big U.S. law firms the goal is simple: to capture the business of U.S., European and Asian companies doing -- or planning -- cross-border transactions within the 12-nation European Community.
Many U.S. firms also want to be a lobbying presence in Brussels, the EC headquarters, as the EC writes the rules that will govern the industrialized world's biggest market. 

"The effect of 1992 on American firms is here and now," said Mr. McCabe, whose law firm has offices in Paris and London. "I don't think there is a major foreign client of the firm that hasn't undertaken a major transaction that perhaps was spurred by 1992 -- or is considering trying one." 

The big U.S. firms are betting they will have an edge in Europe not only because they dwarf their foreign rivals but also because they are years ahead in putting together complex mergers and acquisitions.
They maintain that the increase in these transactions is sure to generate work for U.S. corporate lawyers, even when U.S. law isn't a factor. 

U.S. firms work fast and are used to throwing dozens of lawyers at a deal, says William Lee, a partner in Shearman & Sterling's 25-lawyer Paris office.
European lawyers, Mr. Lee says, "go home for the weekend.
You can call an American lawyer at three in the morning and ask a dumb question and he'll answer it.
You wouldn't dare call a European lawyer at 3 a.m." 

European lawyers don't necessarily agree.
Dr. Michael Thoma, a West German lawyer, insists that European lawyers are as available as their U.S. counterparts and that the results of their work are comparable.
But, he says, "surely we don't produce so much paper.
Our legal system is different." 

Nonetheless, U.S. corporations are accustomed to dealing with the big U.S. firms.
J. Richard Edmondson, senior vice president and general counsel of Bristol Myers Co., says the U.S. invasion of the European legal market should be helpful to corporations such as his.
He has already consulted a European firm in Brussels on issues related to the changing European marketplace, but he sees an increasing need for U.S. law firms in Europe. 

Predictably, U.S. law firms' interest in Europe has generated a lively turf war.
Some major law firms based in New York, Washington and Los Angeles are trying to expand their small offices in London and Paris.
Others are planning assaults on Brussels, forming loose affiliations with Brussels firms or opening offices there. 

Suddenly Belgian lawyers, especially those with EC practices, are being courted by U.S. firms.
Last spring Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, based in Washington, D.C., and Dallas, opened a Brussels office in conjunction with De Smaedt & Danssesse, a Brussels law firm.
The move triggered the kind of upheaval that is common in the volatile U.S. legal market but that has been rare in Brussels.
Phillippe-Francois LeBrun, a senior partner in the Belgian firm, decided he didn't want his practice controlled by a U.S. firm and defected with a group of associates. 

Christopher Norall said his small Brussels law firm, Forester, Norall & Sutton, has been approached by five to 10 U.S. law firms. "At the present time I think our view is we prefer to go it alone," he said.
For law firms with EC expertise like Mr. Norall's, the dilemma is whether to remain independent and hope to receive referrals of business from many sources, or to join forces with a U.S. firm and perhaps limit the number of firms willing to exchange business. 

Partnerships between U.S. and European lawyers are permitted in some nations and not in others, though the rules of many countries are under review.
But less formal affiliations between U.S. and European firms are in vogue. "It's sort of a mating dance but no engagement and no marriage," says Isaac Shapiro, a partner at Skadden, Arps, Meagher, Slate & Flom, which is studying its European options.
The firm has a London office. 

In recent weeks Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher of Los Angeles and Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim & Ballon in New York have both associated with Brussels firms.
O'Melveny & Myers, the giant Los Angeles firm headed by former Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher, has affiliated with MacFarlanes, a mid-sized London firm. 

But MacFarlanes continues to play the field a bit.
Recently a representative from MacFarlanes paid a visit to at least one U.S. firm and explained that the relationship with O'Melveny isn't exclusive and that the firm still wants to do business with other U.S. firms. 

"We have bean approached by an endless stream of people with rumors that Skadden is doing this or Skadden is doing that," says Mr. Shapiro. "Everybody's saying, 'Don't do anything without talking to us. '" Mr. Shapiro contends Brussels "is going to be the Washington of Europe." His firm recently sent an associate to work at the Brussels office of the Paris-based Law Offices of S.G. Archibald for six weeks.
James Venit, the partner with whom he worked, has decided to defect to Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering, based in Washington.
Wilmer has chosen not to affiliate but to go it alone in Brussels, where it will open an office Dec. 1. 

As U.S. firms clamor to make their mark in Brussels, most agree that Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen & Hamilton, of New York, has the clear edge.
Cleary, which opened its Brussels branch in 1960, has more than 30 attorneys there, including U.S. and European lawyers. "We think of ourselves not as the European office of an American firm," says Walter W. Oberreit, a Cleary partner. "We are very much a European office." 

