.START 

Adolph Coors Co. said it signed an agreement in principle to acquire most of the beer-related assets of Stroh Brewery Co. 

The move is in hopes of forging a strong competitor to dominant industry players Anheuser-Busch Cos. and Miller Brewing Co., a unit of Philip Morris Cos., by merging the two struggling brewers. 

Coors, of Golden, Colo., said it will assume debt and pay cash totaling $425 million for five breweries and several Stroh's brands, including Stroh, Schlitz, Old Milwaukee, Schaefer and Signature.
The accord must first pass muster with the Justice Department's Antitrust Division and is subject to a definitive agreement. 

Adding the brands of third-ranked Stroh will give fourth-ranked Coors the critical mass it needs to play with the big boys.
But it doesn't necessarily give the company the marketing wisdom that it has apparently lacked in the past, analysts said. "It's the only move they could make, and it's a great opportunity.
But will they become a solid No. 3 player?" asked Tom Pirko, president of Bevmark Inc., a Los Angeles-based consulting firm. "It's a formidable undertaking." 

The move would give Coors greater flexibility in production and synergies in marketing, and fills in product-line gaps that existed at Coors, said Peter Coors, chairman and president of the Coors Brewing Co. unit. "If we're going to be a long-term player, we have to have more mass, more size," he said. 

The merged company would have annual shipments of between 32 million and 36 million barrels a year.
Anheuser-Busch has annual shipments of about 80 million barrels, and Miller Brewing ships about 40 million barrels a year. 

Some analysts said that the acquisition will significantly help Coors in its marketing and production. "They have been too small to afford the marketing dollars to compete with Anheuser and Miller," said Emanuel Goldman, analyst with PaineWebber Inc. in San Francisco. "This puts them in the ballpark and makes them a major player." The new breweries will also cut the company's distribution costs, he said, making it possible for Coors to make and package its beer all over the nation. 

If the acquisition is completed, the company will also gain a strong popular brand in Old Milwaukee, the fifth-largest selling brand in the nation, and the top-selling malt liquor, Schlitz Malt Liquor.
In addition, Coors would net a couple of brands that are strong in the East and Midwest to complement its current strength in Texas, Southern California and the Rocky Mountains. 

But, Coors must still prove it is a world-class marketer, able to compete alongside Miller and Anheuser.
Mr. Pirko and others note several times in the past when Coors failed to capitalize on marketing opportunities.
In the early 1970s, when light beers first leaped onto the sales charts, Coors missed the opportunity to market itself as the original light beer.
The company also failed to market the draft aspect of Coors, an advantage that Miller recognized in creating its new Miller Genuine Draft beer two years ago.
And Coors failed to jump into the market with a dry beer, a variation that's doing well for Anheuser-Busch's brands. 

Even though the merger will give the company the "critical mass" it needs to survive in the beer industry, Coors will have its marketing dollars split among many brands with this acquisition, a problem that has similarly plagued G. Heilman Brewing Co., now owned by Australia's Bond Corp. Holdings Ltd. Miller and Anheuser can still be more efficient with their marketing because they have fewer brands, analysts said. 

Coors said it hasn't made any decisions yet about what brands it will aggressively promote and which ones it will let slide.
Analysts, however, said they expect the company to focus its efforts on the Stroh, Signature and Old Milwaukee regular and light brands and on Schlitz Malt Liquor, possibly dropping the weakest brands, including Red Bull, Goebel and Silver Thunder.
Coors said it will continue to aggressively promote Keystone, its brand-new entry into the popular-priced segment, although analysts suggested that Keystone could easily cannibalize Old Milwaukee. 

While the new brands bring some regional strengths, Mr. Coors said the company will continue to market Coors nationally.
He also said he doesn't know whether Coors will continue to use both its ad agencies, Foote, Cone & Belding Communications in Chicago and GSD&M of Austin, Texas, along with Stroh's new ad agency, Hal Riney & Partners Inc., of San Francisco. 

If the acquisition is completed, Coors will carry debt on its balance sheet for the first time, although Mr. Coors said he isn't sure yet how much debt the deal will require.
Currently the company has about $1 billion in assets and no debt. 

Competitors are expected to try to block the acquisition, perhaps suing on antitrust concerns that the deal would result in too much concentration in the industry.
Analysts, however, expect that Coors will win in the long run.
Spokesmen for the Justice Department said they didn't know whether the department would try to block the merger. 

Under the agreement, Stroh will keep its non-beer beverage businesses, including Sundance sparkling juices, and White Mountain and California Cooler wine coolers, as well as its Primo beer, sold largely in Hawaii.
The company will also retain its Memphis, Tenn., and Van Nuys, Calif., breweries, where those products are made. 

The Stroh family has become increasingly involved in businesses outside the brewing industry in the past decade, including a couple of large real estate development investments in Detroit. 

Coors shares closed yesterday at $23.75, up $1.50, in national over-the-counter trading. 

