.START 

The House passed a bill requiring alternative long-distance operators to file their rates with federal regulators and disclose prices to customers upon request. 

Under the measure, the companies must submit their rates to the Federal Communications Commission, which could investigate whether the prices are "unjust or unreasonable" and could make companies justify their rates. 

The bill, introduced by Rep. Jim Cooper (D., Tenn.) and passed on a voice vote, is intended to end abuses by companies that provide assistance to callers placing collect, person-to-person and credit card calls from hotels, airports, hospitals and other institutions.
It extends to all alternative-operator services restrictions that the FCC applied to five industry leaders earlier this year.
Similar legislation is pending in the Senate. 

In February, the FCC required five companies to identify themselves to each caller and to place a sticker on the telephone or a placard near the phone with their name and a number to call for more information about the service.
The agency had logged more than 2,000 customer complaints on the five companies.
In addition, the FCC required those companies to disclose rates if callers ask, and ordered the companies to stop blocking consumers' calls to other carriers such as American Telephone & Telegraph Co., MCI Communications Corp. and US Sprint, a unit of United Telecommunications Inc. 

The five companies cited by the FCC were Central Corp. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; International Telecharge Inc., Dallas; National Telephone Services Inc., Rockville, Md.; Payline Systems Inc., Portland, Ore.; and Telesphere Network Inc., Oak Brook, Ill. 

Alternative-operator services, which sprang up after the breakup of the Bell System in 1984, lease telephone lines from major carriers to sell operator assistance to various institutions, which get a commission of 20% or more.
Some regularly charge rates that are 250% higher than AT&T rates. 

The House bill also calls for a nine-month study of operator service providers to decide whether further regulation is needed, and gives the companies 18 months to upgrade equipment to allow customers access to the long-distance carrier of their choice. 

Regulators in several states have already restricted alternative-operator services, but that hasn't stopped their growth.
Alternative companies have captured about 5% of the $12 billion market for operator-assisted calls. 

