.START 

While Congress wrestles with a possible cut in the tax on capital gains, accountants are busy devising strategies for investors playing a waiting game. 

Clearly, a measure approved by the House Ways and Means Committee earlier this month would give many investors a good reason to engage in serious profit-taking.
It would cut the top rate on long-term capital gains to 19.6% for the next 2 1/2 years.
Currently, capital gains are taxed at ordinary income-tax rates that run as high as 33%. 

But the proposal faces a tough fight on the House floor, where a vote could come as early as this week.
Meanwhile, Senate Finance Committee Chairman Lloyd Bentsen has a counterproposal that would expand the deduction for individual retirement accounts. 

The battle could be protracted, and nobody can say for sure what will happen. "I don't think we'll see legislation before Thanksgiving, if then," says Peter Elinsky, a tax partner in the Washington office of KPMG Peat Marwick. 

What should investors do until the situation becomes clear? 

Tax advisers say there are ways people sitting on big gains can hedge their bets.
They also suggest that careful planning now could help some investors avoid a nasty surprise called the alternative minimum tax. 

For now, investors with large gains who can afford to wait should do so, says William G. Brennan, a Washington-based tax partner in Ernst & Young. "Even though we don't know exactly what a new law might look like, presumably it's going to be a lot more favorable than it is today." 

People who are worried that profits they have today will evaporate if they wait to sell have some wiggle room, says Gail Winawer, a tax partner at Spicer & Oppenheim in New York.
Using an algebraic formula, she has calculated how much profit investors in the 28% tax bracket can afford to lose and still be just as well off if the maximum tax on capital gains is cut to 19.6%. "It turns out you could let a current gain erode by 10% and still have the same net, after-tax profit," says Ms. Winawer. 

Residents of New York and many other states that usually amend their laws to conform with federal tax changes may have even more latitude.
Assuming that New York adopts the capital-gains tax cut approved by the House Ways and Means Committee, "a New York City resident could afford to let his profit fall 14.5%" before he would clearly be better off selling and paying today's higher rate, Ms. Winawer says. 

Stock-market investors who don't want to take the gamble might consider a hedging maneuver known in Wall Street parlance as "going short against the box," or against shares already owned.
The investor simply borrows from a broker an equal number of shares of a stock in which he or she has an unrecognized gain and sells them short.
In a short sale, the investor is betting that the price of the stock will fall, so the borrowed shares can be replaced later at less cost. 

Locking in a gain in this manner, without actually selling the original shares, "is the best way to freeze yourself economically," says Adrian Moravcsik, a financial consultant at Bailard, Biehl & Kaiser Inc., San Mateo, Calif., investment advisers. "Whatever you lose on your long position you make up on the short position," he says, whether stock prices rise or fall. 

The strategy has some drawbacks, however.
For one, there is the additional cost in brokerage commissions of doing the short sale.
For another, notes Mr. Brennan of Ernst & Young, it is impossible to know how long to keep the short position because nobody knows when a reduction in the capital-gains rate might become effective. 

The current capital-gains proposal would apply to sales on or after Sept. 14, 1989.
But Congress may well change that date. 

Because an investor who sells short isn't entitled to dividends on those shares, "you're giving up that income as long as you hold the position, so you wouldn't want to sit there indefinitely," Mr. Brennan says. 

If the House Ways and Means Committee measure does become law, investors with long-term gains will have a "tremendous incentive to sell before Dec. 31, 1991," says Tom Ochsenschlager, a tax partner in the Washington office of Grant Thornton.
The measure would let investors exclude from taxes 30% of capital gains on stocks, bonds and most other assets held more than one year. 

But that exclusion would expire at the end of 1991.
After that investors would be able to exclude from taxes any gains attributable only to inflation.
And that exclusion would apply only to newly purchased assets. 

"On Jan. 1, 1992, you start indexing for inflation, but only for those assets you acquire starting that day," says Mr. Ochsenschlager.
If inflation remains low, "it will be several years before you get any real benefit from" the indexing. 

Even investors who want to continue holding a stock after Dec. 31, 1991, may decide to sell before then to take advantage of the 30% exclusion. "If you still wanted to own the stock, you could buy it back on Jan. 2, and your new, higher basis would reduce the gain when you eventually sold for good," Mr. Ochsenschlager says. 

Before banking on their potential profits, however, investors should consider their exposure to the alternative minimum tax.
That's the levy imposed on taxpayers who have a certain amount of some kinds of deductions -- called "preference items" -- that aren't allowed under special minimum-tax rules.
Although the minimum tax rate is just 21%, those subject to it end up paying a higher tab than under the regular tax rules because it applies to more of their income. 

Many tax advisers say the gains investors could exclude from taxation under the Ways and Means Committee proposal would become a preference item.
As a result, "some people who rush into sales may also rush right into the alternative minimum tax," says Joel Isaacson, director of financial planning at Weber Lipshie & Co. in New York.
Among those with the highest risk: executives who had already exercised incentive stock options and investors who had given appreciated securities to charity. 

