.START 

Japanese officials may be dragging their feet in approving Globex, an electronic futures market being developed jointly by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and Reuters Holdings PLC, following a slow start for a recently launched futures market in Japan. 

The issue of a slowdown in the approval process was raised in recent days when Mitsui Trust & Banking Co. withdrew its Globex application, futures industry officials in Tokyo and Chicago said.
Officials at Mitsui, one of the largest trust banks in Tokyo, were unavailable to comment on their withdrawal.
A Chicago Merc spokesman said that the Globex application roster was confidential. 

But officials at Merc member firms, who asked not to be named so as not to risk losing business with Japanese institutional customers, speculated that the delay was deliberate.
Even though they are confident that Japan eventually will approve Globex, they said the Japanese government, in appearing to shield a domestic exchange from foreign competition, is being consistent with its protective stance taken toward other Japanese industries. 

Globex was designed in part to tap the growing demand in Asian and European markets for trading financial futures contracts outside of Chicago trading hours.
With its huge pools of investment capital, Japan is considered crucial to the long-term success of the planned computerized trading system, which initially will allow traders to buy or sell certain Merc financial futures contracts when the exchange is closed. 

A substantial delay in Japan's approval of Globex would be a blow to the planned system, and could weaken its chance to gain a clear competitive advantage in Asian markets over potential rivals, Merc members said.
The Merc's image as the leading innovator among U.S. exchanges could also be tarnished if Globex's expansion is hamstrung for months by Japanese officials.
Globex is expected to begin trading on a limited basis in Chicago, New York and London by year end or early in 1990, Merc officials say.
Other futures exchanges in the U.S. and abroad are likely to join Globex in coming months and eventually list certain of their contracts on the system.
The Merc is also negotiating with the Chicago Board of Trade to merge Globex with a similar electronic trading system being developed by that exchange. 

An official from Japan's Ministry of Finance denied that the government pressured Mitsui or others to back away from Globex following the lackluster launch in June of the Tokyo International Financial Futures Exchange, a bank-owned futures market.
Except for trading in a Euroyen interest rate futures contract, the fledgling Tokyo exchange has been a disappointment, Japanese futures traders say. 

"We have never said no" to institutions wanting to join Globex, the Finance Ministry official said. "We've just said wait until the system {Globex} becomes clear," he said.
Japanese regulators are studying Globex, but the official wouldn't say when the study is expected to be completed. 

One apparent sticking point in the minds of Japanese officials is who would have authority to investigate trades if trouble develops. "Who will take responsibility?" the official asked. "The problem isn't solved." 

The Merc spokesman said the exchange was cooperating with the Finance Ministry's review of Globex. "We have no reason to think things aren't going well," he said. 

