.START 

SMALL-BUSINESS LOBBIES for capital-gains tax cut.
Would an IRA be better? 

Sen. Lloyd Bentsen believes his proposal to expand individual retirement accounts will attract support from small-business owners, congressional insiders say.
His reasoning: a tax-deductible IRA provides an annual tax break to most owners and their employees, while capital gains come into play only if a business is sold.
Also, the Texas Democrat argues, start-up capital for most small firms doesn't come from investors seeking a profit but from friends and family members.
The Democratic heads of the House and Senate small-business committees, Rep. John LaFalce of New York and Sen. Dale Bumpers of Arkansas, favor the IRA idea. 

But small-business lobbyists insist there is "unqualified support" for the capital-gains tax cut.
They argue it would give investors more incentive to risk backing small companies.
Venture capitalists provide only 5% of the equity capital that goes into small businesses, says Allen Neece, a lobbyist for National Small Business United.
The rest, he says, comes from private investors, such as lawyers, doctors, friends and neighbors, who are sensitive to capital-gains taxes.
Moreover, owners can currently set up tax-deductible Keogh savings plans. 

One problem with an IRA plan backed by House Democrats, says John Motley, the National Federation of Independent Business's chief lobbyist, is that it would increase the top tax rate. 

TAX CREDITS for small business are pushed to ease costs of disabilities bill. 

Sen. David Pryor introduces legislation to provide a refundable tax credit of $5,000 to help small businesses that make structural or other changes to serve disabled patrons.
The Arkansas Democrat's proposal is in response to fears that the sweeping Senate-passed bill barring discrimination against the disabled could require costly changes that would be especially burdensome to small businesses.
A new law is almost certain to be enacted, despite small-business opposition to major provisions. 

Currently, businesses get a tax deduction of as much as $35,000 for architectural changes designed to aid handicapped customers or employees.
But a tax credit offers a dollar of credit for each dollar spent, compared with a deduction that's worth about 34 cents on the dollar.
Under Sen. Pryor's plan, if a business has more than $5,000 in expenses in a year, it can apply the difference to the next year's tax credit. 

Sen. Tom Harkin (D., Iowa), a leading sponsor of the disabilities bill, supports the Pryor proposal, giving it a good chance of adoption in the Senate. 

FRANCHISE RULES: The Federal Trade Commission sets a second comment period on its proposed new franchise rules.
The International Franchise Association asked that the record be reopened after the North American Security Administrators Association issued a model franchise law it will propose for use by the states.
IFA calls the model law a "regulatory bombshell" that would impose a new layer of complexity on franchise companies and wants to add comments about it to the FTC.
The new comment period ends Nov. 21. 

RIVALRIES FLARE between small-business groups.
National Small Business United takes credit for helping to get House Ways and Means Chairman Daniel Rostenkowski (D., Ill.) to support near repeal of the Section 89 employee-benefits law.
The National Federation of Independent Business, which demands total repeal, snipes that it wasn't invited to Mr. Rostenkowski's office for the announcement because it doesn't "do the chairman's bidding." Both groups played a role in the lawmaker's decision, a congressional staffer says: "NSBU worked on the inside" and "the NFIB was on the outside throwing bombs." 

TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER between federal labs and business is a flop so far. 

That's the conclusion of a report on the government's three-year-old program to help businesses commercialize federal technology.
The effort has resulted in "frustrated scientists who can't commercialize their inventions and discouraged businesses who can't get at valuable technologies," says a staff report prepared for Rep. Ron Wyden, chairman of a House small-business subcommittee.
The Oregon Democrat has scheduled hearings for Oct. 5. 

Although the 1986 law permits royalty agreements between government scientists and businesses, the program has little leadership and few new products have resulted, the study says.
From the $60 billion a year the U.S. spends on research and development, the government realizes only $3 million in annual royalties.
The Commerce Department says it will take up to five years to see concrete results from technology-transfer agreements now in the pipeline. 

"The rub is scientists and researchers aren't businessmen" and don't see the commercial value of their inventions, says Robert Brumley, a former government official. 

SMALL TALK: Major federal contract awards to women-owned businesses increased 1,000% from 1979 to 1988, reaching $1.9 billion last year, the SBA says. . . . Lazy Cat Productions, Stillwater, Okla., pursues a market niche with "Kitty Video," a video for cats that features chirping songbirds. 

