.START 

King Solomon might have some tips for resolving this dispute. 

In College Corner, a town of about 1,000 that straddles the Indiana-Ohio border northwest of Cincinnati, schoolchildren have gone to classes together for five generations.
But now education officials from each state want control of their own. 

"It's hard to run a school when there's continual conflict between Ohio and Indiana laws," says Franklin B. Walter, Ohio's superintendent of education. "We've got different tenure laws, teacher retirement laws and tax laws." 

But many townspeople, used to watching their children grow up together, take a less benign view. "They want to draw a Berlin Wall down our town," says Marilee McDonough, mother of a second-grader and a preschooler. "They're asking us to separate our kids and stamp them Indiana or Ohio kids.
We're not going to allow it." 

College Corner already is split by two time zones and three counties, not to mention two states.
Union School, now the town's elementary school after serving for 80 years as its only school, was built on the state line in 1893 as a symbol of the town's unity.
The state line runs across the school's basketball court and through the superintendent's office. "We've operated well for years," says superintendent Marilyn Crain, who sits at her desk in Ohio and answers the telephone in Indiana. 

But this peaceful co-existence was shattered last spring when the Ohio Board of Education ruled that the state would no longer provide funding to the College Corner school district for students from Ohio.
The reasoning: College Corner doesn't meet the state's definition of a school district because it only runs through the eighth grade.
Union School's graduates, including those from Ohio, attend high school in Liberty, Ind., six miles away. 

Indiana officials responded by arguing that they should take full control of Union School, booting Ohio members from the joint school board and charging Ohio students to attend. 

But College Corner parents, savvy about life in two jurisdictions, sued in each state to block officials from acting.
An Ohio judge is pondering the crucial question of whether College Corner qualifies as a school district, while the town's students enter the new academic year attending Union School together. 

