.START 

Darcy Vernier's Aug. 21 editorial-page article, "Doing Time With Insider Traders," is -- to be perfectly blunt -- puerile, self-pitying nonsense.
Mr. Vernier seems not to understand what exactly he did wrong or why he received the sentence he did.
What he did wrong was fundamentally no different from what a bank robber or crack-cocaine dealer does -- he attempted to profit by breaking the social contract.
He was caught, convicted and sentenced to prison not ". . . for contemplation" of a crime, but for committing that crime in a premeditated fashion.
As the very first paragraph of his column reveals, he knew full well what he was doing and what the potential consequences were. 

In an ideal world, prisons would reform the ignorant and punish the merely venal.
Mr. Vernier clearly falls into the latter category. (He is certainly educated and articulate enough to get an article onto the editorial page of The Wall Street Journal.) He writes that he finds his prison term ". . . boring, degrading and a monumental waste of time." Does he imagine that prisoners at San Quentin, Attica or other federal institutions find their time inside stimulating and uplifting?
He is in prison to be punished and, if possible, deterred.
If monotony is the worst punishment that society can inflict, then perhaps white-collar criminals should be deprived even of such basics as salad bars and tennis courts. 

John E. Squier 

Washington 

You gave Mr. Vernier a platform to complain that he was punished too severely for altering his W-2 forms to "receive an undeserved refund" (tax fraud).
Common knowledge holds this to be a crime.
The judge called it "contemplative." I call it premeditated embezzlement. 

A year in jail seems well deserved for what Mr. Vernier calls "typical broker rationalization." Did he also cheat his clients?
I question the rationale of putting such white-collar bunko artists, cheating brokers, tax evaders, business and government types into a picnic facility such as Lompoc.
How much more equitable to place them with the other common criminals in overcrowded local jails, where the time would not be quite so "boring." 

Rosemary A.C. Gottlieb Taxpayer Yakima, Wash. 

I am deeply offended by the arrogance of Mr. Vernier, who attempts to vindicate himself by distinguishing between the crime for which he is now serving time (making false claims against the government) and the crime of a common addict he was forced to share a cell with while awaiting trial. "I am one of those addicts, Mr. Vernier." 

He wonders at the benefit to society from his incarceration and suggests that perhaps society would be better served if he were allowed instead to perform some act of community service or volunteer work.
Perhaps society could be better served, Mr. Vernier, but what happens to justice if men of superior means and talents are allowed to first write off the law and then write off their own fines and penalties?
Perhaps going to jail for a somewhat petty and victimless crime does offend a man's right to be free from excessive bail, fines and unusual punishments, but the law can never cease to be blind regarding a man's social standing or talents prior to the commission of such crimes, or the law and all that it stands for become a farce. 

Remember, Mr. Vernier, in America, what's good for the goose is good for the gander, and in the state prison where I now reside we don't have a golf course, a tennis court or a salad bar, and the inmates are not nearly so polite as they are in "Club Fed." But good luck to you just the same, sir, and may you never come back again. 

Richard W. Haskin 

Advisory Council Representative 

California Men's Colony 

Inmate C13532, Cell 2355 

San Luis Obispo, Calif. 

