.START 

Union Carbide Corp. will pay $15 million to 375 former company managers in a settlement that was approved by a state court judge in New York. 

At issue in the suit was a management-incentive plan, which was dissolved after 1970, under which management employees were entitled to cash payments equivalent to dividends paid to stockholders. 

In 1986, when Union Carbide, of Danbury, Conn., sold its Consumer Product businesses in a successful attempt to fight off a hostile takeover by GAF Corp., it made a special payment to stockholders.
The payment prompted retired managers, who were covered by the incentive plan, to contend that they were entitled to the special payment. 

In an unusual move, Union Carbide sued a class of the former employees in order "to get the entire problem in one place so that it could be addressed locally and hopefully settled," said William Krohley, a partner at Kelley, Drye & Warren, which represents the company.
The company sought a ruling that the board's decision not to issue the payments to retirees was correct. 

Frederick T. Davis, who represented the class of former employees, said his clients "settled for roughly 50 cents on the dollar." State Supreme Court Justice Elliot Wilk awarded Mr. Davis's firm, Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, $660,000 in legal fees. 

Mr. Davis said he believes this was the only litigation ever filed over a "dividend equivalent" plan. 

PATTON, BOGGS & BLOW is a limited partner in a new 1992 consulting firm. 

The Washington, D.C., law firm is one of the backers of Denman & Partners, which will advise companies on strategic-planning issues related to the opening trade borders in Western Europe.
The new consulting firm, based in Patton Boggs' offices, will also advise companies on merger and acquisition opportunities in Europe. 

Denman & Partners was co-founded by Sir Roy Denman, who until recently was the Head of Delegation of the Commission of the European Communities to the U.S., essentially the EC's ambassador to the U.S. Hilliard A. Zola, who is of counsel to Patton Boggs, is the other general partner.
Limited partners include Morris L. Chucas, who practices law in Philadelphia and Cherry Hill, N.J., and James Symington, the former Missouri congressman who is a partner at O'Connor & Hannon in Washington. 

"I felt there was a great deal to be done in informing American companies about what was going to happen in 1992 in Europe," said Sir Roy.
He said he wanted to affiliate with a U.S. firm because he needed "expert advise and counsel in legal affairs." Denman & Partners plans to open a Brussels office before year end. 

Patton Boggs is known for its trade practice.
Its managing partner, Timothy May, said the firm will turn to Denman & Partners when clients need advice on European problems. 

Said Mr. May: "We were looking for a window on Brussels short of opening an office or acquiring a firm." 

CAREER ADVANCEMENT is a hot topic at in-house lawyers meeting at Duke. 

Guy A. Zoghby, general counsel at PPG Industries Inc., of Pittsburgh, struck a responsive chord this week when he told 43 in-house lawyers attending a seminar at Duke University's Fuqua School of Business, "I believe a dual ladder is essential" in rewarding highly valued lawyers who have little chance to become senior managers in corporations. 

By dual ladder, Mr. Zoghby was referring to a two-track hierarchical structure which allows staff lawyers to reach the equivalent of senior-management status.
Inhouse law departments are small, usually employing no more than 50 lawyers.
Only a handful of the lawyers can hope to help run a corporate-law department. 

So how does a general counsel keep proven talent happy?
By persuading top management to create an alternative path for advancement, said Mr. Zoghby. 

When Mr. Zoghby joined PPG from International Business Machines Corp. two years ago, he pushed for a dual ladder so that his most experienced lawyers would be eligible for senior-management benefits such as stock options, bonuses, higher salaries and larger office space.
The company's top executives agreed. 

At the 52-lawyer legal department at Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co., of Springfield, Mass., a dual track has been in place for 16 years, said associate general counsel Kenneth S. Cohen, who attended the Duke seminar.
Lawyers not involved in management are eligible for perks and can participate in senior level decision-making, Mr. Cohen says. 

Two years ago Hershey Foods Corp., of Hershey, Pa., began offering lawyers with a minimum of 12-years experience the chance to attain managerial perks, a top salary of $200,000 and the title of senior counsel.
Hershey's assistant general counsel Robert M. Reese cautioned against dismissing a new title as trivial. "Lawyers value recognition and professional pride and self-esteem as much as a salary increase," he said. 

WEDTECH ASKS for summary judgment in suit against E. Robert Wallach. 

The defunct defense contractor has asked a federal court in Manhattan to grant a summary judgment in its racketeering suit against Mr. Wallach and his co-defendants.
Mr. Wallach was the former confidant and personal legal advisor to ex-Attorney General Edwin Meese. 

Last month, Mr. Wallach, W. Franklyn Chinn and R. Kent London were found guilty of racketeering, fraud and conspiracy.
The three men were charged with receiving illegal payments from Wedtech in return for trying to influence Mr. Meese and other federal officials on behalf of Wedtech. 

Wedtech, which is in bankruptcy proceedings, sued the three defendants in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in New York in July 1987.
The suit was later moved to federal district court.
Wedtech accused the defendants of racketeering and common-law fraud. 

In its motion, filed yesterday, Wedtech said the defendants are prohibited by law from denying their criminal acts because of their convictions.
The company said a court should therefore summarily rule in favor of Wedtech.
Wedtech seeks to recover millions of dollars from the defendants. 

The defendants have vowed to appeal the convictions. 

Gary Naftalis, an attorney for Mr. Wallach, said, "We are very confident Bob Wallach's unfounded conviction will be set aside and that this lawsuit will be proved meritless." 

COCAINE DEALERS in California can be prosecuted for second-degree murder if a customer dies of an overdose, according to a recent California Supreme Court decision.
But the ruling was hardly a victory for prosecutors.
In the 4-3 vote, the justices also said prosecutors must be able to prove there was a "high probability" that the person who took cocaine would die.
In dissenting opinions Chief Justice Malcolm Lucas and two other justices said such a rigid standard of proof would discourage such cases against dealers.
The justice who wrote the majority opinion said the legislature -- and not the courts -- should encourage the use of second-degree murder charges as a deterence to drug dealers. 

PAUL, HASTINGS, Janofsky & Walker recruits on Capitol Hill: Ralph B. Everett, 38, chief counsel and staff director of the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, will join the 400-lawyer Los Angeles firm of Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker.
Three years ago Mr. Everett became the first black to run a committee of the U.S. Senate.
He will be a partner in Paul Hasting's Washington, D.C., office where he will lead the Legislative Practice Group. 

