.START 

BACK AT THE RACKS, women help buoy retail sales.
But for how long? 

After languishing since "the great miniskirt debacle" of 1987, women's apparel sales are on the rise, says Andrew Regan, a Donaldson, Lufkin analyst.
But he notes recent hefty gains may be harder to sustain. "The career closets are stocked," he says, noting much of the buying was simply to replace worn-out wardrobes.
And, analysts expect discounts to cut into important Christmas receipts.
The Limited already discounts fall clothes and cash-strapped Campeau (Bloomingdale's, Abraham & Straus) may use markdowns to move goods, prompting others to follow. 

Meanwhile, women still search for that something "to die for" before they have to find something to die in.
Reports of success are few.
Chanel slaves are still chained in gold to the boxy knit and bony knee look and loving it, retailers say.
Silver, suede and animal prints gain favor, but no shape, color or style issues a new "statement." Popular fashion is staid: skirts that skim past the knee, trousers that flounce, shoulders that aren't quite so big, earth tones. 

After a lawsuit, Saks offers free tailoring on some ladies wear.
A new A&S promises free alterations in an hour. 

DOC-IN-A-BOX came first.
Now medical niches mushroom as physicians compete. 

Walk-in surgery centers led the way in stressing service over stately medical care.
Now, Call Doc Medical Group in San Diego takes its general services straight to the consumer's door in an equipment-packed van with a lab and pharmacy. "It's one-stop shopping," says Gresham Bayne, M.D., an owner and one of the emergency-room physicians who staff the van.
After four years, Call Doc eyes expansion.
Dr. Bayne says: "We're still not sure what our niche is.
Nobody's marketed medicine much." 

But they're learning.
A brochure handed out near Wall Street promotes four medical groups, including an ear, nose and throat practice managed by attorney William Romo for his doctor brother.
Advertising "is almost dictated by where you are," Mr. Romo says. "If you're {visible} down on a ground floor in a normal {not New York}city, you don't need it." The watchdog American Medical Association growls at overly hyped ads, but bumps heads with federal regulators guarding doctors' rights. 

ATLANTIC CITY'S real gamblers may be investors in junk-bond financed casinos. 

With Merv Griffin's Resorts International on the restructuring ropes and given the junk-bond market's generally wobbly state these days, the odds seem to be building against investors.
Analysts say the weak market probably won't cause immediate problems for casinos already loaded with debt.
But it may torpedo some recapitalization plans using junk bonds.
Ramada, parent of Tropworld, just postponed an offering, and Holiday, owner of Harrah's Marina, mulls an issue. 

Stakes are high.
Papers filed with regulators show the city's 12 casinos have $3.14 billion in long-term debt, mostly junk.
But casinos are more leveraged than they appear, considering the parents' junk.
Besides Resorts with $925 million, the biggest casino debtors: Bally's Park Place, $520 million; Trump Castle, $348 million; Trump Plaza, $273.5 million. 

Regulators figure under 20% of the $2.1 billion in debt since 1985 was actually used for new construction. 

UNFLUORIDATED BOTTLED water prompts a cautionary letter in the New England Journal of Medicine.
A recent study of 12 popular brands found only one (Perrier) met EPA fluoride targets.
If the trend away from tap water lowers fluoride intake, supplements may be in order, writes Sheila McGuire, D.D.S., Harvard Dental School. 

THE PATRON SAINT of hairdressers is Martin de Porres.
That's one of the many revelations in the New York Public Library Desk Reference.
The initial 848-page hardcover was inspired by the four million or so calls the library answers each year. 

A BAROMETER of retail sales is reborn.
The International Council of Shopping Centers pays the government $100,000 a year to generate data on 125 markets cut from Census budgets; it vows fewer revisions. 

REJECTED for a coveted $50 million grant, Combustion Engineering forges on. 

The ailing nuclear power industry pins its hopes on a sort of "junior" reactor: one that's smaller, safer, cheaper.
Westinghouse and GE each recently won a federal grant to develop such a design.
Combustion didn't and now looks to England. "It's a global market and we're now going to focus on the U.K." a spokesman says. 

The firm earlier formed a consortium with the U.K. Atomic Energy Authority and Rolls-Royce to explore development.
With a stiff upper lip, Combustion points out that there are several older power stations in Britain that will be decommissioned in the 1990s that could be ripe sites.
Its new reactor would rely on a "passive" cooling system that uses gravity and other natural forces to operate.
Existing plants use pumps and piping which critics say offers more margin for failure. 

U.S. nuclear plants generated 15% more power in 1988 but costs rose 22%: Temple, Barker & Sloane survey. 

BRIEFS: In the same day's mail: a survey from Trump Shuttle saying its fliers favor Trumplane over Pan Am; and a note that Pan Am is fighting the shuttle war on its stomach, offering free frozen Elan yogurt to waiting passengers . . . . Teatime's astir as Lyons Tetley unwraps a round teabag. 

