.START 

Varian Associates Inc. said net income in the fourth quarter ending Sept. 29 will be "substantially below" the 45 cents a share it reported in the third period. 

The announcement, which contradicted a previous projection by Varian that earnings would rebound from depressed third-quarter levels, rocked its stock.
In trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Varian closed at $25.75 a share, down $1.25. 

The diversified electronics concern didn't specify what fourth-quarter net income would be.
In the third quarter, earnings fell 23% to $9.1 million on sales of $333.5 million.
In the year-earlier fourth quarter, Varian earned $24.2 million, or $1.10 a share, including a gain of $9.6 million from the sale of a division and a charge of $22.8 million from restructuring. 

A company spokesman said fourth-quarter results were dragged down by an "embarrassing combination of unforeseen" problems in its electron-device and systems businesses, which make microwave tubes for radars and other products.
Among the problems were technical glitches with a tube product the company is trying to bring to market, he said. 

Varian also said fourth-quarter results will be hurt by reserves the company is establishing to cover anticipated legal expenses.
Varian disclosed last month that some employees would be subpoenaed in connection with the Justice Department's anti-trust probe of the power-grid tube industry, which supplies tubes for television and radio transmission. 

Varian announced last month that it intends to restructure its electron-device and systems business.
It said about 175 employees have been cut from that segment since June to cut costs.
Varian said it also is considering further cost-cutting moves, and said it hasn't ruled out trying to sell the electron-device and systems business.
That business typically accounts for about 40% of Varian's sales, with the remainder split evenly between medical products, semiconductor-production equipment and analytical instruments. 

