.START 

Reader's Digest Association Inc. is negotiating to purchase American Health magazine from its publisher for about $40 million, according to publishing industry executives. 

Separately, Reader's Digest, the closely held publishing concern based in Pleasantville, N.Y., said it has created three new business groups in a restructuring aimed at helping its growth in global publishing and direct-mail industries. 

The company, which is currently in preregistration for an initial public offering of non-voting shares of company stock, said it couldn't comment on acquisition activity.
But during the last two years, the company has been buying magazines to add to its flagship monthly Reader's Digest, which has a U.S. circulation of more than 16 million.
Since 1986, Reader's Digest Association has acquired three special interest magazines, Travel-Holiday, The Family Handyman, and New Choices, formerly known as 50 plus magazine. 

Owen Lipstein, president and general partner in American Health and the related special interest magazines that form American Health Partners, acknowledged that he is discussing a sale of American Health, but declined to identify the buyer.
Mr. Lipstein said the partnership is interested in selling the magazine "precisely because it's having a good year" and "it seemed like a like a good time to have a discussion." However, publishing industry executives speculated that Mr. Lipstein needs to raise money to pay off investors in American Health, which he started in 1982. 

The 38-year old Mr. Lipstein also is a general partner in Smart and Psychology Today, and the sole owner of Mother Earth News. 

Mr. Lipstein launched American Health with $10 million raised from investors by Oppenheimer & Co.
A spokesman for Oppenheimer said the investment bank is no longer involved in any of Mr. Lipstein's properties.
In recent years, Mr. Lipstein has worked with the New York media investment bankers Veronis Suhler & Associates, acquiring Mother Earth News in 1985 for an amount not disclosed and purchasing Psychology Today in 1988 for an estimated $25 million.
Earlier this year he and some limited partners launched Smart, a new consumer magazine aimed at men. 

Although Mr. Lipstein is said to be considering the sale of other magazines, such as Psychology Today, he said the only sale discussions at present concern American Health magazine. "I am still left with three essentially strong magazines," said Mr. Lipstein. 

In July, Mr. Lipstein said he planned to raise $40 million to $50 million in a public offering of his company, which he planned to rename New American Magazines.
Mr. Lipstein said the money raised would be used to pay off investors, but that about $15 million would be used as a start-up fund for new magazines.
Yesterday, Mr. Lipstein said he is still considering the public offering. 

Meanwhile, the realignment at Reader's Digest, according to George V. Grune, chairman and chief executive, represents a "natural consolidation" for the company. 

The three operating groups will be headed by newly appointed presidents.
M. John Bohane, 53, vice president and director of U.S. marketing, was named president of the Direct Marketing Group, responsible for all U.S. direct-mail activities for the company's book, music and home video products and financial services. 

Kenneth A. Gordon, 52, vice president and director of international marketing, was named president of the International Group, responsible for all Reader's Digest activities outside of the U.S. 

Thomas Kenney, 42, who has headed his own media investment firm, was named president of the Magazine Publishing Group.
Mr. Kenney will oversee the company's magazines.
He was founder and president of Thomas Kenney & Co., a New York media investment company. 

