.START 

A battle cry is rising to partly reregulate the airline industry, and it's coming not from liberal Democrats but from mainstream and conservative Republicans in Congress. 

These critics say airline competition has decreased dramatically at big airports in recent years, resulting in higher fares and reduced consumer choice.
They contend government must act to spur competition, especially at "fortress" hub airports dominated by one or two carriers. 

"Viscerally, I'm not in favor of government intervention, but I see a clear need in this case," says Arizona Sen. John McCain, ranking Republican on the Aviation Subcommittee.
He contends market forces have allowed the major airlines to block competition from newcomers, resulting in de facto reregulation -- without the regulators.
That, he says, "is the worst of all possible worlds." 

Many legislators are deluged with constituent complaints about fare increases. "I'm looking very strongly at reregulation," says Sen. Ted Stevens, an Alaska Republican who claims his constituents must pay "excessive amounts" for air travel.
Missouri Sen. John Danforth, ranking Republican on the Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, is upset about steep fare hikes at St. Louis and some other big airports. "There is neither regulation nor competition, and it's intolerable," he says. 

The Transportation Department also is taking a critical look at deregulation.
Secretary Samuel Skinner promises "major policy changes" in coming months, saying that while deregulation has been beneficial overall, "the current system isn't structured in a way to enhance competition" by upstart airlines.
He may try to free up slots at congested airports for newer carriers.
His activist style contrasts sharply with that of his predecessor, James Burnley, a defender of deregulation. 

Sen. Larry Pressler, a South Dakota Republican who proudly calls himself the "second-most-conservative member of the Senate," is also pressing for government action.
He's fed up with fare boosts and service cuts in regions away from the major population centers. "Deregulation hasn't worked in cities of 100,000 or less," he asserts. "I don't like government regulation, but travelers are in revolt." 

The airline-deregulation debate, the subject of a Senate hearing yesterday and a House hearing today, comes amid a reassessment of the 1978 airline deregulation law.
Largely a Democratic initiative whose goal was later embraced by the Reagan administration, it was supposed to give rise to dozens of healthy airlines by eliminating government red tape. 

Many new airlines did spring up, but most went out of business, and today more than 90% of the market is controlled by eight carriers, compared with 15 in 1984.
Democrats say the Reagan administration mismanaged deregulation by approving a raft of airline mergers and failing to increase airport capacity. 

"Deregulation never meant that government should abdicate its responsibilities," says Alfred Kahn, the Carter administration's deregulation czar, who advocates tougher antitrust enforcement and government action to ensure greater access to airports by smaller airlines.
While he remains a staunch defender of deregulation, he doesn't rule out the possibility that fare ceilings might have to be imposed to protect travelers. 

Yesterday, the General Accounting Office reported that industry and government policies that give airlines a lock on airport gates and facilities form an effective barrier to new competition. 

While no one is proposing to remedy the situation by reconstituting the Civil Aeronautics Board, with its supreme authority over airline routes and fares, Sen. McCain and Sen. Danforth are considering proposals that would alter the face of the industry.
The ideas include forcing the airlines to sell their computerized reservation systems, capping the percentage of gates an airline is permitted to control at an airport and banning or restricting carriers' long-term leases at airports. 

Such ideas are called "competition-enhancers" by proponents but sound like reregulation to the airlines. "The stakes are very high," says Robert Aaronson, president of the Air Transport Association, the industry trade group, who worries that "deregulation will be endangered." 

Despite his fears, the airline industry has strong allies in Congress who are loath to fiddle with deregulation.
Extensive research by the Brookings Institution's Clifford Winston and Steven Morrison shows airline deregulation has saved consumers billions of dollars a year, and lawmakers are reluctant to do anything that might reverse that. "Air travel will be even more costly and more complicated," warns Wyoming Sen. Alan Simpson, the assistant Republican leader, "if the federal government horns back in." 

The airlines and some transportation specialists challenge the view competition is inadequate. "You have seven or eight firms really competing nationwide," says Daniel Kasper, director of the transportation practice at Harbridge House, a Boston international management consulting firm. "There are very few industries you can point to where you have that many industries competing in many markets." Moreover, a new Transportation Department study shows that although competition has decreased at big airports, it has increased substantially at smaller ones. 

But deregulation has had an uneven effect, helping some travelers and hurting others.
And parochial concerns color the congressional debate.
Sen. McCain, who is particularly concerned about the problems of newer airlines, counts among his constituents America West Airlines, a Phoenix, Ariz., carrier frustrated by its inability to get permanent landing rights at crowded East Coast airports. 

Sen. Pressler would like to see a link between prices and miles flown so passengers taking short trips in less populous areas won't pay disproportionate fares.
Sen. Stevens wants to require airlines to tell consumers how to get a cheaper fare.
He is upset that it costs more to fly round-trip between Anchorage and Seattle than between Seattle and Washington, 

Rep. Cass Ballenger, a North Carolina Republican who recently complained about the impact of USAir Corp. 's acquisition of Piedmont Airlines, gripes that he and his wife have had four flights cancelled in the last two weeks.
In one case, he was trying to take a British member of Parliament to his home town of Hickory, N.C. Sen. Danforth frequently cites a General Accounting Office study that found fares at St. Louis rose twice as fast as the national average after Trans World Airlines and Ozark Air Lines merged. 

In the long run, almost everyone agrees increasing airport gates and facilities is the best way to stimulate competition.
In the short run, lawmakers are mulling over the possibility of barring clauses in airport contracts that permit carriers to veto airline-financed expansions in a bid to block competitors, and pressing lawsuits on alleged predatory pricing. 

But one powerful tool for promoting competition, the elimination of popular frequent-flyer programs -- which critics call legalized kickbacks -- isn't likely to be considered because, says Sen. McCain, it would be "political dynamite." 

