.START 

The organization man in the gray-flannel suit feels right at home at Procter & Gamble Co. 

One step inside P&G's limestone Twin Towers headquarters, where drinking at lunch and wearing light colored socks or red suspenders is taboo, seems like a step back in time. 

Here, hierarchy and tradition reign.
Even star recruits start their careers peddling soap and usually wait two decades before getting a shot at vice president.
Middle managers rarely make key decisions: Routine requests for a packaging redesign may travel through half a dozen management layers. 

"It's a throwback," says Lynne Hyman, an analyst with First Boston Corp. 

So why is the consumer products giant, whose profits surged 18% to $1.21 billion in fiscal 1989, doing so well? 

The answer shows that a behemoth corporation with old-fashioned values like loyalty and steadfastness can still thrive.
And that's especially so with a chief executive who personifies those values but stays in touch with changes in the marketplace. "You can't be old fashioned and be successful in the markets in which we compete," says John G. Smale, P&G's chairman and chief executive, who acknowledges the company has had to modify its traditional ways. "Somebody is trying to get at you every day and in every part of the world." Unlike CEOs who hawk their products on television and frequent the society circuit, Mr. Smale brags that he's a "dull fellow," and keeps a low profile.
The closest he comes to a product endorsement is his private testimony about how P&G's Metamucil has lowered his cholesterol. 

The 62-year-old executive, and 37-year veteran of P&G, listens to recordings of the company's toll-free customer hotline in his car and can quote commodity orange juice prices, which drive the company's Citrus Hill business.
Asked to define his management style, Mr. Smale, who is given to wearing a mainstream navy blue suit and burgundy company tie dotted with P&G's man-in-the-moon logo, answers simply: "I don't know how to describe it." (He seems to have mellowed from his years as a business major at Miami University of Ohio, when he published two pamphlets on how to throw a party: "Party 'Em Up" and "Party 'Em Up Some More.") 

P&G's performance today is all the more remarkable for the fact that, just a few years ago, during a period also under Mr. Smale's stewardship, the company hit the skids.
In 1985, P&G posted its first annual earnings decline since 1952 -- a 29% drop to $635 million.
Mainstay lines, such as toothpaste and diapers, were getting hammered by the competition: Crest's market share alone fell to 30.5% in 1985 from 40% in 1977; Pampers' share dropped around 40 points to 33% over roughly the same time. 

Yet, in the intervening years, P&G has boldly changed how and where it does business.
Determined to take advantage of growing markets overseas, the company turned around its early debacle in Japan, where its diaper and detergent lines in particular were faltering.
And it has acquired a raft of health-care businesses -- and a cabinet of new products -- in a series of takeovers.
Since 1980, in part because of the acquisitions, the company's annual sales have doubled to $21.4 billion. 

At the same time, Mr. Smale hung on to stale products others might have dumped, waiting for the chance to revamp them. "Smale revitalized the company," says a consultant close to P&G. "But he did it without losing the basic values of P&G or getting into the short-term thinking that dominates American industry." 

Consider P&G's turnaround in Japan.
The company first began selling its Pampers disposable diapers in Japan in 1972, but stumbled badly for more than a decade.
For advertisements, it relied on French and American television commercials dubbed with Japanese voices, which offended Japanese women.
What's more, P&G's diaper was inferior to the more tailored and absorbent Japanese variety. 

P&G executives mistakenly assumed that what worked at home would also work halfway around the world. "It was corporate arrogance," says Louis A. Pritchett, a P&G vice president of sales who retired earlier this year. "The business was just awful, but we kept saying the solution was to throw more money at it." By 1982, P&G's losses in Japan had mounted to a total of $200 million. 

Enter Mr. Smale, who turned to a traditional P&G strength: consumer research, which ultimately helped the company reposition its products in Japan. "The Japanese consumer is the most discriminating consumer in the world," he says.
To gain a footing there in the world's second largest consumer products market, Mr. Smale also authorized personnel changes.
Managers assigned to Japan were required to study the language and culture more closely.
Japanese managers also were hired to help run the business. 

Now Pampers diapers and Whisper sanitary napkins -- both redesigned for Japanese consumers -- are top sellers there.
And thanks to the turnaround in Japan, P&G's profits from international operations soared 37% in fiscal 1989, to $417 million.
Nearly 40% of the company's total sales came from international operations, and that is expected to grow to more than 50% within five years, Mr. Smale says. 

P&G has also realized that it can't grow everything in-house anymore.
To be sure, P&G still outspends other consumer-products companies on research and development and will devote decades to testing and perfecting a new product.
P&G scientists spent more than 40 years in the company's labs developing the fat substitute olestra, which the company says takes the calories and cholesterol out of potato chips and ice cream.
P&G still is awaiting government approval for olestra. 

But during his tenure, Mr. Smale has turned outward for growth, spending more than $3 billion on acquisitions and equity stakes in 16 companies around the world.
That's more than twice the number of acquisitions P&G made during the 1960s and 1970s combined. 

Aware that U.S. markets for its diapers and detergents were fast maturing, Mr. Smale handpicked the growing health-products business as P&G's next target.
Over three years, he acquired Norwich Eaton Pharmaceuticals Inc., Richardson-Vicks International and the over-the-counter drugs of G.D. Searle & Co. Now P&G has a list of famous health-products, such as Pepto-Bismol and Metamucil. 

Operating margins in drugs can be 30% or more compared with the single-digit margins P&G achieves in diapers. "He had the vision on what P&G had to do to get going," recalls Raymond Colton, a retired P&G executive. "We were in a trough throughout the 1970s, and we weren't getting into anything new." 

Despite his appetite for acquisitions, Mr. Smale shuns hostile takeovers.
P&G, he acknowledges, had been interested in Richardson-Vicks for a decade prior to the final $1.24 billion deal in 1985.
The company asked on several occasions if the Richardson family was interested in a friendly deal, but never pushed ahead.
P&G became the family's choice only when Unilever N.V. tried acquiring Richardson in a hostile raid. "John hates what hostile takeovers and junk bonds have done to companies," says Hercules A. Segalas, an investment banker with PaineWebber Inc. and a former P&G hand. 

That conservatism also means he is willing to stick with products long after other companies would have pulled the plug.
Insiders, for example, long called Pringle's potato chips the "Edsel" of P&G's stable of products.
In 1978, the product was getting clobbered by its competitors, especially Frito-Lay. "People who liked grease and salt weren't buying it," recalls Gordon Tucker, former brand manager for Pringle's and now executive vice president of Lojack Corp. Besides, the red canister twin packs made the chips more expensive than the competition. 

The brand's team approached Mr. Smale with a plan to salvage Pringle's.
It recommended a packaging change, new varieties and a saltier recipe.
Mr. Smale, who ordinarily insists on a test market before a national roll-out, told the team to go ahead -- although he said he was skeptical that Pringle's could survive, Mr. Tucker says. 

Yet the chief executive also involved himself in the smallest details of the project.
He balked at the idea of a silver can for Pringle's Lite -- chips with fewer calories and less fat -- because he "didn't find it appetizing," Mr. Tucker says.
Pringle's package designers would also quickly hear -- through channels -- if Mrs. Smale happened to find a broken chip in one of their canisters. 

The attention to details worked.
The once-unprofitable Pringle's had record sales last year -- and also made P&G money. 

Not that Mr. Smale won't cut loose a product that isn't bringing returns.
The soft-drink business of Crush and Hires was bought in 1980 and sold last month to Cadbury Schweppes PLC, after Mr. Smale concluded it was too difficult to compete against Coke and Pepsi, "who control the bottling system." 

A bigger problem for P&G is competitors who move faster.
P&G, says Thomas S. Carroll, former chairman of Lever Bros., tends "to be awfully right, but awfully long in arriving at it." 

P&G's Pampers, which is still scrambling to catch up to Kimberly-Clark Corp. 's better-selling Huggies diapers, is an example of this.
While Huggies moved aggressively to introduce softer elastic and a cuff-like material to stop leakage, Procter hasn't swiftly transferred such improvements from the lab to the factory, and now is paying the price.
Market share has slid to about 26%, though Luvs, P&G's other diaper, has been gaining in the market. 

Then there's Duncan Hines cookies, which flopped against three competitors.
P&G sued the cookie makers for patent infringement and recently won a $125 million settlement from Nabisco, Keebler and Frito-Lay.
But while copycat competitors certainly hurt, Mr. Tucker, the former P&G manager, also says the company was too slow developing a full line of cookies, with a variety of flavors. "Anything Procter can do, Nabisco can do a lot faster," he says. 

Mr. Smale defends P&G's pace. "Speed isn't always a virtue," he says, noting that the company would often rather be right with a product than first. 

Changes in the organization have been an equally big challenge for Mr. Smale.
P&G hasn't joined in the purges of staff and harsh budget cuts undertaken by most big corporations in recent years.
Nor has it radically restructured businesses.
Its total employment, now at 79,300 world-wide, has in fact grown, not declined. 

But Mr. Smale has tinkered with some sacred cows.
He changed the coveted brand management system to a broader category management plan so individual P&G products no longer compete against one another.
Now, instead of Spic and Span battling Top Job in the market, a P&G manager may oversee both brands, and coordinate advertising and sales to minimize the products' cannibalizing each other. 

In addition, P&G salesmen, long noted for their arrogance and tendency to dictate terms to retailers, have, in light of new competition, changed their ways: Now they woo customers with special promotions and pay more attention to retailers' needs.
Teams of sales and marketing representatives have even moved to the headquarters towns of big accounts, such as Wal-Mart, to work more closely with the retailers.
Moreover, a new "product supply system" -- how the company moves products from the factory line to customers -- has cut inventories and other costs, and, according to the company, could save P&G $500 million a year. 

Such changes, Mr. Smale contends, "are the most important things that have taken place in the last eight or nine years." 

Still, conservatism rules.
One former senior executive terms P&G's efforts with retailers "a minuet involving three steps forward and two steps back." And a plan to centralize the company's huge sales force -- which could involve some cuts in staff -- is meeting resistance. 

Executives at P&G -- who are still overwhelmingly white and male -- must follow a rigid set of rules, including strict secrecy about even minor company matters.
One former salesman, who left because he found the environment stifling, says "my bosses told me I was using my personality too much in selling." Adds Mr. Pritchett, the former vice president: "Conforming is as important as performing." 

What's clearly over for P&G are the days when it monopolized entire markets.
The company faces stiffer competition in every category, especially its fledgling food and beverage business.
That operation lost $14 million last year. 

"They've got to identify a new leg," maintains Gary Stibel, a former P&G manager now with New England Consulting Group.
In the 1970s, P&G targeted paper goods.
In the 1980s it was health care.
In the next decade, says Mr. Stibel, "P&G has to crack the code in food and beverages or find an alternative." 

