.START 

GORBACHEV OUSTED two conservative members of the ruling Politburo. 

As part of a Kremlin reshuffle that appears to further consolidate the Soviet leader's power, Vladimir Shcherbitsky, the 71-year-old Communist Party chief of the Ukraine, and Viktor Chebrikov, 66, former chief of the KGB and head of a committee overseeing legal affairs, both "retired." The moves were announced following a meeting in Moscow of the Communist Party's policy-setting Central Committee.
A third full Politburo member, Viktor Nikonov, 60, who had been nominally in charge of agriculture, also was dropped. 

The party adopted a plan granting the Soviet Union's republics more economic autonomy, but demanded that calls for independence cease. 

HURRICANE HUGO HEADED to the U.S. as looting flared in the storm's wake. 

Coastal residents from Florida to North Carolina stocked up on supplies and made evacuation plans as the storm quickened its pace toward the Eastern Seaboard.
On the island of St. Croix, violence and widespread looting erupted in the aftermath of the hurricane, and Bush authorized sending military police to the U.S. Virgin Islands "to help restore order." Relief efforts intensified, with Coast Guard planes flying Red Cross goods to St. Thomas and other islands. 

Forecasters warned that the hurricane, which has killed at least 25 people, could hit the U.S. late today or tomorrow after it skirts past the Bahamas. 

Moslem extremists claimed responsibility for Tuesday's downing of a French DC-10 jetliner over northern Africa.
All 171 people aboard, including the wife of the U.S. envoy to Chad, were killed.
The wreckage of the plane, which exploded while bound for Paris from the Congo, was found in Niger.
A U.S. team will help investigate the incident. 

The FAA proposed fining Pan Am $630,000 for alleged security violations involving six flights, including the one that exploded and crashed over Scotland, killing 270 people.
The infractions involved security breaches in the methods used to screen passengers and baggage at London and Frankfurt airports. 

Pierce was subpoenaed to appear before a House subcommittee investigating allegations of mismanagement and fraud at HUD.
The former housing secretary had abruptly canceled his scheduled appearance last week before the panel, which directed him to appear on three separate dates beginning next Tuesday. 

The Senate voted to resume U.S. contributions to a U.N. population fund opposed by anti-abortionists.
The action, overturning a five-year policy begun under Reagan, came as a bipartisan majority approved increased military aid of $90 million for El Salvador. 

NATO intends to present to the Warsaw Pact today in Vienna a package of conventional arms-control proposals that foresee limiting the number of troops taking part in military exercises across Europe, diplomats in Brussels said.
The package was completed after a U.S.-European dispute over verification procedures was resolved. 

Ex-Premier Papandreou was ordered by Greece's 300-seat Parliament to stand trial before a special court on criminal charges of ordering illegal telephone wire-tapping during his eight years in power.
The 70-year-old Socialist will be the first civilian prime minister in Greece to stand trial over allegations of wrongdoing while in office. 

South Africa's de Klerk was sworn in as president and vowed a new constitution that would bring blacks into the government by the end of his five-year term.
While he didn't specify any apartheid laws that would be repealed, de Klerk appealed to South Africans of all races to help build a nation "free of domination and oppression." 

A jury in Los Angeles convicted self-proclaimed devil worshipper Richard Ramirez of 13 murders and 30 other felonies, deciding that he was the "Night Stalker" who terrified Southern California in 1985.
The 29-year-old Ramirez could be sentenced to death. 

Boston-based researchers found that users of "extended-wear" soft contact lenses run a risk of a serious eye infection several times higher than those using daily wear lenses.
Of an estimated 13 million people in the U.S. who wear contact lenses, about four million use the extended-wear type. 

Mubarak said PLO leader Arafat has accepted Egypt's proposals for direct Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
The Egyptian president appealed to the people of Israel to tell the government "to agree with the principle of territories for peace." Israel's Prime Minister Shamir has rejected Mubarak's proposal to trade occupied land for peace. 

Massachusetts Rep. Frank rejected suggestions he would resign.
The Democrat said it would be "cowardly and inappropriate" to step down while the House Ethics Committee investigates his acknowledged involvement with a male prostitute. 

Rebels in Afghanistan bombarded Kabul with rockets, killing at least 10 people, authorities said.
A military truck carrying mortar shells and other kinds of ammunition collided with a civilian vehicle in the capital, killing at least two people. 

U.S. security officials expect Colombian drug cartels to launch attacks against U.S. targets in an attempt to scare Washington away from its drive against drug-traffickers.
The FBI's third-ranking official said the likeliest initial targets would be U.S. government and business representatives in Latin America. 

