.START 

The rumor mill is continuing to churn out speculation about the Soviet Union -- this time it has the U.S. mulling a huge aid package to prop up Mikhail S. Gorbachev's attempts to restructure the Soviet economy. 

Many grain analysts are skeptical about the rumor, which has the U.S. laying plans to offer the Soviet Union billions of dollars of easy credit to buy U.S. agricultural goods such as corn and wheat.
Such a move would be politically difficult and it isn't clear the Soviets need, or want help.
Not only would aid to the Soviet Union be highly unusual, but it is ineligible for direct food aid because of limits adopted 15 years ago by the U.S. in response to Soviet restrictions on Jewish emigration. 

What's more, the White House is already catching heat for a program that simply compensates exporters that sell wheat at a discount to the Soviets, among other countries.
The program is designed to boost U.S. wheat exports.
But some lawmakers are concerned that the 1988 drought shrank U.S. grain stockpiles to uncomfortably low levels. 

The prices of most futures contracts for corn and wheat settled slightly higher yesterday at the Chicago Board of Trade.
Traders attribute the move primarily to renewed speculation that an early frost might end the growing season soon, and thus trim yields. 

In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade, the corn contract for December delivery rose 1.25 cents a bushel to settle at $2.285 cents a bushel. 

If anything, the aid rumor signals just how difficult it is to read the Soviet Union, despite its new openness.
As part of economic restructuring, several government ministries have been abolished and their duties divided among new commissions.
As a result, many grain traders and U.S. government officials aren't clear who is in charge of Soviet agriculture. 

In the past week, U.S. markets have been yanked around by conflicting reports from Soviet officials about whether they will continue to be the huge buyers of U.S. crops they have been in recent years. 

Traders are jittery because the Soviet Union is probably the biggest customer of U.S. farmers.
For the year ending Sept. 30, it spent about $3 billion to buy 21.7 million metric tons of U.S. crops. 

The first sign that this might change was in August when the Soviet government decreed that it would pay hard currency to wheat farmers that exceed certain production quotas.
U.S. analysts are reasoning that the funds for these payments are coming from the budget of the Soviet's grain importing agency -- which would trim Soviet purchases of U.S. crops. 

But many U.S. analysts doubt that the Soviet Union can stimulate enough grain production to meet its own needs in the near future, and question whether the Soviet Union can afford to pay bonuses to its farmers and buy foreign grain at the same time. 

Yesterday's speculation about an aid package apparently was fueled in part by unconfirmed reports that the Soviet Union is asking Canadian wheat growers for credit.
That was followed by trade reports that the Agriculture Department is offering to subsidize the sale of up to 100,000 metric tons of soybean oil to the Soviet Union. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

ENERGY: Gasoline futures prices soared, pushed higher by news that an Amerada Hess Corp. refinery on St. Croix sustained "considerable" damage from Hurricane Hugo and won't be in full operation again for 60 days.
The facility, with capacity of 545,000 barrels a day, had been operating at 400,000 barrels a day until it was shut down Saturday ahead of the hurricane's arrival.
Amerada Hess said it expects to resume operation of several units at the facility in about 30 days. 

In trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, gasoline for October delivery skyrocketed 2.07 cents a gallon to close at 59.74 cents.
November contracts closed up the allowed limit of two cents a gallon. 

In addition to the Amerada Hess refinery news, petroleum futures prices were buoyed higher by the weekly report from the American Petroleum Institute, which showed an unexpectedly steep decline in inventories.
The statistics, released late Tuesday, said U.S. crude stocks dropped more than 9.6 million barrels.
The expiring October contract for West Texas Intermediate, the benchmark U.S. crude, rose only eight cents, however, to close at $19.64 a barrel. 

COPPER: Futures prices recovered from Monday's decline on rumors of an explosion at the smelter of a Brazilian mine.
The December contract rose 0.75 cent a pound to $1.2670.
The rumors about the Brazilian mine were conflicting and couldn't be confirmed.
The mine, Caraiba Matais, S.A., produces 115,000 tons of refined copper annually.
One dealer said that, according to reliable Brazilian sources, the mine was having no problem.
However, an industry consultant, who said he also had spoken with a reliable Brazilian source, contended, "There is some problem, but the extent of it isn't known.
The source says Caraiba will try to buy refined copper, presumably to fulfill contracts." Other trade sources and analysts said they hadn't heard that and, well after trading had ended, confusion continued.
Bette Raptopoulos, analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York, said the problem was with the mine's smelter and that the impact on supplies wouldn't be felt for some time. "Prices, however, will rise because of it," she added.
Ms. Raptopoulos said that most of Caraiba's production goes for Brazilian consumption and that only a small amount is exported to U.S. brass mills. 

PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices turned higher.
December delivery gold advanced $3.90 an ounce to $370.10, while December silver was up 5.5 cents an ounce at $5.2150.
October platinum rose $3.90 an ounce to $478.20.
One analyst said precious metals prices firmed in response to an easier dollar and strength generally in commodities, particularly crude oil.
The weaker dollar, he said, reflected concerns that the meeting of finance chiefs from the Group of Seven major industrial nations on Saturday in Washington might take steps to restrain the rise of the dollar.
But demand was mostly technical, he said, coming from computer-guided funds. "When the December gold price rose above $370, it triggered further buying," he said.
After rising to as high as $374, the December contract fell back to $368.50, before rising slightly at the end of trading, he noted.
Gold was the leader and carried silver and platinum with it, he said. "The fact that gold gave up most of its gain wasn't a good sign," he said, "but it did show steadiness at the close." It's hard to tell if the rally was the start of a sustained advance, because the dollar hasn't definitely shown that it has topped out and demand for physical gold hasn't picked up, he said. 

COFFEE: Prices rose on traders' perceptions the U.S. was showing a more amenable attitude toward a new international coffee agreement.
The December contract advanced 2.85 cents a pound to 82.74 cents.
A statement from the State Department said President Bush had responded to Colombian President Virgilio Barco's letter to him.
The news release said: "The President expressed appreciation of the importance of coffee to the economies of Colombia and many other developing countries, noting that the U.S. played a constructive role in the negotiations for a new ICA." Mr. Bush also expressed disappointment that agreement members hadn't been able to resolve the problems of coffee sales to non-member countries and rigid export quotas, according to the paper.
The passage that apparently raised traders' hopes said: "The President confirmed to President Barco that we are prepared to resume discussions on the ICA with his government at any time.
He expressed hope that a lasting solution, which is acceptable to major ICA members and respects market trends, can be found." A New York dealer, however, said that U.S. coffee industry officials, after recent discussions in Washington, had come away with the "unequivocal" impression that the U.S. hadn't changed its strong stand against lower-priced coffee sales to countries that aren't members of the agreement and for more flexible export quotas.
Talks on a new agreement will begin Monday in London. 

