.START 

House Democratic leaders, looking for a way to sidetrack the drive to cut the tax on capital gains, have decided to push for an increase in the tax rate on wealthy individuals and an expansion of the tax benefits of individual retirement accounts. 

House leaders last evening began to test the plan among their Democratic colleagues to see how well it might fare against the sizable forces that favor the capital-gains cut.
Leadership aides said that the tax rate-IRA measure is "the leading option" to combat the capital-gains tax cut, which is scheduled to come to a vote in the House as early as next week. 

The leadership proposal would raise the top tax rate for individuals to 33% from the current 28%.
Because of an anomaly in the tax code, many taxpayers already pay taxes on at least a portion of their income at the 33% rate.
The leadership plan, in effect, would raise the tax rate only on the richest families who make about $150,000 a year or more. 

Details are still vague on the IRA proposal, but aides said it is generally modeled after a plan suggested by Sen. Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas).
Mr. Bentsen, who heads the Senate Finance Committee, is trying to block the capital-gains cut by proposing instead to give a 50% deduction for IRA contributions to people who currently aren't eligible for a deductible IRA plan.
The Bentsen proposal also would allow all individuals to withdraw funds from their IRAs without penalty to buy their first home and to finance higher education, in addition to the current function of assisting retirement. 

The House leadership also agreed to permit a vote on the House floor to repeal the catastrophic-illness insurance law.
Many lawmakers and administration officials predict that the House will vote to repeal the program because of the avalanche of protests from senior citizens about the surtax that funds the plan. 

Still, the Bush administration and Democratic leaders in both the House and the Senate are trying to devise plans to save at least part of the program.
Marlin Fitzwater, President Bush's spokesman, said the administration wants to "keep the benefits and mitigate the premiums." 

In the meantime, lobbying efforts on capital gains are heating up.
White House officials are making numerous telephone calls to Democrats urging support for the capital-gains tax cut that was approved by the House Ways and Means Committee this past week.
President Bush hasn't made any calls yet, but he is expected to do so soon. 

The White House officials are asking what Democrats might want or need in exchange for their support of a capital-gains cut.
The trading is over small issues important to individual legislators rather than big legislative trade-offs. 

Administration officials also are beginning to organize business lobbyists to contact members of Congress to urge support for the tax reduction. 

On the other side, the Ways and Means panel's chairman, Rep. Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.) also met with business lobbyists and urged them either to fight against the capital-gains tax cut or at least not to take sides. 

The Democratic leaders plan to argue that imposing a top 33% rate on the richest Americans is fairer than cutting the capital-gains tax, which would overwhelmingly benefit the wealthy.
The IRA expansion also would benefit far more middle-income taxpayers than the capital-gains reduction. 

Republicans are likely to oppose the new top rate as nothing more than a tax increase that would violate President Bush's no-tax-increase pledge.
More tax increases would be sure to follow, Republicans complain. 

The Ways and Means Committee voted narrowly to reduce the capital-gains tax to 19.6% for 2 1/2 years from the current rate of as much as 33%.
Afterward, the top rate would be 28% with the gains indexed for inflation. 

That proposal is being vigorously opposed by Democratic leaders in the Congress, who see it as a huge revenue loser that would disproportionately benefit the wealthy.
But not all Democrats think that the top tax rate should rise.
Sen. Bentsen told a breakfast meeting of reporters yesterday that he opposes the 33% plan. 

