.START 

The Internal Revenue Service, the agency that once took 196 pages to define "activity," is quietly beginning a campaign to make its regulations simpler, clearer and briefer. 

That might make some word-weary tax practitioners chuckle in disbelief, but to Fred T. Goldberg, the new IRS commissioner, the regulation-writing scheme is serious, urgent business. "I think we can provide short, sweet, simple guidance -- so let's just do it now instead of talking about it," Mr. Goldberg says. 

Although relied upon mainly by accountants and lawyers specializing in tax, IRS regulations influence what becomes of most Americans' money.
In spelling out the rules for complying with the nation's tax code, the IRS's attorneys have increasingly tried to address every potential question, producing documents so dense and detailed that many tax practitioners complain they are unworkable. 

There's more than mere annoyance at stake: The enormous amount of time that attorneys and accountants spend pondering the regulations swells the cost of compliance for nearly every U.S. business, and for many individual taxpayers. 

Mr. Goldberg, who until July was a partner in the Wall Street law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, says that under his orders the IRS has targeted about 10 pending regulation-writing tasks to "try to do differently." That means relying on broader statements and plainer language -- and a new guideline: "Don't try to solve all the world's problems." 

Some of the commissioner's plans, however, have caused apprehension among private practitioners.
For instance, Mr. Goldberg intends generally to avoid issuing temporary guidance, in the form of brief "notices," so the agency can more quickly get out regulations, which are more formal and carry more weight under law. 

But Donald Alexander, a partner at Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft in Washington and a former IRS commissioner, says: "The form in which it is issued is important -- and regulations are better than notices -- but it's more important to have the guidance than not have it.
And it's faster to issue notices." 

Mr. Goldberg argues that it will speed things to mold regulations after the briefer, more-general style of a notice, and that regulations will come out faster if the cushion provided by the notice is removed. 

"Having gotten the notice out gives them all the time in the world to write regulations, and that's when those suckers turn into these tomes that no one can understand," he says. "We're taking a hell of a long time from the time we issue notices to regulations, and I think we're going to get ourselves in trouble, and I think we're going to get the taxpayer in trouble." 

As of July 31, the IRS was working on 509 sets of regulations, many of them stemming from the Tax Reform Act of 

"We think it's time something's done," says Donald Skadden, vice president, taxation, for the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, who recently discussed problems of complexity and delay with the commissioner. 

"I think what's happening is more and more, except for the big firms, people are ignoring these things" and simply using common sense, explains Gordon Henderson, head of tax department in the New York law firm Weil, Gotshal & Manges.
He adds that "the whole system is really not working very well." 

Mr. Goldberg concurs.
The detailed IRS regulations, he says, "may be the perfect product for someone who's got nothing to do but spend two years thinking about it, but it isn't the perfect product for a general practitioner that's being bombarded with questions April 15." 

That's the predicament faced by Steven Bankler, a solo practitioner CPA in San Antonio, Texas.
The regulations limiting tax benefits from losses from passive business activities -- which came over a year late and in two separate installments, one of 266 pages and one of 196 pages -- "took forever to get through," he laments. 

Mr. Bankler also recalls a recent set of regulations dealing with employees that launched into the use of prison labor. "Now how many people does that affect?" he asks, concluding: "I applaud his goal of issuing simpler, more-generic regulations that answer 90% of the questions without trying to cover several hundred pages that answer everything." 

