.START 

For all these years, I never realized what was wrong with my life.
Michael Gartner's Aug. 31 Viewpoint column "Just What You've Always Suspected: Football Is a Dumb Sport" has finally enlightened me. 

At age 14, I chose to attend my high school, a private Catholic institution, based solely upon the reputation of its football program.
I was dumb.
After four years of high-school participation and learning silly lessons such as dedication, pride, commitment, humility, perseverance and establishing a work ethic, I decided to participate in football again in college.
Another dumb decision. 

During my four years there I was team captain two years, an All-American candidate and, in my final year, voted most valuable player -- those same silly lessons of leadership, honor, teamwork, tenacity and mental fortitude appeared. 

Today, as a recent graduate of law school and an associate of a multinational law firm in New York, I can only think back sadly to those eight "wasted" years.
I guess I got what I deserved. 

Charles J. Spinelli 

New York 

Maybe Mr. Gartner should have entitled it "Just What I've Always Suspected. . . ." I agree that injuries are inherent in the sport and that it's an excellent idea to evaluate any program your children engage in.
Too often, sports programs are in the hands of people who may be professionally qualified but are lacking in areas of leadership and developing students socially as well as athletically. 

However, there are football programs that do not teach winning at all costs. 

My experiences in scholastic and collegiate football have left me with a sense of the values and results of hard work and dedication, as well as the importance of teamwork.
The benefits of these morals, I feel, far outweigh any backhand or golf stroke I could teach to my children. 

James M. Folkerts 

Valhalla, N.Y. 

Did Mr. Gartner play high-school football?
I did, and I wouldn't trade the experience for all the golf in the world.
Was I a star?
No, I didn't make first string until my senior year (playing both ways in the limited-substitution days of 1949).
No colleges asked me to join them.
Did I get hurt?
Yes, and so what?
Broken nose (no face guards back then, remember?) broken fingers, torn cartilage -- most of which could just as easily have happened on a ski slope, in a (perish the thought]) fight, or stepping off a curb. 

What did I get out of it?
Proof that I could succeed as an individual and as a team member, the truth of the value of persistence ("So you got knocked down, shaken up -- so what?
Get back up and knock the other guy down").
Perhaps most important, I learned how to win -- not to be a good loser, but how to reach down inside for that layer of determination whose existence was previously unknown. 

Those who never played can never understand.
Those of us who did, eventually quit trying to explain it -- but it was more important to my character formation than all the rest of high school combined. 

John D. Breslin 

Cincinnati 

In high school, football provides young adults the perfect environment to learn about life.
Both life and football are series of hard knocks -- except in the latter case you've got referees, yellow flags and timeouts.
Mr. Gartner talks of taking "a long, solo bike ride to think through the problems of the office" -- that may work for the established adult, but teen-agers cannot pedal away from the adversities of growing up.
Football provides proof to its young participants that adolescent problems are challenges to be met head-on. 

In college, football continues paying dividends.
The discipline and hard work that football demands translate into successful academics.
Despite the frequently publicized argument that football detracts from college studies, I find that the strict requirements football now places on my time serve to regiment and better organize my academic work. 

Mr. Gartner says football "often teaches the wrong values." No, football teaches that hard work pays off, that dedication and perseverance beget success, and that discipline allows control under pressure.
I find it difficult to believe that the president of NBC News sees hard work, dedication, perseverance and discipline as wrong values for young people to develop. 

Scott D. Laughlin 

Princeton, N.J. 

