.START 

A disagreement over an arcane corner of the software world sparked a public argument among three of the most influential figures in computer publishing. 

John Warnock, whose Adobe Systems Inc. has a stranglehold on software essential to computer publishing, kicked off a round of insults at a major industry conference here.
His voice cracking with emotion, Mr. Warnock told a crowd of more than 500 insiders that a competitor's plan to move into his business was "the biggest bunch of garbage and mumbo jumbo I've ever heard in my life." 

Seated next to Mr. Warnock on the dais was his new nemesis, Bill Gates, chief executive officer of Microsoft Inc.
On Tuesday, Microsoft joined with Apple Computer Inc. to come up with an alternative to Adobe's widely used way of insuring consistency of typefaces and fonts across diverse computer systems.
Yesterday, Mr. Gates, arguing that Adobe's dominance could stymie innovation, asked, "Would you just want one standard for everything?
Wouldn't you prefer two?" 

Steven Jobs, who is credited with launching computer publishing when he decided to pair laser printers equipped with Adobe's software and Apple Computer's Macintosh, quickly offered an answer.
On the dais to pitch the merits of his new Next Inc. computer, Mr. Jobs came down squarely on Adobe's side. 

Referring to the proposed software from Microsoft and Apple, he said, "There's no new technology here." The only reason Apple joined with Microsoft, he added, was because Apple "made a mistake, a big mistake" in deciding to use an alternative to Adobe's method of producing fonts.
Mr. Jobs's Next computer uses Adobe's software both to display type and to print it. 

Yesterday's outburst reflects how emotional computer executives can grow over seemingly bewildering technical points. 

Mr. Warnock has built Adobe into one of the most profitable software concerns on the strength of an innovative approach to computerized printing and the ability to persuade the leading makers of desk-top computers to adopt his system. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Gates frequently has used his clout as head of the world's biggest producer of personal computer software to pressure competitors into actions that benefit Microsoft.
Recently he's been frustrated with Adobe's unwillingness to share key technical information that will help competitors clone fonts and other critical software used in computer publishing. 

Mr. Gates once again got his way.
After lambasting Mr. Gates, Mr. Warnock said that by March, Adobe would provide to all comers the secret specifications to Adobe's font format.
Mr. Gates called that "a positive step," and Mr. Warnock said he had taken it only because of pressure from Mr. Gates.
The two men have been negotiating the matter for several months. 

Mr. Warnock said the new policy on fonts won't hurt Adobe's revenue in the short term, but the firm's stock slipped 37.5 cents to $19.75 a share in national over-the-counter trading on fears that Adobe's share of the printer software business will decline.
Adobe's stock has been hammered since July when Apple, Adobe's largest customer and shareholder, said it would sell its 16% equity holding and compete with Adobe by developing a clone of Postscript, its printer language. 

However, the cloned software, now to be produced jointly by Apple and Microsoft, won't be available until next year, and for the moment Adobe's business is strong.
Earlier this week the Mountain View, Calif., concern reported fiscal third-quarter net income of $9.1 million, up 42%.
Revenue for the quarter ended Sept. 1, was $30 million, up 19% from a year earlier. 

When the public feuding ended, the insults continued in private.
Asked whether he felt his criticism was too harsh, Mr. Warnock, his voice calm, disagreed and criticized Mr. Gates's ideas. 

Mr. Gates, however, was more forgiving, describing his exchange as "all in the normal give and take of business.
I don't think John was out of line." 

