.START 

Consumer prices held steady in August, the first time in more than three years that they didn't rise, the Labor Department said. 

Falling energy prices held down the overall retail price level, just as they have been holding down prices at the producer level.
The department reported last week that producer prices declined in August for the third month in a row. 

Energy prices have tugged the inflation rate sharply up and down this year, first raising alarm over possible inflationary spirals and then bringing relief that the worst of inflation may be over. 

But many economists are still uncertain over the outlook for inflation. "The good news in a couple of sectors I think should not obscure the fact that inflation continues at unacceptably high levels in a number of key areas," said John Godfrey, chief economist of Barnett Banks Inc. in Jacksonville, Fla. 

Still, even excluding energy, consumer prices posted only a mild 0.2% increase in August.
Excluding food as well -- another volatile area, where prices have been moderating -- prices went up only 0.2% also. 

"The core rate is well-behaved," contended David Seiders, chief economist at the National Association of Home Builders. 

In another economic report, the Commerce Department said housing starts plummeted 5% in August, the steepest decline in six months.
The housing industry was battered earlier this year by the Federal Reserve's efforts to restrain economic activity and hold down inflation by raising interest rates.
Home building and buying picked up a bit after the Fed began nudging interest rates down, but Mr. Seiders said the latest numbers show that talk of a rebound in housing was premature. 

Although inflation has moderated in the past few months, consumer prices have still risen at a 4.8% annual rate in 1989, higher than the 4.4% increases for 1988 and 1987.
If prices continued to rise at that pace, Mr. Godfrey said, "You would have a doubling of prices in less than 12 years.
That's not acceptable." 

Geoffrey Moore, who heads Columbia University's Center for International Business Cycle Research, agreed that the current inflation rate "is really too high." But he believes the recent easing of inflation will continue. "The one thing that could make it last is if the slowdown in the economy that has been going on since this spring continues.
And I rather think the slowdown is going to continue," he said. 

The housing starts report was further evidence of a slower economy.
Construction began on new homes and apartments at an annual rate of 1,353,000 units, the Commerce Department said, down from 1,424,000 units in July.
Building of single-family homes, the backbone of the housing market, declined 2.5% after rising 5.9% in July. 

But the number of building permits issued last month grew 3.5%, to a 1,326,000 annual rate, after falling 2.1% in July, a sign that construction could pick up.
Permits for single-family homes grew 1.3%.
Figures in both reports are seasonally adjusted. 

August was the first month since April 1986, when prices dropped 0.3%, that the government's consumer price index didn't grow after seasonal adjustment. 

Gasoline prices fell 4.2% during the month, while overall energy prices declined 2.0%.
As a result, transportation costs continued to moderate, tumbling 0.8% after climbing sharply in the first five months of the year.
New car prices slipped 0.3%. 

Housing costs also moderated, rising 0.2% after climbing 0.6% in July, as fuel oil prices declined 0.9%. 

Clothing prices fell 1.5%. 

But prices continued to rise across a range of services, especially medical care, where they jumped 0.7% for the fourth month in a row. 

In another price measure, which covers retail prices for urban wage earners and clerical workers, consumer prices also were unchanged in August.
This index is used to calculate cost-of-living increases for Social Security recipients. 

The Labor Department also said that the average weekly earnings of American workers outside the agricultural sector dropped 0.7% in August. 

Here are the seasonally adjusted changes in the components of the Labor Department's consumer price index for August. 

August consumer price indexes (1982-1984 equals 100), unadjusted for seasonal variation, together with the percentage increases from August 1988, were: 

