.START 

Treasury Minister Guido Carli called for the adoption of a full-scale privatization program in Italy to help narrow the country's budget deficit and reduce political meddling in the economy. 

Speaking to a conference of international securities regulators in Venice, Mr. Carli said that "history has taught us that the democracy of the market is the only one which can restrain the enormous, often unjustified spaces" controlled by Italy's politicians.
The sale of state-owned properties to the market is the only way in which "the appointment of directors of firms belonging to the public sector can be legitimately removed from political power." 

Mr. Carli's comments come less than a week after he lambasted the former management of state-owned Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, Italy's biggest bank, for negligence in the scandal surrounding its U.S. branch in Atlanta.
As previously reported, the branch, which had an individual lending limit of $500,000, extended about $3 billion of credit to Iraq without authorization. 

The scandal has raised dozens of questions about possible involvement by the Italian or even U.S. governments, and accusations that the loans were being used to finance unauthorized arms transactions.
So far, however, no company or person has been charged with a crime in connection with the investigation.
Mr. Carli is scheduled to appear before parliament tomorrow to answer questions. 

The scandal also has hurt the bank's international reputation.
The London-based rating agency IBCA yesterday downgraded BNL's individual rating to C from B/C.
The individual rating refers to a bank's overall performance, and the C rating is below average for major international banks. 

Mr. Carli didn't mention BNL in particular in his speech yesterday.
But the former central bank governor and former Fiat S.p.
A. director has sometimes been criticized as representing the views of Fiat and other big industrial companies.
The reason is that many in Italy fear that if banks such as BNL were privatized, the only ones with enough money to buy them would be the big industrial groups, which already dominate much of Italy's economic landscape.
Some 80% of Italy's banks are state-owned; no large banks are privately owned. 

