.START 

In a move that some predict will raise questions at the Food and Drug Administration, Kraft General Foods is introducing Sealtest Free Nonfat Ice Cream, the first national brand of ice cream that is virtually free of fat and cholesterol. 

The food giant, a subsidiary of Philip Morris Cos., claims its new entrant has the appearance and taste of butterfat-rich products.
It is using cellulose gel, a natural ingredient widely used in foods, as a bulking agent.
Cellulose gel is a naturally occurring dietary fiber found in fruit and vegetables such as apples and celery. 

"This development is creating a hubbub among industry experts," said Alan Huggins, a dairy industry consultant in Chicago. "If this cellulose formulation is the equivalent in its functional properties to Simplesse, it may be a real breakthrough." Simplesse is a NutraSweet Co. fat substitute that is awaiting FDA approval. 

But Mr. Huggins predicted the new product will provoke "some labeling problems with the FDA" because a product must contain 10% butterfat to be called ice cream. 

"There will be questions from regulators and certainly their competitors will ask questions," Mr. Huggins said.
The FDA couldn't be reached for comment.
Typically, food companies label low-fat ice cream as ice milk. 

According to a Kraft spokesman, the company is submitting a suggestion to the FDA on "how to revise current frozen dessert standards." He said the letter would go to the FDA by the end of the month and said the company was meeting with industry groups to get a consensus before the submission was made. 

"We believe the term 'nonfat ice cream' is very appropriate for Sealtest," he added. 

Sealtest Free has less than half a gram of fat and less than two milligrams of cholesterol per half-cup serving.
Sealtest's regular vanilla ice cream has seven grams of fat and 20 milligrams of cholesterol per serving.
The new product will have about 100 calories per serving compared with 140 calories for traditional vanilla ice cream. 

Calling the new product nonfat ice cream mirrors a strategy Kraft already has used successfully.
A few years ago, the company came under fire from the FDA and the Wisconsin Department of Agriculture for its labeling of Kraft Light Naturals Reduced Fat Cheeses.
Regulators initially took the position that the label was misleading because the product failed to meet the criteria of traditional cheese. 

Kraft argued its label wasn't confusing because the term "reduced fat" provided a clear distinction to consumers.
The controversy appears to have died down, Mr. Huggins said, "because the regulators aren't stopping Kraft from doing it and other competitors have followed suit." 

Sealtest Free represents Kraft General Foods' latest move to become a major player in the low-to-no-fat foods arena.
In August, it announced it placed an order for Simplesse, the first that NutraSweet has received.
The company is also developing a substitute of its own. 

