.START 

When investors think of First Executive, they think of the Los Angeles insurer's $6 billion junk-bond portfolio. 

Chairman Fred Carr wants to change that.
He now is on the road, telling investors he has built a great insurance company and isn't a river boat gambler.
Some say Mr. Carr is right.
But as he winds up his tour to promote a $255 million First Executive rights offering, it's clear he has an uphill struggle to win over Wall Street investors. 

Junk bonds were the making of First Executive.
High investment income allowed the company to grow by offering attractive returns to policyholders.
But with the junk market getting clobbered recently, some say junk bonds might be the undoing of First Executive. 

Since the rights offering was announced in June, First Executive stock has dived to 10 7/8 yesterday from 16 1/4, largely on junk-bond scares but also on deflating takeover rumors about First Executive.
Since being issued last week, the rights have quickly tumbled.
So have prices for First Executive common-stock warrants and preferred, trading on a "when issued" basis. 

The rights offering entitles First Executive stockholders to buy a $15 package of convertible preferred shares and warrants.
Because First Executive's stock got clobbered, underwriters Drexel Burnham Lambert and Kidder Peabody had to cut the exercise price on First Executive commonstock warrants to 15 from 20.
That's the price warrant holders would pay to buy a share. 

What is the junk-bond scare all about?
In recent months, First Executive has written down to zero about $150 million of Integrated Resources and Southmark securities.
It also has taken big hits on other holdings, including almost $100 million of Griffin Resorts bonds, $160 million of Gillett Holding bonds and smaller amounts of Federated Department Stores bonds.
Its $17 billion investment portfolio now is about $400 million "under water," meaning that the market value is way below the cost and First Executive would look bad if, like a mutual fund, it had to mark the bonds down. 

If the market sell-off of junk resumes, some say investment losses might force the Los Angeles insurer to keep adding capital, or to slow the growth of its profitable insurance operations.
With the junk market getting more illiquid, there's also a worry that if policyholders start to redeem First Executive insurance policies, Mr. Carr might have to dump junk bonds at big discounts, adding to First Executive's losses. 

Money manager Martin Sosnoff of Atalanta/Sosnoff Capital in New York thinks Mr. Carr is "a great businessman." But Mr. Sosnoff sold a big First Executive stake a couple of months ago at about 16.
His concern: First Executive has more than half of its $17 billion investment portfolio in junk bonds and other bonds that are below investment grade, a much higher proportion than other insurers.
And "we were concerned about the valuation of the portfolio." 

Mr. Carr declined to comment until the rights offering officially ends Oct. 10.
First Executive will get its money next month from the rights offering, no matter what.
But if First Executive shareholders don't cough up $255 million and buy First Executive preferred and warrants, underwriters Drexel and Kidder Peabody might be saddled with losses on the preferred, quoted yesterday at 14 5/8.
People in the underwriting group say that's a real possibility. 

Nobody knows if Rosewood Financial Partners, a long-rumored acquirer of First Executive, will exercise its rights to maintain its current 9% stake.
Rosewood didn't return calls.
But this week, insurer I.C.H. Corp., which had a 20% First Executive stake, declined to buy First Executive preferred.
It simply swapped First Executive rights it received for warrants in a noncash transaction valued at about $5 million. 

Drexel won't comment.
But traders say the firm marked down and sold First Executive preferred that I.C.H. passed up.
They say Drexel expects 60% of First Executive holders to exercise their rights, and hopes new investors will buy the remaining 20% of the preferred shares. 

The rights offering has attracted a shareholder lawsuit and criticism from people who see it as an anti-takeover device.
It also is a costly way to raise capital, fueling talk that First Executive might fear a cash squeeze.
Companies usually issue equity when their stock price is high.
Moreover, the new preferred will pay a $2 annual dividend rate, perhaps in additional preferred, putting the yield currently at a generous 13.8%. 

However, First Executive carries a Triple-A rating on its ability to pay claims.
If it had issued debt instead of equity, its rating might have suffered, analysts say. 

Is the junk-bond scare over First Executive really justified?
Brian Posner of Fidelity Investments, a big First Executive stockholder, says, "It's frustrating that the stock is always moved by rumors and scares.
It's a sound company and in the long run, its fundamental strength should be reflected in the stock." Mr. Posner won't say if Fidelity will buy more First Executive shares, however. 

Bulls say Mr. Carr, a veteran junk-bond player and privileged investment client of Drexel, has a better-than-average junk portfolio.
To meet possible insurance-policy redemptions, adds a senior insurance executive familiar with First Executive, the company has about $5 billion of liquid short-term securities.
Although First Executive has $329 million of bonds that have stopped paying interest, this person adds, in 1989 it will have $2 billion of cash investment income to cover about $1.4 billion of interest obligations to policyholders and related expenses. 

First Executive has "had a horrible six months and has written off" a lot of junk, the insurance executive says, but it still showed six-month profit of about $100 million, excluding special items. 

Offsetting First Executive's bond losses are many equity investments that it could sell at a profit, says Mark Schoder, an analyst at Conning & Co. 

As a longtime Drexel client, Mr. Carr often got equity "kickers" for buying Drexel bond deals.
On more recent investments, First Executive has about a $40 million profit on its equity stake in RJR Nabisco and a $25 million profit on a Magnatek stake.
Some say it also has an estimated $150 million profit on its buildings in Los Angeles. 

