.START 

Iraq's oil minister won't push to increase the country's share of production, but said OPEC ministers meeting in Geneva later this week should raise the cartel's 19.5 million barrel-a-day output ceiling. 

Issam Abdul-Raheem Al-Chalabi told a small gathering of reporters at an energy conference here that an upward adjustment to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries' overall oil-production ceiling "must be made." But he added that he doesn't expect a resolution to the thorny issue of permanent fixed quotas from the cartel's monitoring committee meeting, which begins Saturday. 

The ministers will be examining a position paper outlining options concerning production sharing prepared for them by an internal technical committee.
Such a paper at least provides a point from which to start negotiating.
Many oil industry strategists have already dismissed the notion that the ministers would be at a point where solid negotiation was possible. 

OPEC ministers have attempted to recast the quota system several times.
But pressure from members who claim that their ability to produce more closely to their potential is being hampered by antiquated quotas may force a more serious examination of the issue.
Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates have already effectively removed themselves from the current production agreement and have been pumping at almost full capacity. 

Mr. Al-Chalabi said Iraq is currently pumping about 2.8 million barrels daily, slightly more than its 2.78 million barrels-a-day quota.
Since the end of its war with Iran, Iraq's oil production has soared.
In addition, startup yesterday morning of a new pipeline stretching across Saudi Arabia will give Iraq the ability to move an additional 1.65 million barrels a day. 

But, the oil minister said, Iraq won't increase its output if it causes world oil prices to deteriorate. "We are always after a maximization of revenue," he said, adding that Iraq would like to see oil prices maintained at the $18 a barrel average for which OPEC strives. 

The Iraqi minister pointed out however that over the longer term, as oil output drops in some countries, both within and outside OPEC, "that will mean our share will have to increase." 

The special meeting of the monitoring committee was called for in June by OPEC producers who felt the cartel hadn't adequately addressed the issues then, even though the group boosted its ceiling by one million barrels at that time.
Even though the eight-member monitoring committee is "empowered" to make decisions and representatives of other OPEC members will attend, Mr. Al-Chalabi said any agreements next week would probably be reopened for discussion at OPEC's next regularly scheduled meeting in November. 

Mr. Al-Chalabi was in Montreal to address delegates to the World Energy Conference.
He met U.S. Deputy Secretary of Energy Henson Moore Tuesday for talks on expanding the role of U.S. companies in the Iraqi oil industry, but declined to give details of their discussions. 

Julia Lichtblau in Montreal contributed to this article. 

