.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

FOUR YOUNG MEN FROM LIVERPOOL invaded the U.S. in February 1964.
In just two weeks, the Beatles -- Paul McCartney, John Lennon, Ringo Starr and George Harrison -- restored momentum to rock 'n' roll and boosted the pop music and recording business to new heights. 

Starting in a Liverpool cellar club in 1958, the Beatles enjoyed only middling success until 1963.
Strongly influenced by American rhythm-and-blues and by Elvis Presley, the once and future king of rock 'n' roll, they made it big when "She Loves You" became the largest-selling single record in British history.
That, plus TV appearances, created "Beatlemania." 

The Beatles made their American debut on the Ed Sullivan Show, (drawing an audience of 70 million), followed by performances at New York's Carnegie Hall and Shea Stadium. 

The timing was perfect.
Young Americans had been devastated by the assassination of John Kennedy in November 1963.
The record business and been languishing, and the Beatles brought an exciting -- and better -- brand of music to the rock scene.
The promotion behind their arrival was a masterpiece.
The four Liverpudlians had cleaned up their act with a well-turned-out look that did not give parents Maalox moments on sight. "They looked innocent," says Brown Meggs, who in 1964 headed Eastern operations for Capitol, the Beatles' recording company. 

The recording payoff was spectacular. ("A bonanza," says Meggs, now head of Angel Records.) Their first LP, "Meet the Beatles," shipped 3.6 million albums. (It has since reached five million) "Can't Buy Me Love" topped Elvis's best-selling single.
Their first movie, "Hard Day's Night," released in July 1964, was an instant hit. 

The Beatles reigned until they broke up in 1970.
Last year, George Harrison looked back and said: "It sort of turned out all right.
And still a lot bigger than we expected." 

