.START 

A man on the bench is fighting for some chairs. 

A Florida judge has decided he won't stand for another judge being denied four chairs because the state won't pay for them.
So he's adding to a busy court calendar by taking the state's chief financial officer to court. 

The case involves four office chairs ordered for a newly appointed judge in Tampa at a potential cost to Florida taxpayers of $3,745.
When Florida Comptroller Gerald Lewis saw the bill last spring, he refused to pay it. 

The chairs -- one desk chair, two wing chairs and one "English pub lounge chair and Ottoman" -- carry a price tag more than three times what comparable furnishings would cost from other suppliers, Mr. Lewis maintains. "To me, it's a question of using some judgment, some discretion," he says. 

Not to Monterey Campbell, west-central Florida's chief appellate judge.
He filed suit in Tallahassee last week seeking a court order forcing Mr. Lewis to pay the bill. 

The chairs were selected by the new judge, not for their extravagance, says Judge Campbell, but for "their lasting quality." There's a deep-seated legal question, as well, he adds: Does Mr. Lewis have the legal authority to withhold payment? 

The seating dispute has been simmering since June, when Judge Campbell's court administrator wrote Mr. Lewis to explain that the cost was justified: "The chairs will be subjected to a good deal of wear." 

Judge Campbell is more blunt: "We spend a lot of time on our backsides reading. {We're} not having cocktail parties in there." So miffed is the judge that he has twice come to Mr. Lewis's office unannounced to inspect his furniture and order records of purchases by the comptroller's office. 

Mr. Lewis isn't taking the matter sitting down, either, though he concedes that defending the suit is likely to cost more than the furniture.
And his office has had poor luck arguing with judges before. 

Last month, Mr. Lewis tried unsuccessfully to block payment for $3,161 worth of exercise equipment ordered by the Florida Supreme Court.
Among the purchases: 

A punching bag. 

