.START 

Tucson Electric Power Co. stock rose on heavy volume yesterday after an Arizona Corporation Commission hearing officer recommended rate increases to generate an 11.6% boost in annual revenue in a closely watched rate case. 

The utility's stock rose 62.5 cents a share to $24.125 in New York Stock Exchange consolidated trading on volume of 522,300 shares. 

Analysts said the proposed decision, which is subject to formal review by the commission, is somewhat more generous than expected, but by no means solves Tucson Electric's financial problems.
Earlier this year, the utility slashed its dividend, said it may report losses in future quarters, and saw its chairman resign under pressure following his sudden sale of most of his stock holdings. 

"On balance, this proposed order is not devastating to the company, but it would not allow a speedy recovery either," said Gregory B. Enholme, an analyst at Salomon Brothers. 

The proposed decision by hearing officer Jerry Rudibaugh recommended that Tucson Electric be granted a $57 million, or 11.6% boost in annual revenue, compared with the $80.3 million, or 22%, increase sought by the company.
The commission staff had urged that the company receive a $33 million, or 9%, boost in revenue. 

The proposed ruling also recommended that Tucson Electric be disallowed from recovering $32.6 million paid to its onetime Alamito Co. unit for electricity, an amount sought by the company under a special fuel and power adjustment clause that has been ended by the commission. 

A Tucson Electric spokesman declined comment on the preliminary decision, saying the company expects to respond directly to the commission within the 14-day period allowed for comments.
Mr. Rudibaugh's 70-page opinion criticized Tucson Electric's management and urged that an audit be conducted of the company's operations. "One theme prevalent throughout the recent history of TEP has been its emphasis on shareholder/management compensation, and disregard for its customers and this regulatory commission," the hearing officer wrote.
He recommended that the commission disallow recovery of some $850,000 in management bonuses. 

The proposed ruling also would limit Tucson Electric to a 12.5% return on equity, compared with a 16.5% return that the utility has been permitted since 1981. 

Analysts said the hearing officer's proposals may be the best news that Tucson Electric gets from the consumer-minded Arizona Corporations Commission, which could roll back Mr. Rudibaugh's suggested rate increases. 

Moreover, it's expected that Tucson Electric will soon return to the commission with a request for another rate increase related to its new Springerville 2 coal-fire generating plant.
Analysts predict the company may seek an increase as high as 30% in that case. 

"You can imagine how the commissioners may feel about that one," says Mr. Enholme. 

