.START 

Shigeru Kita is an emblem of his times. 

In the bleak days after World War II, Mr. Kita and his brothers set up a company that bought and sold the materials to rebuild Japan: steel and lumber.
Today, Hanwa Co. does an even better business trading in the building block of the modern era: money. 

"Money is just a commodity," says Mr. Kita, Hanwa's 63-year-old president. "We trade it for a profit." 

And in a big way.
Aggressively taking advantage of recent liberalizations in Japan's money markets, Mr. Kita's Hanwa has become one of Japan's biggest corporate borrowers and one of the biggest individual players in the global foreign-exchange market. 

Many days, in the minutes before Japan's life-insurance companies and banks start placing their morning orders, Mr. Kita will weigh in with an order that is sometimes as much as $1 billion.
Often, it's enough to set the tone of trading for the day. 

Hanwa's animated president lurks behind every market move the company makes.
And he has a good track record at guessing the dollar's course.
On one March morning this year, he put more than $1 billion into dollars, then rode the dollar from its rate of about 130 yen then to its peak of 150 yen in June. 

Altogether last year, Hanwa made about 17 billion yen ($115.9 million) before taxes trading money, Mr. Kita says, against about 10 billion yen trading another 600 billion yen of other commodities, such as steel and lumber.
After taxes, the company's earnings in the year ended last March 31 amounted to 16.7 billion yen, up 50% from 11.10 billion yen a year earlier.
Analysts estimate that its profit will rise nearly 40% this fiscal year. 

By many measures, that makes Hanwa one of the most profitable trading companies in Japan, even if it's not as well known as its giant rivals such as Sumitomo Corp. or Mitsubishi Corp.
The company has been successful, Mr. Kita says, because it trades money as well as goods. 

Playing the financial markets isn't a new phenomenon for Japanese companies, or even to Hanwa, which began doing "zaiteku" -- making money through financial investments -- five years ago.
Many Japanese companies have achieved fame for the practice; Toyota Motor Co. sometimes is referred to as Toyota Bank for its use of zaiteku.
In the year ended June 30, 1988, the latest for which full-year figures are available, Toyota earned 116 billion yen before taxes from investing cash reserves of 2.15 trillion yen. 

What sets Hanwa apart from the pack is Mr. Kita's artful use of recent liberalizations of Japan's financial markets to maximize its returns. 

For instance, when Japanese authorities in November 1987 launched a market for commercial paper, a kind of corporate IOU, Hanwa was among the first Japanese companies to discover a profit opportunity in the incipient market.
With more than two trillion yen in commercial paper outstanding, Hanwa now is the biggest issuer of commercial paper in Japan. 

Another way in which Hanwa makes money is by issuing bonds in Europe that permit investors to convert the face value into Hanwa stock or to buy Hanwa stock at a set price.
Because they offer a chance at making money on the stock, the bonds pay very low interest rates.
That means Hanwa's borrowing costs stay low and enable it to make money by placing the funds into long-term time deposits. 

Taking advantage of interest-rate discrepancies, Mr. Kita says, Hanwa routinely earns about 0.2% more than it pays for money it borrows in the capital markets.
It's the money it earns on that spread that Mr. Kita then invests in the currency markets, to compound his profits. 

So far, there's no dearth of interest in helping Hanwa raise money.
A steady stream of Japanese and foreign investment bankers trek through Mr. Kita's office, offering to help his company borrow more. "Hanwa is one of the best-known prospective clients in town," says a foreign investment banker, who has sought Hanwa's business on several occasions. 

Despite its financial prowess, Hanwa actually is a conservative investor.
Mr. Kita won't even consider trading futures or options.
When he takes a position in the foreign-exchange market, for instance, he usually invests in a fixed-term, foreign-currency deposit. 

Still, Mr. Kita concedes that Hanwa's profile has changed since he became its president in 1983.
Its steady flow of profit has boosted its capital to 260 billion yen from 29 billion yen five years ago, yet its employee base has remained relatively stable at about 1,200. 

"Five or six years ago, I would have said this is a steel company," he says. "But I have been doing the trading business for a long time and had an instinct for finance.
Now I think that is our future." 

