.START 

Jason Yates thought he had a sure thing with the end-of-school issue of his Future Farmers of America chapter newsletter. 

With financial backing from a local Springdale, Ark., businessman and a week of work, Mr. Yates produced Farmboy, a tame, eight-page parody of Playboy that billed itself as "Entertainment for Future Farmers." The cover pictured three female students of Springdale High School, appropriately pouty-looking, but fully clothed. 

Nevertheless, when Farmboy rolled off the presses in June, something familiar to future farmers hit the fan.
Springdale High School's principal, Harry Wilson, stopped distribution until the FFA officers could decide whether they approved of the newsletter.
The officers weren't entertained, the copies were confiscated and Farmboy appeared to be a dead issue. 

But the resourceful Mr. Yates fired off a letter to Playboy itself, complaining about the censorship. "This is what high school students in Springdale, Arkansas, are being taught about the First Amendment," he wrote. 

Playboy, ever at the vanguard of press-freedom issues, has published Mr. Yates's letter on page 48 of the November issue, right beside a reproduction of the cover of the ill-fated Farmboy.
As a result, Mr. Yates is harvesting a whole new crop of grief. 

"There's a lot of people who aren't real happy about it, and they're not afraid to say so," says Mr. Yates, who has since moved on to the University of Arkansas in neighboring Fayetteville. 

The new stink doesn't show any signs of abating soon.
In a letter drafted by the advisers and 200 members of the Springdale FFA chapter, Mr. Yates was taken to task for failing to clear his plans for Farmboy with the chapter and school administration before publication. 

"It didn't live up to the image of FFA that we wanted to reflect to the community," the letter says.
Chapter adviser Dennis Mason says the letter was to be sent to the editors of the Arkansas Gazette and the Springdale News. 

Mr. Yates, who, appropriately, is studying journalism at the university, is confident that the FFA won't send its letter to Playboy. "This is the Bible Belt," he points out, "and you just don't send anything to Playboy." 

