.START 

Robert Fulghum became an enormous BLIP on the radar screen of American pop culture a couple of years ago, with the publication of "All I Really Need to Know I Learned in Kindergarten," his collection of essayish ruminations notable for their brevity and relentlessly uplifting tone. 

The heart of that book's title essay -- which has by now been reprinted throughout the free world -- or at least wherever puppy dogs lap the apple cheeks of beribboned little girls, unicorns canter 'neath rainbows, waterfalls spill golden honey and wishes really do come true -- is a series of admonitions that Mr. Fulghum insists every healthy being learned in kindergarten: "Share everything." "Warm milk and cookies are good for you." "Take a nap every day." There were several more. 

Some of us objected that Mr. Fulghum's list excluded the truly enduring and common-sensical aphorisms of youth -- "Don't get mad, get even," for example, but hundreds of thousands of Americans, maybe millions, have clutched Mr. Fulghum and his book to their bosom. "Kindergarten" has been on the best-seller lists for what seems like centuries. 

Mr. Fulghum now has issued a follow-up to "Kindergarten": "It Was On Fire When I Lay Down On It" (Villard, 218 pages, $17.95).
It too is a best seller, although in every particular indistinguishable from its predecessor.
And for the curious, the dustjacket bio tells us all we really need to know about Robert Fulghum.
He has been a cowboy and a folk singer and Unitarian minister.
His business card reads, simply, "Fulghum." He lives on a houseboat. "He is," we learn, "still working on what he wants to be when he grows up." 

If this isn't enough to make your flesh leave your bones, there is the book itself, with its warm-hearted pitch.
Upon examination, Mr. Fulghum's prose style appears to owe much to the late A.A. Milne, particularly Milne's mature "Pooh Corner" period.
Like Milne, he is a master of the sentence fragment and the single-sentence paragraph.
And as with Milne, these truncated stylistic forms are perfectly suited to what he has to say, which is an agglutination of Lao-tse, Whitman, Harry Emerson Fosdick, Thoreau, Friedrich Schleiermacher and Abigail Van Buren. 

"I am in tune with the universe," he writes. "It feels like home." And: "I would live in a treehouse if I could.
And: "The purpose of hugging has changed . . . a shift from Look At Me to I Am Seeing You." And (no surprise here): "My son is a mother." And: "What I do is to be the most Fulghum I can be. . . . poet, counselor, neighbor, dreamer, wisher, laugher, traveler, pilgrim, and on and on and on." 

And on and on and on is right.
What Mr. Fulghum's stream of consciousness lacks in depth it makes up in width and length; there seems to be no end to his gift for rumination.
This means that he will continue to scribble, and to publish, and to sell, unless something is done.
It is, therefore, more profitable (although not in the sense that Mr. Fulghum's philosophizing will continue to be) to resist the ostensibly timeless questions that Mr. Fulghum pretends to contemplate and to consider instead why his bogus gravitas should resonate -- as he might put it -- so mightily with the nation at large. 

I would guess that at the center of Mr. Fulghum's appeal is an exercise in self-congratulation -- and a massive one at that, on the order of, say, the construction of Versailles.
But there's a twist: The self-congratulation is catching.
In his little essays Mr. Fulghum signals not only his own singularity but his reader's as well. "Yes," he seems to say, "I really am a quite remarkable man; but what does that say about you, who had the taste and sensibility to buy my book and write 'How True]' in the margins?" 

Mass, indiscriminate flattery always has been a means of acquiring certain kinds of popularity.
Mr. Fulghum milks the technique until the udders are chafed and aching.
One of his central, and more familiar, tenets is that children, despite their terrible hygiene and inability to spell, are somehow superior in wisdom and spirituality to those of us who can drive, open bank accounts, and procreate.
And since we all were children once, wisdom is equally accessible to all, by a simple process of regression -- by developing, for example, a chin-wagging fondness for Mr. Fulghum's Pooh-like prose. 

Now, if there is anything to learn from America's "education crisis," it is that there is no more deleterious notion than that children possess a special wisdom: It's deleterious for teachers, for adults, and for those of us who are forced to ride public transportation with their children.
Obviously Mr. Fulghum must be stopped.
But how?
The First Amendment does constrain us, alas.
But not all concerted action is therefore ineffectual.
Nothing will so discourage gurus of Mr. Fulghum's ilk as simply to ignore them.
For the sake of our children, then, for the sake, indeed, of our country: Give Mr. Fulghum an early retirement.
He already has a houseboat, after all, and doesn't need your money.
Don't buy this book. 

Mr. Ferguson is an editorial writer for Scripps Howard News Service in Washington, D.C. 

