.START 

The Federal Reserve Board, prompted by the securities industry, proposed several rules that would make it easier to buy foreign securities through U.S. brokers. 

The proposals, which would amend the Fed's Regulation T, are geared primarily at institutional investors whom the industry worries may be side-stepping U.S. brokers when they trade foreign stocks and bonds. 

Under one rule change, customers would be able to buy foreign stocks on margin, or credit, through U.S. brokerage firms.
Currently, investors must make full payment when purchasing these securities through U.S. firms.
Margin accounts, typically 50% of the purchase price, can only be used for U.S. securities or foreign stocks that are traded on a U.S. exchange. 

While the biggest foreign companies already are covered because they are traded on a U.S. exchange, usually through American depositary receipts, it would open up hundreds of eligible companies.
They would be designated "world-class securities." 

The rule proposal initially would affect only stocks on the Tokyo and London stock exchanges, because requirements would include having price quotes continuously available in the U.S. as well as an aggregate market value of more than $1 billion for the company's shares. 

The proposals are likely to be widely supported on Wall Street, which sponsored the proposals through its industry group, the Securities Industry Association.
The Securities and Exchange Commission also offered suggestions on the proposals before they were submitted, Wall Street sources said. 

The industry's concern is that U.S. institutional players who currently want to buy stocks on margin can do so through a foreign bank or broker, but are barred from using a U.S. broker. "The {U.S.} brokers feel that large institutional customers want to diversify," said Scott Holz, an attorney for the Fed's banking supervision and regulation unit. "If they can't buy them on credit . . . they won't go to a U.S. broker." 

A second proposal would allow U.S. buyers of foreign securities to use foreign currency rather than converting the funds into dollars first.
That would ease the foreign-currency risk currently faced by U.S. brokers when their clients ask them to buy foreign issues. 

The rule changes also would allow transactions to be settled -- when the money must be paid for the securities -- using foreign settlement dates rather than the standard seven-day U.S. period.
Tokyo exchange settlement, for example, is three days. 

The proposals are open for comment through Nov. 30. 

