.START 

Laurie Anderson used to light up the stage.
And she could do so simply by putting an incandescent light bulb in her mouth and smiling an eerie half smile, her teeth glowing an unsettling but very pretty yellow.
She told amusing stories about the oddities of American life that maybe meant something more than their literal content, or maybe didn't.
But so appealing was her delivery that no one really cared, especially when she illuminated her vignettes by drawing elementary but wonderfully apt images with a light pen, by playing a funny violin with a bow made of recording tape and a playback head for the bridge, by singing in a goofy electronically altered voice. 

So well, in fact, did Ms. Anderson manipulate visual information, music, theater and technology to make the ordinary fresh and delightful -- to make, for instance, common objects like sunglasses and airplanes appear avant-garde and miraculous -- that it seemed as if Ms. Anderson just might become the ultimate pop artist.
But that was six years ago, when Ms. Anderson had collected all her material together into a four-part, two-evening performance entitled "United States," which she presented live at the Brooklyn Academy of Music and released as a recording and a book. 

Then, as her fame grew, Ms. Anderson began to flounder.
Overly complex technology burdened her stage performances and took away their fun; her songs started to sound pretentious as she gave ever more importance to music in her work; her material lost touch with the common world as stardom removed her from it.
For the past couple of years, she was little heard from. 

Now, however, Ms. Anderson has returned here to the site of her greatest triumph with a new 90-minute solo performance.
But, unfortunately, "Empty Spaces," which has opened this year's installment of the Next Wave Festival at BAM and runs through Sunday, is, well, what its name implies.
In fairness to Ms. Anderson, her show really is something to see if only for the sparkling slides, animation and film so beautifully projected on various-sized screens around the stage.
And the diminutive, spike-haired Ms. Anderson (who has lately complained of being in a weakened state after catching an ocean-pollution disease in Brazil last summer, and who had to cancel two performances last weekend) still has a way of commanding the stage, as she uses all that voice-altering technology to change personae as if by magic. 

But all that technology now feels like part of a magician's bag of tricks, something employed to make substance out of thin air.
That is most apparent in the music.
Ms. Anderson has not been idle during her absence from the stage.
She learned to sing; and she turns out to have an effective, if limited, soprano voice.
But she has not learned to create music that stands on its own.
Her music had been minimal but inspired in its way of adding a spunky and clever accompaniment to the delivery of her stories.
When she needed more, she relied on good musicians to support her. 

In her new performance, she relies on machines -- a space-age violin, keyboards (which she doesn't play with much proficiency) and microphones all connected to computers.
But, in her hands, all the computers can do is make big and unusual sounds out of bland or banal ideas.
Once Ms. Anderson could give human expression to a blowup of a wall socket, but now Ms. Anderson's parade of images -- paper coffee cups, Elvis or a flying flashlight -- neither startle nor amaze. 

Nor do her metaphors resonate any longer.
She compares Hitler's speaking style to a drummer and Reagan's to a crooner singing "When You Wish Upon a Star," but she does little more with those not unobvious notions than a standup comic might.
Worse, much of her early irony has now turned angry and self-referential. 

But conventional as Ms. Anderson has become, she still can make the inspired, ironic, off-beat observation now and then, as when she offers her off-center interpretation of the "Star-Spangled Banner." In fact, Ms. Anderson's real talent may lie more as an interpretive artist than a creative one, and one could imagine something spectacular if, say, an opera company turned her and her technology loose on a production of a standard repertoire opera.
Or even an entirely nonstandard one such as John Moran's "Jack Benny]" which is currently onstage in Manhattan at La Mama E.T.C. 

That's right, "The Jack Benny Show" happens to be the latest American pop icon to be turned into an opera, in this case a surreal hour-long fantasy by Mr. Moran, a cheeky 24-year-old composer from Nebraska who already has written ballets on Freud and Faust and who now is busily penning an "epic opera" on the Manson family.
What Mr. Moran has done in "Jack Benny]" is to manipulate tapes of the audio portion of the actual Benny TV show of the 1950s in order to concoct a sort of electronic music.
Against this background, amusing actors from the off-off-Broadway Ridge Theater pantomime the characters of the show. 

On top of all this, Mr. Moran adds a favorite trick of his own -- stopping and restarting a skit many times over, adding echoes, buzzes and harrowing sound effects, or just plain ear-splitting distortion, to each repetition.
Eventually the aural surrealism becomes so confused that the authentic commercial breaks for products such as Listerine shown between skits seem nearly as bizarre as a cross-dressing Don Wilson or a black Dennis Day on stage.
And it probably is better not to ask at all what the apocalyptic prelude or the Hinduish dancers in the glass cage have to do with anything else. 

But if the production, wittily directed by Bob McGrath, has little of Ms. Anderson's polish, and if the technology looks and sounds crude in comparison (for all of Mr. Moran's fancy electronic sampling), "Jack Benny]" is, nonetheless, the work of an original, if somewhat immature, voice.
It is an opera that reminds one exactly of the exciting new kinds of music theater Laurie Anderson was producing when she was Mr. Moran's age. 

Mr. Swed is a free-lance music critic based in New York. 

