.START 

The battle of "firsts" among commercial banks in the securities business escalated as a J.P. Morgan & Co. unit underwrote a $30 million corporate debt issue for Savannah Electric & Power Co. 

Morgan said the issue, which it won on a competitive bid, marked the first time that a commercial banking company had acted as the sole lead underwriter for a corporate debt issue since 1933, the year Congress barred commercial banks from underwriting and dealing in corporate securities.
This past June, the Federal Reserve Board reopened the business to four big banks on a limited basis. 

However, Morgan's claim to primacy isn't the first. 

On Sept. 21, Bankers Trust New York Corp., a Morgan rival, trumpeted a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission for its securities affiliate to be the sole lead underwriter of a $150 million senior note issue for MorningStar Foods Inc. Bankers Trust, too, cited that as a first. 

That announcement drew snickers from competitors who felt that Bankers Trust had jumped the gun.
Not only hadn't the issue been priced and gone to market, competitors argued, but Bankers Trust was shooting fish in a barrel, they said, because Bankers Trust holds a minority equity interest in Dallas-based MorningStar. 

Yesterday, a Bankers Trust official said the MorningStar issue isn't expected to be priced until November. 

In its announcement yesterday, Morgan said the 30-year first mortgage bonds for Savannah E&P, a utility subsidiary of Southern Co., had been priced and sold by its J.P. Morgan Securities Inc. unit.
The issue was priced to yield 9.32%, or 1.32 percentage points above the yield on 30-year U.S. Treasury bonds. 

Being visible in the securities markets is important to banks, which are trying to win back corporate financing business lost in recent years to the securities markets. 

One of the unsuccessful bidders on the Savannah offering -- who included Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., Goldman Sachs & Co. and Salomon Brothers Inc. -- called Morgan's bid "very aggressive." The bidder said the issue would have been more attractive at 1.5 percentage points over Treasurys. 

To ease any lingering doubts regarding other firsts: In July, Morgan co-managed with Salomon a $200 million offering in the U.S. for the kingdom of Thailand, the first time a bank had handled such an issue in modern times.
And in June, Morgan was the first bank to participate in an underwriting syndicate for corporate debt; that issue involved Xerox Co. 

