.START 

British Aerospace PLC and France's Thomson-CSF S.A. emerged as strong contenders to buy troubled British defense contractor Ferranti International Signal PLC. 

In a joint statement, the two big European defense contractors said they've "decided to cooperate in reviewing all options open to them in relation to Ferranti," including a possible joint bid.
The two companies already have bought about 2.5 million Ferranti shares, or 0.3% of the stock outstanding. 

The announcement, confirming recent press reports, makes the Anglo-French partners the first Ferranti suitors to declare their interest publicly.
Last month, the ailing British contractor began soliciting bids for all or some of its shares from around the world's defense industry, following its discovery of alleged accounting fraud at a U.S. unit.
Ferranti's resulting #185 million ($291.8 million) after-tax write-off -- nearly half the company's net worth -- has forced it to seek a financial bailout. 

But a Ferranti deal, by British Aerospace-Thomson or anyone else, is still weeks away.
The two suitors said it will be "some time" before they decide whether to bid, following an in-depth study of Ferranti's books.
Likewise, Ferranti said discussions with its various suitors "are at a relatively early stage." Ferranti Chairman Sir Derek Alun-Jones declined to identify other potential bidders, but a Ferranti statement said "a large number of major U.K. and overseas defense and electronics companies" have expressed interest in the company.
At current stock market prices, Ferranti's value is #412 million. 

Though other suitors are expected to emerge, British Aerospace and Thomson "have to be among the front-runners" for winning Ferranti, said analyst Stephen Parker of London stockbrokers UBS Phillips & Drew.
British Aerospace is Britain's largest defense contractor, and its rival U.K. bidders are either too small or might encounter political obstacles.
And while Ferranti's foreign suitors may be numerous, Thomson would benefit from the increasingly close ties between the British and French defense ministries, he said. 

A successful Thomson bid would be the biggest French investment so far in Britain's defense industry.
But the prospect of a bid, which once would have set off political alarms, is unlikely to meet much resistance. 

For starters, Thomson may bring a dowry: A source close to Thomson said French government officials are discussing with British counterparts a possible "quid pro quo" if the U.K. allows a Thomson bid.
He didn't elaborate.
More generally, the British Defense Ministry now encourages its contractors to cooperate with European rivals.
Last summer, the U.K. government let West Germany's Siemens AG join Britain's General Electric Co. in a joint takeover of British electronics concern Plessey Co. British GE isn't related to the U.S. company with the same name. 

"The idea of British companies producing British aircraft and British tanks to the exclusion of our allies is a relic of history," said Bruce George, a Labour Party member of the House of Commons's defense committee.
Though some U.K. politicians may oppose Thomson, he said, "I could think of worse bids for Ferranti." 

Thomson's interest in Ferranti is intense.
It already collaborates with British Aerospace on an air-to-air missile, and with Ferranti on a fighter radar system.
But at stake, Thomson officials said, is the future of France's defense industry. 

"The European defense industry is restructuring," said one Thomson official, citing the Siemens-GEC-Plessey merger and Daimler-Benz AG's recent accord to buy Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm G.m.b.
H. "We intend by our own means or through an association to constitute one of the world poles of that restructured industry." French Defense Ministry officials say they hope to see Thomson get a foothold in such projects as the European Fighter Aircraft program, a joint effort by Britain, West Germany, Spain and Italy to build a new-generation fighter.
Despite Ferranti's recent troubles, a Ferranti-led consortium still is a contender for a #800 million-plus radar contract for the new fighters. 

Rumors about potential rival suitors for Ferranti swept London markets yesterday but most were quashed.
French defense contractor Matra S.A. denied any interest in Ferranti, as did St. Louis-based Emerson Electric Co.
In above-normal trading volume of 6.8 million shares at London, Ferranti stock slipped 4.5 pence (7 cents) to 55 pence (87 cents). 

