.START 

Bland packaging can sour even the sweetest-tasting product, and Just Born Inc. knows it. 

The Bethlehem, Pa., candy company found that shoppers skipped over its Hot Tamales, Jelly Jos and Mike and Ike treats because of their old-fashioned black-and-white packages.
So last year, the company introduced a new package featuring a colorful cast of animated grapes and cherries -- and sales soared 25%. 

"Kids say we went from dull and boring to definitely awesome" without a single product change or advertisement, says a company marketing official. 

Package redesign is nothing new, but lately it has become more popular.
Companies, especially small ones without deep pockets, are finding it's a cheaper alternative to expensive ad campaigns.
Some even say it's more effective.
Markets are increasingly splintered, what with myriad television channels and magazines diluting the effects of advertising.
As a result, it's that much more important for a product to have strong appeal on the store shelf, where standing out from the clutter is an eternal struggle. 

"Packaging is the last five seconds of marketing," says John Lister, executive vice president of Lister Butler Inc., a New York consulting firm whose package redesign work has risen 20% this year.
Redesign is becoming "a more prudent investment as conventional advertising becomes less effective," he says. 

But it isn't just a small-company trend.
For big advertisers, an eye-catching design can complement ad campaigns: TV commercials typically feature the package for at least half of air time. 

While costs of redesign range widely, it's almost always cheaper than the multimillions spent on ad campaigns.
Reshaping a bottle might run as much as $300,000 because of alterations in production equipment.
But new graphics on the label or a better photograph, the simplest and most common changes, may cost just a few thousand.
Many established brands are reluctant to tinker, worried that a new look could alienate loyal customers, even though consultants say negative reactions are uncommon.
Convincing a pack of managers to agree on a new design can also take time.
And unlike advertising blitzes, the results aren't instant.
It can take a few years to see the full impact of a new package, especially if it's part of a complete product overhaul. 

But when it works, it often works well.
Stroh Brewery Co. turned to a new package after market research showed that its white beer cans "didn't stand out" against competitors, says Peter J. Cline, senior vice president of sales and marketing for the mid-sized brewer.
Now the cans and bottle labels are bright blue.
Sales of Stroh's long-neck bottles are up, especially to first-time buyers, he says, and distribution has been expanded as a result. 

Even private-label brands, the Plain Janes of marketing with their stark store-name labels, are opting for face lifts as a way to boost market share without extra advertising.
Kroger Co., a Cincinnati-based grocery store chain, redesigned store-brand packages after evaluating their poor sales performance.
Now, newly repackaged products are competing with national brands.
Kroger's Deluxe ice cream sales grew 20% this year after the type was enlarged and a label photo was enhanced. 

With new competitors arriving daily, most companies want products to look in step with the times.
Valvoline Oil Co. recently introduced a new package for its motor oil after consumer focus groups said the old package looked dated.
The changes were simple, but the process was involved.
Valvoline considered more than 40 variations before deciding merely to increase the type size on the oil's grade and add more color to the label.
The company says it's too early to tell if sales are affected. 

The box for Wheatena, a century-old brand of hot cereal, was redesigned last year to give it a more modern look.
An old-fashioned Pennsylvania Dutch style cereal bowl on the front was replaced with a picture of a striped bowl and modern spoon.
Uhlmann Co., which has since sold the brand to American Home Products, also played up Wheatena's bran and wheat germ contents on the label to attract fiber fanatics.
Sales of the cereal jumped 25% in Florida test markets a couple of months after the new package hit the shelves, without any advertising or promotions. 

Procter & Gamble Co. 's Clearasil acne medication now gets a packaging change every few years, rather than once a decade. "Teens tend to buy the newest product on the market," says Ronald Peterson, managing partner of Peterson & Blyth Associates Inc. Peterson & Blyth, the New York company that designed the latest package, says redesign work now accounts for 70% of its business, up from 50% last year. 

While rare, negative reactions to new packages do occur.
During the summer of 1988, Adolph Coors Co. angered loyal drinkers by changing the label on its beer to read "Original Draft' instead of "Banquet Beer." Some customers claimed the beer tasted different.
So, just six months after adding the slogan, the company dumped it. "The last thing you want is a customer to think you've changed the formula when you change the package," says one consultant. 

Because of that fear, few companies are that aggressive with new packaging.
S.C. Johnson & Son Inc., a Racine, Wis., household products company, hadn't altered the packaging on its Future floor wax since 1960, partially out of concern that customers wouldn't recognize a new bottle.
When the company finally decided to make a change this summer, it was a subtle one.
The word Future is black instead of white and the background is a brighter shade of purple. "We wanted to cut through the increasing clutter, but keep what the consumers recognize," says Dean Lindsay, a principal at Kornick Lindsay Inc., the Chicago package-design firm that worked with S.C. Johnson. 

"In most cases, the client is more inclined to be conservative because they want to protect a franchise that can take only so much fiddling," says Mr. Lindsay. "You're treading a fine line." 

That's why Campbell Soup Co. doesn't expect to touch it's familiar red and white color scheme even though it plans to substitute paper labels with lithographs painted directly on cans in a few years.
The company says the labeling change is partly to cut back on trash and partly for image.
Says Melvin L. Druin, vice president of packaging at Campbell: "Printed cans provide a more upscale product to the consumer." 

