.START 

Once again, it's the eleventh hour of the "budget process," which means all of Washington is restaging its favorite show -- Nightmare on Pennsylvania Avenue.
As usual, the Pork Monster known as an omnibus appropriations bill is gobbling its way through what's left of Washington's political respectability.
In fact, there's a 30-page document now making the rounds in Washington that lists "extraneous and other problem provisions" in the Senate bill.
Here are some of Congress's creations this year, quite apart from the billions pouring out for new health, welfare and environmental spending. 

There's money for an oat acreage limitation program; for boosting the sale of meat in U.S. commissaries; for a $6 million "magnetic levitation transportation grant"; for "demonstration projects relating to telephone service centers"; and for the Finger Lakes Area Hospital Corp. in New York. 

One provision would prohibit the President from designating a country as covered by the Caribbean Basin Initiative unless it adopted certain labor laws.
Special-interest provisions would pay for grants covering Onondaga Lake in New York and a special transition rule for the Kenosha Harbor in Wisconsin. 

Believe it or not, the capital-gains tax cut is part of the same bill that's carting all this special-interest baggage.
Oh, but there's more.
The House has affixed a new Fairness Doctrine bill to the capital-gains bill.
President Reagan refused to renew the Fairness Doctrine, an unconstitutional restraint on broadcasting which Congress would raise from the dead by packing it into the omnibus bill.
Remember the child-care bill that includes licensing grandmas?
That's in there too, with expanded programs and paper work alone that will make Section 89 look like a model of clarity. 

This is Garbage Government.
This is the way Washington legislates now, the way it has enacted poorly crafted laws in recent years and the way it will do so forever unless someone puts a stop to it.
Every four years the American people go to the polls and elect the person they expect to put a stop to this disgrace: the President.
Instead, the role Washington has assigned to Presidents ever since the 1974 budget "reform" bill has been to faint dead away as the garbage truck rolls through town. 

President Bush will never have a better chance than he has now to rewrite this script.
He has to confront Congress.
It is time for President Bush to test his inherent power to line-item veto unconstitutional and unneeded provisions in the budget. 

Mr. Bush is on record in interviews as saying that he's looking for just the right test case for the item-veto proposal that was made on these pages by lawyer Stephen Glazier.
Mr. Glazier argues that Presidents possess an inherent line-item veto or, alternatively, the power to impound or refuse to spend authorized funds.
The omnibus garbage bill is reason alone to restore discipline to the process, but the politics of this bill in particular make it evident why the process produces mainly paralysis. 

The capital-gains cut is the one serious piece of politics Washington has conducted this session.
It's been fully aired in public and voted on.
Now it's in danger of disappearing into the omnibus muck.
Because Mr. Bush fears he'd have to agree to an orgy of spending if he also wants to keep the capital-gains cut in the bill, he's negotiating to take it out.
But that would require another vote in the House, raising the danger that the class warriors there would prevail against the capital-gains cut this time.
Moreover, since that vote would come after the vote on the budget, President Bush may conclude that he'd have to cut a deal to accept whatever spending he's handed in the awful omnibus bill to get action on capital gains. 

The alternative to this paralysis is to go on the offensive against a Congress already weakened in the public's mind by the S&L fiasco and its record of ethics scandals.
Mr. Bush could pledge to line-item veto some of the worst provisions and see if any court would question his power to do so.
Invoking an inherent line-item power is risky, but we would argue that the American system of government is already at risk from the current spectacle and from another President temporizing to the tune that next time, next time, he just won't stand for it. 

Indeed how President Bush reacts to getting his first budget from Congress will very likely set the political tone for the entire term.
If congressional Democrats can make him eat all this "extraneous" junk, they will set the stage for next October, and the next after that, when the same process will recur. 

The issue, in a phrase, is presidential authority.
Use it, or continue to lose it. 

