.START 

Sony Corp. 's $3.4 billion purchase of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. may have been just a preview. 

Although few Japanese companies are expected to invest as heavily in Hollywood as did Sony, more are looking around the U.S. movie industry these days with an eye to buying part of the glitzy business. 

Cash-heavy trading houses, usually known for shipping grain and airplanes, are buying up the rights to air U.S. films on cable networks in Japan.
Even industrial giant Nippon Steel Corp. is tying up with MCA Inc. to explore "various opportunities in the entertainment field." 

Analysts say there'll be more such activities.
Japanese companies "have money on their hands," says Shigeru Masuda, chairman of the New York-based venture company Zeron Group, which recently collected $20 million from Japanese companies to fund some Hollywood movies.
Adds Alexander Wilberforce, an analyst at WestLB Securities Pacific Ltd., "It's a very long-term trend." 

But why movies?
Sony had a clear-cut reason to buy Columbia Pictures: to acquire the software to play on its own videocassette recorders.
But lately, companies with little connection to the movie industry are looking to buy in.
These firms, like Sony, don't intend to influence the content of foreign movies.
Rather, they're after a piece of Japan's expanding video and cable networks market.
Even movies that fail in theaters often make money when turned into videos: The two areas add up to a thriving 500 billion yen ($3.5 billion) market in Japan. 

Companies also want to profit from new cable networks and the upcoming launch of high-definition television.
Indeed, by 1997, Japan plans to have eight satellite broadcasting channels, which will require a mass of new programs. 

Sony's acquisition of Columbia Pictures came on the heels of a $100 million investment by Victor Co. of Japan Ltd. 's entertainment subsidiary to produce movies with Hollywood's Lawrence Gordon.
Entertainment conglomerate Fujisankei Communications Group, which already has financed a series of successful Japanese movies about cutsie animals and a teenagers' movie called "When She Changes Into Her Bathing Suit," is giving London-based producer David Puttnam $100 million to make six movies in the next four years.
In addition, Fujisankei took the plunge into the music business last week when it bought a stake in Virgin Music Group. "They're very aggressive," says Mr. Wilberforce, who used to work in Fujisankei's London unit. "And they seem to know their market." 

Some seemingly unlikely investors are also jumping in.
Japan's powerful trading houses, concerned about narrowing margins in their traditional businesses, are particularly eager to venture into the entertainment industry, setting the example for other nonmedia companies to follow.
Sumitomo Corp. has bought the rights to air some 2,000 foreign and domestic films on cable television.
Armed with two cable channels and a media staff of 200, which has produced sales of more than 10 billion yen this year, Sumitomo says it now wants to join with Hollywood studios to distribute films around the globe. 

Such tie-ups might even mean buying a sizable share in a U.S. studio, says Yasushige Nishimura, Sumitomo's manager of the media business department. "We want to be significant players in the international market." 

Others companies are putting their money into movie-production projects still in the works.
After sponsoring a few Japanese movies, Marubeni Corp. has put together a team of investors, including rival trading house Nissho Iwai Corp., to finance a $10 million movie starring John Lone.
Marubeni hopes the movie, "China Shadow," which will be about Hong Kong's return to China's control, will become a box-office success all over the world.
To make international success possible, the film is in English -- even the Japanese actors deliver their lines in English, whether or not they understand what they are saying. 

For Marubeni, that's just the beginning.
At the International Film Festival held in Tokyo last week, Marubeni officials were scurrying around hunting for future projects and prospective new artists. "I had breakfast three times" in a single day, says Osamu Masada, Marubeni's manager in charge of audio-visual software. "And I'm having dinner twice." 

Not every Japanese company venturing into the movie business has found immediate success, though.
Four years ago, trading house C. Itoh & Co. spent $15 million on a project with Suntory Ltd. and Tokyo Broadcasting System to bring movies such as "Fatal Beauty," "Bright Lights, Big City" and "Betrayed" to Japan.
The movies all flopped here. 

But the threat of box-office failure doesn't tarnish the glamorous appeal for such companies.
They figure that their huge distribution networks will help reduce the risks.
Even retailers, such as Japan's giant retail and hotel chain Saison Group, and finance companies such as Orix Corp. are also starting to put up money for movies. 

In Hollywood, where many independent producers have trouble financing projects, Japanese investments are being warmly received.
Edward R. Pressman, the producer of the movie "Wall Street," says a Japanese entertainment company, Shochiku-Fuji Co., invested $10 million in two of his latest film projects: "Reversal of Fortune," the story of Claus von Bulow, and "The New Rose Hotel," a thriller set in Tokyo. 

"It has been a very pleasant way of doing business," says Mr. Pressman. "Certain changes had to be made, and it was a very complicated deal.
They handled it an orderly and gentlemanly way." He notes that after the Japanese company agreed to fund the projects, they transferred money, even before the final papers were signed, because the funds were needed for production. "There was a kind of confidence one has to live up to," adds Mr. Pressman. 

Producers who haven't worked with the Japanese say they also welcome the new potential source of funding. "I think producers are thrilled to have a new additional source of money to make more movies," says Richard Roth, the producer of "In Country," a recently released movie starring Bruce Willis and Emily Lloyd. "It's a real plus.
Have them call me," says Mr. Roth. 

Kathleen A. Hughes in Los Angeles contributed to this article. 

