.START 

The Los Angeles Times will introduce a more-open look with today's editions as part of its campaign to retain its grip on the competitive Southern California market. 

The redesign, the paper's first in a decade, has been months in the making, and details have been a closely guarded secret.
Prototype editions indicate the facelift at the nation's fourth-largest daily newspaper is more incremental than radical, blending the paper's traditional typefaces with new indexes, sub-headlines, and thin black lines to guide readers through a chunk of newsprint that often runs more than 100 pages. 

The overhaul, says editor C. Shelby Coffey III, "is about clarity and organization" that will point up what he describes as the paper's strengths in reporting and writing.
Mr. Coffey became the paper's editor Jan. 1 with a mandate to revise its look.
The paper's parent is Times Mirror Co. 

The Los Angeles Times's sheer bulk and its dense layout have given it a reputation as dowdy-looking and hard to read. "It's the old, gray lady of the West Coast," says John Morton, a newspaper analyst with the investment firm of Lynch, Jones & Ryan. 

The new design is intended to hurry the reader through the paper.
Each section other than the front carries a page-long index down the left-hand side, with squibs describing stories in the section.
Important stories throughout the paper are to carry small, one-sentence descriptions set in moderately large type immediately below the headline, an unusual feature. 

Reaction by staffers at the paper has been mixed.
A joke around the newsroom suggests the new design makes the Los Angeles Times look like the flashy USA Today but without its depth of reporting.
One reporter complained that the spiffy graphics make the paper look like a fat man stuffed into a zoot suit. 

Still, public reaction remains untested, and subscribers' views are vital to the Times in a market where its share has eroded and where sharply designed competitors are barking at its heels. 

About one Los Angeles household in four subscribes to the Times.
South of the city, the Orange County Register has built a commanding lead in circulation over the Times in that wealthy county, appealing to readers with lavish use of color photos and smart graphics, among other things.
To the north and east, other publications have built a ring of feisty suburban competition, offering more local news and easier-to-read designs and layouts. 

In an effort to reverse its competitors' gains, the Times is spending more than $400 million over several years on new printing facilities with the capacity to print more and better color.
It has modernized its circulation sales and speeded up newspaper deliveries. 

Times officials say they don't want the paper merely to look like the suburban competitors and thus have retained parts of the paper's more traditional layout. "The biggest mistake you can make is to look like all the other guys," says David Laventhol, the Times's publisher and chief executive officer as well as president of Times Mirror.
Yet, there are elements of the new design that echo the Times's smaller competitors.
For instance, a nicely divided and easily read page of briefs looks much like a similar layout in the Orange County Register. 

Industry officials and analysts say the Times's new design will be closely watched in a continuing industry debate about the importance of graphics to a paper's popularity and circulation.
While newer, flashier layouts -- notably USA Today's -- have caught the public eye, their effectiveness in the long run is in dispute. 

"Newspaper design has become a moving target; what looked modern three years ago, now seems to have stepped out of the Stone Age," says Steven H. Star, a professor of management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a longtime analyst of newspaper marketing. 

It will likely be some months before the results at the Times are apparent.
Advertising specialists say they will be looking for slow but steady circulation increases. "The March, 1990 Audit Bureau of Circulation statement should be an important indicator," says Jim Surmanek, senior vice president at McCann-Erikson, a New York-based advertising agency. 

