.START 

A major accounting organization asked the Financial Accounting Standards Board to delay for a year or two its proposal to force companies to deduct billions of dollars from profits for retirees' medical benefits. 

The National Association of Accountants, which has 85,000 members, said the burden of implementing the rule would be enormous, particularly on small and medium-sized companies. 

In testimony before the FASB, Robert Weiss, chairman of the management accounting practices committee of the accountants association, asked that the FASB delay implementing the standard until the association can complete its own research project by mid-1990.
Mr. Weiss is a vice president and controller of Schering-Plough Corp. 

If adopted, the current FASB proposal would be effective starting in 1992 on the income statement and force companies starting in 1997 to book a liability on their balance sheets if the benefits aren't fully funded in advance. 

The vast majority of companies don't pre-fund such benefits but deduct them from profits each year as such benefits are paid.
Under the proposal, companies would accrue or set up a reserve for future benefits, which aren't tax-deductible as are pension benefits.
Some estimates put the hit on corporate profits of this proposal at hundreds of billions of dollars each year. 

Michael Cinalli, a member of accounting practices committee and manager of accounting policy for Du Pont Co., conceded that the committee's request for delay could add a year or two to the FASB's timetable. "But there are a lot of small and medium-sized companies who don't have the actuarial resources of larger corporations and need the added time," he said. 

Mr. Cinalli said that to implement the FASB proposal, a company would require a lot of hard-to-get information such as medical benefits received by current retirees and benefits due to current employees and dependents, their ages and medical histories, and other demographic data. "A lot of small or medium-sized companies just don't have the horses of a major corporation to gather such data, and hiring outside accountants and actuaries to gather it quickly is costly," he said. 

Mr. Cinalli also criticized the FASB proposal for relying on "subjective measurement criteria" and for basing costs on the most expensive changes in technology and expected medical costs.
He also suggested that the FASB extend the period for adjusting the financial statements for previously promised medical benefits to 30 years.
The FASB's current proposal provides for a 15-year catch-up period. 

Dennis Beresford, FASB chairman, said the FASB believes that under its proposal, "reasonable estimates can be made of companies' medical benefits." He added: "While we don't expect 100% precision, the measurements will get better as time goes on." 

As to delaying the proposal beyond 1992, he said the FASB "doesn't plan to delay implementing the rule just for the sake of delay." But he said that if testimony at the hearings shows that delay is needed, "We'll certainly consider it." The FASB hearings on the proposal continue today and tomorrow here and Nov. 2 and 3 in Washington.
So far the FASB has received more than 450 letters on the proposal, and more than 60 parties will testify at the hearings.
The FASB intends to issue the medical-benefits accounting rule sometime next year, Mr. Beresford said. 

In other FASB business, the chief rule-making body for accountants said it intends to delay for another year its accounting rule on deferred taxes.
The new effective date will be for financial reports with fiscal years beginning after Dec. 15, 1990.
The FASB has also said it will pursue amendments to reduce this rule's complexities. 

