.START 

In the first indication that potential predators are stalking Saatchi & Saatchi Co., the British communications giant's largest shareholder said it had been approached by one or more third parties interested in "possible restructuring transactions." 

Southeastern Asset Management Inc., a Memphis investment firm that holds a 10.24% Saatchi stake, also said it "may engage in such discussions with third parties." In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, it didn't identify the third parties. 

London-based Saatchi's shares have surged in recent days amidst takeover speculation.
The mammoth advertising and consulting company has been plagued by problems this year, with little sign of improvement.
The most recent speculation has centered largely on Italy's Silvio Berlusconi.
But Mr. Berlusconi's company, Fininvest, said yesterday it owned a Saatchi stake of less than 1% "for investment purposes." It said it had bought about two million shares in June and July, but had subsequently sold some shares on the open market.
Another rumored bidder, Robert Jacoby, ousted head of one of Saatchi's ad agencies, said in an interview Friday that he had disposed of his shares about a month ago. 

In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Saatchi's American depositary receipts closed at $16.75, down 25 cents. 

Southeastern had portrayed itself as a passive investor in an earlier SEC filing.
But yesterday's filing said the investment group "may be more active or assertive in making suggestions . . . in conversations or meetings with (Saatchi) management." 

In an interview yesterday, Mason O. Hawkins, Southeastern's president, stressed that Southeastern wouldn't seek control or otherwise take action at Saatchi.
He added that Southeastern isn't currently in any discussions with third parties. "We haven't initiated (discussions) and we have no plans to" initiate them, he said. 

Mr. Hawkins steadfastly declined to name the "third parties" who had approached Southeastern, and executives close to Saatchi also said they didn't know who the parties are.
The vague announcement prompted one Wall Street executive to question whether Southeastern was simply trying to whip up the stock price and put a "for sale" sign on its stake.
An announcement that "'we'd love to do something -- please call' isn't usually done from strength," the executive said. 

In any case, Mr. Hawkins emphasized in the interview that he would support current management. "We are very supportive of Maurice and Charles Saatchi," the brothers who built the world-wide organization, "and their management team," he said.
He said he had recently returned from London to visit the brothers, "and we feel very comfortable that they are taking the appropriate steps to enhance shareholder value.
They're pursuing a number of different possible options." 

Mr. Hawkins added that he was "of the opinion" that Roy Warman and Terry Bannister, who head up Saatchi's international advertising arm, would ultimately be able to bring profit margins to their historical level of 13%. 

Reached in London, Simon Mellor, a Saatchi director, declined to comment other than to say that Saatchi has considered Southeastern's stake "friendly." However, one executive close to the company said the Saatchis have considered "virtually every technique for releasing shareholder values." The executive said those techniques included a possible employee buy-out, the sale of non-core businesses and a large share buy-back. 

According to another executive familiar with the company, Mr. Hawkins, in a trip to London a few weeks ago, expressed interest in a share buy-back using the proceeds from the planned sale of Saatchi's consulting business.
The executive added, however, that a share buy-back might be more difficult in the U.K. because of less advantageous tax laws, and added that Saatchi hasn't yet decided what it will do with the consulting sale proceeds. 

While outside investors may be able to force a restructuring, analysts have said that an outright takeover of Saatchi would be difficult.
They said that it doesn't have sufficient cash flow to handle debt payments in the case of a leveraged buy-out.
Thus, a buyer would have to have deep pockets of its own, or it would have to use mostly cash and very little debt -- no easy feat considering that analysts value Saatchi at about $1.3 billion. 

What's more, most analysts believe Saatchi would be a more viable takeover candidate after its troubled consulting operations are sold.
But the sale, which Saatchi initially said it expected to have completed by Sept. 30, the end of its fiscal year, is going slower than the company had at first expected. 

