.START 

Waiting to Take Off Isn't 

Only Delay on Airplanes 

THE BUSY SIGNAL you hear when phoning from an airplane might not be coming from the ground. 

Airlines are installing more and more air-to-ground public telephones and promoting them as another passenger convenience.
But in fact, only four calls can be made simultaneously from any airplane, according to GTE Airfone, the only phone company aloft since 1984. 

In the more than 1,130 airplanes equipped with Airfone's cordless system, that limitation isn't usually a problem.
These aircraft have between two and eight handsets, which are carried to one's seat and then returned to the phone station. 

But 40 to 50 seat-back Airfones have been installed in each of at least 67 planes and Airfone is promoting seat-back versions to other customers. 

Midway Airlines says that since it plugged two phones into every row of seats, or one for every 2.5 passengers, its Airfone use has risen by a third. 

But analysts say that on short flights, if many passengers pick up their phones at once, the wait for a dial tone could be longer than the flight.
An America West Airlines spokeswoman concedes, "You might have to wait three to five minutes to get a line." 

An Airfone spokesman says, "even during peak hours of use, generally not all the phones are in use." The GTE Corp. unit will expand its air-to-ground technology, he says, if usage increases. 

Sensitive Data Traded 

By Amusement Parks 

AMUSEMENT PARK operators don't tell the public their weekly attendance numbers, but many of them tell one another. 

The U.S. Attractions Marketing Association is a little-known group of marketing executives who trade weekly totals for more than 30 of the largest parks in the U.S.
Many of the parks are regional competitors and say shared weekly reports help determine the promotions they should run. 

The reports, one of which was obtained by this newspaper, are proprietary to group members -- including Six Flags Corp., King's Entertainment Co., Anheuser-Busch Cos. ' Busch Gardens, and Sea World, which Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. is about to sell to Anheuser. 

The group's total year-to-date attendance through Aug. 20 was flat compared with the year-earlier period, according to the report for that week, and results at Busch and Sea World were among the worst.
Busch's two parks fell 8% to 3.9 million visitors; for Sea World's six parks, the total was 10.1 million, off 7%. 

Ronald W. Miller, marketing vice president at King's Entertainment, says its Doswell, Va., park and rival Busch Gardens in nearby Williamsburg, Va., benefit from viewing each other's numbers without being anti-competitive. "It lets you see if a trend is happening everywhere or just at your place," he says. 

The main membership requirement is annual attendance of at least one million.
A marketing executive at Walt Disney Co., the biggest park operator, says he never heard of the association and wouldn't join if invited. 

Similarly, Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom in Allentown, Pa., would qualify for membership, but spokeswoman Eileen Laverty can't imagine why other parks would share sensitive data. "We would never do that because we don't want our competition to know where we are," she says. "It's like Chevy telling Ford how they're selling in a given town." 

Bill Would Help Fliers 

With Worthless Tickets 

ONCE AGAIN, holders of prepaid airline tickets for canceled flights -- Braniff's this time -- may be stuck with worthless paper. 

It might have turned out differently, though.
A bill to save travelers from getting stiffed, the Airline Default Protection Act, was close to congressional approval last year.
But it died in committee after being tacked onto a contested drug-testing amendment. 

In the current session, Rep. Sherwood Boehlert (R., N.Y.) reintroduced a similar bill, which would let the airline industry solve the problem itself or the transportation secretary would impose a solution.
Rep. Boehlert says Congress must "make sure these tickets are worth more than the paper they're printed on." 

If individuals holding tickets were considered a group, they probably would be an airline's biggest unsecured creditor.
Each of the major carriers usually has an average of $241 million of unused tickets issued.
But with small individual claims, "It seems the consumers are lost in the shuffle" of bankruptcy-law cases, Rep. Boehlert says.
Braniff Inc., which filed for bankruptcy-law protection last month, says it doesn't yet know the value of its unused tickets. 

When Frontier Airlines stopped operating in 1986, the family of state Rep. Flavel Butts of Missouri was left holding $5,450 of useless tickets for a Christmas gathering.
The family had to pay another $5,000 for tickets to meet as planned in Wyoming.
So far, the family has been reimbursed for only about one-fourth of the value of the canceled tickets. 

Odds and Ends 

HIGHER AIR fares ahead? 

Jet fuel prices, one of several factors in fare setting, have been rising since February.
Paul Karos, a First Boston analyst, estimates prices of jet fuel in the third quarter climbed 13% from a year earlier and sees a "brutal" fourth-quarter jump of 17%. . . . At La Guardia Airport, a refrigerated flower vending machine takes credit cards or cash but doesn't make change.
Instead, it credits any overpayment toward another bouquet -- if you buy again within one minute. 

