.START 

The New York Stock Exchange is beefing up its security, nervous that 1960s-style protests could again cause commotion at the nation's center of capitalism. 

The exchange, according to several top traders, was highly embarrassed after a group of AIDS activists -- wearing fake badges reading "Bear Stearns" -- were able to infiltrate an off-limits area of the exchange on Sept. 14.
The activists chained themselves to a platform overlooking the trading floor and sounded a horn to drown out the opening bell.
The demonstration briefly disrupted trading. 

Three days earlier, according to a spokesman for the demonstrators, two of them entered the exchange undetected for a "test run" of the demonstration.
The activists were protesting the high cost of the AZT drug used by patients who have acquired immune deficiency syndrome. 

According to traders and exchange officials, the Big Board was dumbfounded that non-traders so easily entered the trading floor and mingled among traders.
The possible problems with such a security breach are immense for an exchange that routinely hosts presidents and chief executive officers.
There have been cases at other exchanges in which "fake" traders have been able to actually execute trades. 

Until the Sept. 14 incident, the Big Board hadn't been host to such a successful demonstration since Abbie Hoffman and a dozen other demonstators threw $1 bills onto the trading floor from the visitors' gallery on Aug. 24, 1967, causing havoc.
After that incident, the Big Board installed windows on the visitors' gallery. 

According to one top Big Board trader, the Sept. 14 incident "scared the exchange a lot" and sparked comparisons to the 1967 Abbie Hoffman incident. 

Wayne Richardson, the Big Board's security head, declined to comment on the new security changes.
But an exchange spokeswoman, saying she was speaking for Mr. Richardson, said security has been "tightened considerably" and "we will probably be making further changes to tighten security." 

Prior to the incident, traders came and went without their photo identifications always being checked, traders said.
Now such IDs are being checked.
Also, the exchange is requiring unannounced guests to walk through an X-ray machine before they can enter certain parts of the exchange building.
The AIDS protesters entered carrying a metal chain; five protesters attached themselves to a platform with the chain and two took pictures. 

Peter Staley, a former bond trader who is the spokesman for ACT UP, which staged the Sept. 14 demonstration, conceded his group probably would have been foiled if X-ray machines were being used.
He said there was no particular reason why the fake badges his group used read Bear Stearns. 

