.START 

Elders IXL Ltd. sold its 4.7% stake in Kerr-McGee Corp. last month for what the Australian company called a "modest" profit. 

Andrew Cummins, an Elders executive, said in an interview that the stake in the U.S. energy company was sold on the stock market and that he doesn't know who bought the shares. 

Elders acquired the stake over several months through its Hong Kong-based unit, Elders Investments Ltd., for about $100 million.
The holding was disclosed in late July.
The company had retained a U.S. consultant to manage what Elders termed the Kerr-McGee "project." That fueled speculation that Elders might be planning to take over the Oklahoma City-based oil-drilling, coal, chemicals and forestry company.
Elders's international assets span brewing, financial services, agribusiness and natural resources. 

Mr. Cummins said Elders Investments acquired the Kerr-McGee stake because it was undervalued, adding that a bid was just one of its options.
Elders sold the stake because Kerr-McGee's "share price increased since we bought it," reflecting a stronger stock market and particular demand for gas shares, he said.
In mid-June, Kerr-McGee shares were trading around $45.25; in mid-September, they were around $48 and now are around $50. 

Some analysts have been expecting the Australian company to sell off various assets, including the Kerr-McGee stake, at the suggestion of Harlin Holdings Pty.
Ltd., which in late August accumulated a 60% stake in Elders.
Harlin's purchase, which was bigger than originally intended, cost it about two billion Australian dollars (US$1.57 billion).
Selling assets and returning the cash to Elders shareholders, including Harlin, would help Harlin service its debt, analysts say. 

But Mr. Cummins, who is a Harlin shareholder, said the sale of the Kerr-McGee stake wasn't related to Harlin's acquisition of Elders. 

Harlin is controlled by Elders Chairman John Elliott, several Elders executives, the Elders pension fund and AFP Group PLC, a London-based investment company with close ties to Elders. 

