.START 

Millenarianism is in the air.
Heady hopes voiced from left and right, dreams of an end to history or an end to superpower struggle, are once again proffered as political prediction, this time in technocratic garb.
The new order that will supersede the old is rather murkily sketched.
Liberals and conservatives have their own versions of technophiliac enthusiasm.
Liberal technocrats stress communications technology and the internationalist possibilities personal computers and FAX machines embody.
Conservative technocrats foresee a new world order dominated by universalization of a market model.
For both groups, the future will be one in which technical dilemmas and the means to solve them replace the ideological struggles of old. 

This promised new order may not be the world of joy and rest, where there shall be neither mourning nor crying nor pain anymore, of the millenarians of old.
But, we are assured, it will be a world of greater stability and manageability than any previously known.
Technical innovations plus growing international economic integration may not have the same ring to them as visions of a New Jerusalem or classless society but these old idealisms were hopeless and naive.
By contrast, the new technocratic internationalism is shrewd in fusing principles of U.S. and Western self-interest with the good of the coming world order. 

There is, however, a major problem with the techno-managerial image.
It pays scant attention to the overriding political passion of our time -- nationalism.
Between 1945 and 1968, 66 new states where born out of the wreckage of old colonial empires.
Each colonial struggle gave birth to new nationalisms, hence to the unity necessary to confront the external world of other states and to combat tendencies toward tribal or regional fragmentations within.
The nation-state model may have emerged historically as a Western invention but this form has been embraced world-wide.
The Palestinian "intifada" is about national aspirations denied their traditional mode of expression -- a state.
Aggrieved peoples, whether the 2 million Lithuanians, Latvians and Estonians who joined hands across the Baltic republics, or the Ukranians calling for a "free Ukraine," or South African blacks who want, not an end to the nation-state but an end to white dominance of it, speak to and from a particular history, language, culture, and wounded sense of collective identity. 

This identity goes deep.
In his recent work on "The Political Life of Children," child psychologist Robert Coles found attachment to a homeland in the symbolism and imagery deployed by children. "Nationalism works its way into just about every corner of the mind's life," Mr. Coles writes. "Children have ready access to a nation's name, its flag, its music, its currency, its slogans, its history, its political life," and this personalized yet political identity shapes their outlooks and actions, for better or for worse.
Entrenched notions of a homeland are doubled-edged, at once inward looking, a place where one "gets one's bearings," and outward-projecting, protecting "us" from "them," from foreigners who, all too easily, may become enemies.
Both aspects of homeland and nationalist imagery turn up in "the developing conscience of young people" everywhere. 

Militant, narrow and rapacious nationalisms have brought enormous grief and suffering to humankind.
Small wonder that internationalists past and present fear and even despise strong expressions of nationalist sentiment.
But national identity, symbols, slogans, history and political life are not going to disappear.
If anything, wounded nationalisms are on the rise.
This nationalism can take a number of forms.
We rightly fear forms of nationalism that feed on hatred of other ways of life.
But much of the new nationalism, the remarkable outbursts of civic energy from suppressed peoples, speaks in and through a rhetoric that taps universal claims and concerns. 

Consider the fact that the Baltic states are protesting their annexation to the Soviet Union, first, because it violates principles of international law and, second, because it tramples on basic human rights.
This nationalism is at once particular and universal, tapping old identities but energizing new political recognitions.
Peoples who proclaim their devotion to human rights as a universal principle can be held accountable in ways that rapacious nationalists of old, who scoffed at such niceties, could not. 

If there is any hope for a new internationalism that speaks to dreams of peace and justice, it lies, not in the hands of technocratic elites, but in those forms of universal recognition embedded in current national claims.
In 1963, President John F. Kennedy spoke of a world "safe for diversity" yet open to universal cooperation lodged in recognition of our shared mortality and concern for our children's futures.
Peoples now crying for recognition of their distinctive histories and identities are doing so in a way that leaves open the possibility for peace as a cherished achievement.
Intimations of this new order, in contrast to the homogenized stability of efficiently managed technological forces, offer us a dream worth dreaming. 

Prof.
Elshtain teaches at Vanderbilt University.
She is the author of "Women and War" (Basic Books, 1987). 

(See related editorials: "Grievances Around the World" and "The Great Delusion" -- WSJ Oct. 11, 1989) 

