.START 

In the conservative world of big corporate law firms, the name Harvey Myerson has become synonymous with temptation -- and, perhaps, its consequences. 

Mr. Myerson, a gregarious 50-year-old with ample girth and ambition to match, announced plans last year to build in a year the kind of elite law firm that has traditionally taken decades to mold. 

His main tool?
Money.
And lots of it. 

In an era in which many attorneys have unbound themselves from lifetime loyalty to a single firm, Mr. Myerson found many big-name lawyers willing to jump to a start-up operation, if the price was right. 

Former U.S. Ambassador to Switzerland Faith Ryan Whittlesey was an early prize, coming aboard at a promised salary of at least $400,000 a year for five years, even though she had no client base to bring along.
Corporate lawyer Gerald Eppner joined up at $1 million a year, more than the competition thought his client list was worth.
The word went out, and others clamored to get similar deals. 

Mr. Myerson, joining forces with former baseball commissioner Bowie Kuhn, predicted first-year revenue of $50 million.
He boasted that his New York-based Myerson & Kuhn would become "one of the two or three most elite law firms in the country." And he hired public-relations man John Scanlon to assist in a media blitz.
By Christmas, Mr. Myerson had a 160-lawyer firm on his hands.
He celebrated with a bash for partners at his posh home in East Hampton, N.Y. 

That was last year.
This year, with revenue far below projections, the firm is in disarray and its viability in doubt.
Nearly two dozen partners and some 45 associates have left the operation, and headhunters say many more are looking for the door. 

Michael Horowitz, former managing partner of the firm's Washington office, describes his tenure at Myerson & Kuhn as a "nonstop nightmare." He says, "The only way I'll ever come out of this experience whole is if I can sell the movie rights to this absurd story." Mr. Horowitz, a former general counsel to the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, bailed out late last month. 

A collapse of Myerson & Kuhn, should it occur, would make Mr. Myerson a two-time loser.
In November 1987, the firm where he worked -- Finley, Kumble, Wagner, Heine, Underberg, Manley, Myerson & Casey -- fell apart and slid into bankruptcy proceedings, where it remains. 

Just a decade ago, such debacles in the elite bar were virtually unheard-of.
But in the 1980s, competition among law firms intensified.
Top firms that never before had hired a lawyer from another firm began raiding the competition for skilled practitioners who could bring high-paying clients with them. 

In the process, many law partnerships came unglued and firms such as Finley Kumble and Myerson & Kuhn became forces.
It is a trend that Stephen Gillers, professor of ethics at New York University's law school, calls "the new disloyalty." Compensation, above all else, is the driving force at this new breed of law firm, he says. 

The current mess at Myerson & Kuhn is mostly about money and mistrust.
It involves allegations that the firm overbilled at least one major client, that Mr. Myerson misled partners about how many clients the firm actually has, and that he took more from the firm's coffers than he deserved. 

In turn, Mr. Myerson has accused his accusers of impatience and has called some of them "traitors" for jumping ship.
He confirms, in a lengthy interview, that the firm is suffering a "cash crunch" but says it isn't terminal.
Indeed, he contends the firm will soon "be more profitable" than ever, that most partners have remained loyal to it and that several new partners will be joining the firm. 

Mr. Myerson, like most of his partners, broke into the legal big leagues in a very different era.
The son of a Philadelphia silk and woolens wholesaler, he made his name as a trial lawyer in the 1970s at the venerable New York firm of Webster & Sheffield, where he rose to co-managing partner.
The firm, however, didn't keep pace with many of its more profit-oriented competitors, so Mr. Myerson soon found himself earning less than top litigators elsewhere. 

Enter the go-getters at Finley Kumble, who lured the likes of Mr. Myerson with fat contracts and promises of greater riches to come.
Mr. Myerson, who fancies raccoon coats, Rolls-Royces and 20th century paintings, liked what he heard, and joined the aggressive firm in 1984.
There he represented, among others, Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., Donald Trump and the now-defunct United States Football League (in its celebrated 1986 antitrust suit against the NFL). 

Again Mr. Myerson became a managing partner, and his name even was added to the firm's overburdened letterhead.
But Finley Kumble, which quickly grew to become the nation's fourth largest law firm, was a house of cards.
It collapsed under the weight of inflated revenue projections, sloppy accounting practices, heavy borrowing and fierce power clashes among top partners, Mr. Myerson included. 

Mr. Myerson, however, saw opportunity in the ashes.
He was free now to create a new firm in his own image, and, less than two months later, he announced his plans.
Lawyers who joined him insist it wasn't just for the promise of big money.
They say Mr. Myerson brimmed with enthusiasm about his project and made it seem like an exciting adventure.
He offered potential partners a chance to build a prestigious law firm and have a hand in its management.
Puffing deeply on fat cigars and speaking confidently in a raspy, excited voice, Mr. Myerson seemed to sweep their cares away. 

"He's very smart and he's very quick, and when he's on and the adrenaline is pumping, he's overwhelming," says Leon Marcus, a partner who has since left the Myerson fold. 

But Finley Kumble had gotten in trouble with hype and false promises, and now -- unbeknownst to his new partners -- Mr. Myerson appeared to be heading down much the same path. 

A key part of Mr. Myerson's sales pitch was that he had assembled a roster of blue-chip clients that included Mr. Trump, former Treasury Secretary William Simon and Shearson Lehman.
But this claim, which mollified many new recruits and appeared to back Mr. Myerson's revenue projections, turned out to be more wishful thinking than fact. 

Mr. Trump, for one, says he hasn't been Mr. Myerson's client since the new firm was formed.
The two, it seems, parted ways in less-than-amicable fashion. 

"Donald doesn't like to pay lawyers' bills," Mr. Myerson explains.
Mr. Trump tells a different story.
Late in 1987, as Finley Kumble was crumbling, "Harvey started billing me four times more than he should have," Mr. Trump says. "The bills were too high and I wasn't satisfied." 

Mr. Simon also hasn't thrown much, if any, of his own business Mr. Myerson's way, according to lawyers at the firm.
Mr. Simon couldn't be reached for comment. 

And Shearson?
Mr. Myerson had told incoming partners last year he was "doing all of the major litigation" for the securities firm, and said the relationship would prove an even greater bonanza in the future.
At the time, Shearson was the law firm's biggest client, providing billings of about $10 million.
Still, Shearson's chairman, Peter Cohen, said in an interview last year that most of the work Myerson & Kuhn did was "minor stuff," much of it resulting from Shearson's acquisition of E.F. Hutton Group Inc. in early 1988. 

The bottom line was that Myerson & Kuhn didn't have the business to support a payroll bloated with high-priced lawyers who brought in little business.
By the end of its first year, its revenue totaled about $30 million, far below Mr. Myerson's projections. 

Problems mounted.
Although partners received only a portion of their year-end profit distribution in December, they were assured the rest would come early this year.
It didn't. 

In January and February, partners missed several of their twice-monthly salary payments, and the firm failed to pay its own bills on time.
By March, Myerson & Kuhn had begun delaying payments to associates and partners for medical and business expenses, sometimes for weeks. 

Then came a stunning blow.
Shearson accused Mr. Myerson's firm of overbilling it $2 million.
Myerson & Kuhn quietly agreed to pay more than $1 million to settle the matter, although Mr. Myerson continues to deny overbilling.
Shearson, for its part, ended its relationship with the firm. 

Making matters worse, the incident prompted federal prosecutors in Brooklyn and the state Appellate Division's Disciplinary Committee in Manhattan to begin investigating the firm's billing practices.
Neither agency will comment on the matter. 

In April, partners received their first monthly financial statement in nearly four months.
According to several former Myerson & Kuhn partners, it included a mysterious $473,000 line item they couldn't account for. 

In response to partners' questions, Mr. Myerson provided a more specific statement.
It included $426,000 listed as "advances to partners and staff" and an additional $93,000 in "other assets." A group of partners learned from a staff accountant that Mr. Myerson had withdrawn money between December 1988 and March 1989, when the firm's financial condition was weak. 

Mr. Myerson acknowledges that he withdrew more than $400,000 from the firm's coffers.
He says, however, that he believes he was entitled to the money because the firm owed him $550,000.
Mr. Myerson says that early this year he missed twice as many of his salary payments as other partners because "I think the leadership of a law firm is best served by these kinds of examples." He says about $200,000 of what he took was money owed him for what he calls "business promotional expenses." He adds that many partners knew of the advances. 

Several of Mr. Myerson's ex-partners say, however, that they knew nothing of the advances.
They say the money Mr. Myerson took exceeded what they believe he was owed.
What's more, they say, although other partners earned less than Mr. Myerson -- whose annual compensation was set at $1.4 million -- they were never reimbursed for their missed checks. "The firm had two sets of rules -- one for Harvey and one for everyone else," Mr. Marcus says. 

Mr. Kuhn says that he knew of the advances but that "in some instances, Harvey didn't routinely tell" the firm's executive committee about the payments as he took them.
Mr. Kuhn says now, "I should have insisted that more of {the advances} go through the scrutiny of that committee." 

Former Myerson & Kuhn attorneys also say that, in June, Mr. Myerson deposited a $125,000 check from longtime client Kelley Oil Corp. into his personal bank account.
When asked about it, Mr. Myerson says, "There has never been a check from Kelley Oil to this law firm deposited into my personal account." 

But Mr. Kuhn says the Kelley Oil check -- written out to Myerson & Kuhn but endorsed to Mr. Myerson -- was indeed issued as a "personal advance" to Mr. Myerson because he was "in a cash crunch at that time." Mr. Myerson, he says, "has a life style that creates considerable need." 

In recent weeks, Mr. Myerson has spent much time in meetings trying to pump up demoralized partners but, in many cases, to little avail.
As people have left, Mr. Myerson has made it a condition of amicable parting that partners agree not to discuss the firm with reporters.
Mr. Myerson says that these agreements were reached through a "mutual understanding." He says that, in some instances, the ex-partners, rather than he, asked for the agreements. 

Despite the firm's run of bad news, Mr. Myerson is still attracting new lawyers.
Daniel Oliver, a former chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, recently joined Myerson & Kuhn's Washington office, and Robert Claeson, a real-estate attorney, will join in New York.
Messrs.
Oliver and Claeson both say they questioned Mr. Myerson and others about the firm and believe it will flourish.
Both dismiss many of the defections as normal for startup firms. 

Mr. Myerson also continues to claim that he is forging important new client relationships.
He says that, with Mrs. Whittlesey's assistance, Myerson & Kuhn has gotten "a major piece of litigation" from Sir James Goldsmith.
He has told partners he met with the British corporate raider in late September. 

But Sir James says no such meeting ever took place.
He says he has met Mr. Myerson only once, "at one of these 2,000-people dinners in Washington." Sir James says he retained Myerson & Kuhn for several days this summer on a project he decided not to pursue.
He adds: "My relationship is with Faith {Whittlesey}," rather than Mr. Myerson, "and I would always be happy to use her." But he says he has no immediate plans to use Myerson & Kuhn again. 

Mr. Myerson also has told his partners that Myerson & Kuhn will soon get the bulk of Revlon Inc. 's product-liability litigation.
But an official of MacAndrews & Forbes Group Inc., Revlon's parent, says his company doesn't plan to hire the firm.
Mr. Myerson declines to comment. 

Despite all the controversies, some of the lawyers who have stuck it out at Myerson & Kuhn remain supportive of Mr. Myerson. "I think he's the most gifted trial lawyer in the U.S. today," says Mrs. Whittlesey. "Harvey has no flaws as a lawyer or manager," says partner Mark Segall. 

Their opinion, however, is not universally shared.
Mr. Horowitz, the former Washington-based partner, says he has learned an important lesson: not to give "new money to an old horse-player." And Alan Roberts, a New York legal recruiter who was once one of Mr. Myerson's biggest boosters, says he recently told the lawyer: "I wouldn't put anyone at Myerson & Kuhn now." With clients leaving the firm and accounting problems rife, "Harvey," says Mr. Roberts, "just doesn't have a good story to tell." 

