.START 

Japanese voters are as disgusted with the Liberal Democratic Party today as they were when they threw out the scandal-ridden party's Upper House majority in July, but they are having a hard time deciding whether to pull the plug on 34 years of LDP rule.
This uncertainty is being fueled by growing doubts about whether the Japanese Socialist Party, under the leadership of Takako Doi, has changed enough to be entrusted with power. 

The issue will come to a head with the next Lower House elections, which must take place by July 1990.
There are three possible outcomes: The LDP stages a miraculous recovery and preserves its single-party rule; the JSP and the other anti-communist opposition parties form a coalition government; or the LDP loses its majority, but forms its own coalition. 

LDP leaders are betting Ms. Doi won't be able to swing her party sufficiently toward the center to make an alliance work.
Safely out of power for the past two generations, the Socialists have clung to a platform that called for abolishing Japan's military, tearing down nuclear-power plants, supporting North Korea and scrapping the 1960 U.S.-Japan security treaty.
There have been notable shifts on these issues of late, but the question of the security treaty, the bedrock of Japanese foreign relations, is still unresolved.
Given the JSP's fuzzy agenda, the LDP believes it will be able to undo the fragile alliance Ms. Doi is working to consolidate. 

The LDP is also standing tough on the issue of the unpopular new 3% consumption tax that went into effect in April.
While not ruling out revisions, or saying what they could be, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu said last week, "The consumption tax is essential . . . for Japan's future." Bolstered by a recent victory in a closely watched by-election, the LDP hopes to discredit legislation to abolish the consumption tax.
But the by-election win may prove Pyrrhic if it lulls the LDP into a false sense that the voters have accepted the tax and forgiven the ruling party for imposing it. 

LDP leaders are not even examining the possibility that their party's philosophy and arrogance may be at the root of the party's current troubles.
Instead, the LDP has assumed that July's vote was merely a symbolic protest against political kickbacks and sex scandals.
So it has adopted the attitude of knee-jerk ideologues who reject whatever their opponents say -- an attitude long associated with the Socialists.
Prospects for internal LDP reform are dim, says Arseny Besher, a researcher in an LDP policy think tank. "The most important thing to the heads of the LDP is to preserve the factions they control.
Meaningful political reform has to address the real source of their power -- money -- and this is not something they are about to let happen." 

The LDP has not taken the steps required to convince the public that the party is willing to root out the corruption and abuse of authority that have made it so unpopular.
According to a recent poll, for the first time in 40 years, the LDP has surpassed the Communists as the party least liked by new college graduates. 

Even members of the Japanese establishment have joined the anti-LDP bandwagon.
LDP economic policies "force domestic consumers to pay higher prices for Japanese goods than do people overseas," said Toshio Yamaguchi, a member of the government's Labor Relations Commission.
Takashi Hosomi, a former high official in the Ministry of Finance and now chairman of the Nissei Life Insurance Research Institute, said he is afraid those policies "are inspiring resentment toward Japan that will have chilling ramifications in the future." 

The JSP is trying to take advantage of this widespread anti-LDP sentiment by promising to develop new approaches to the problems associated with Japan's increasing wealth.
And it is doing so within a different framework than its class-based ideology might suggest, a necessary shift that is nonetheless cause for rumbles from the party's left. 

Sukio Iwatare, a JSP Diet member close to Ms. Doi, told me that while his party is committed to the free-market system, it does believe voters would support attempts to shift some welfare costs to the corporations and individuals who have benefited most from Japan's prosperity.
Moreover, he insisted, the recent surge in JSP popularity should not be viewed merely as a vote against the LDP. "Japan's workers, who have made many sacrifices over the years," he said, "believed that once the nation reached the economic superpower status it has now achieved, their efforts would be rewarded. . . . But imposition of a consumption tax on the necessities of daily life has shown them this was an empty dream." 

The JSP will only play into the LDP's hands, however, if it cannot dispel the doubts about Ms. Doi's "new vision." If the Socialists want to forge a tenable anti-LDP alliance, they must address the fears of people troubled by the JSP's quixotic ideas of "unarmed neutrality." Recent signs that the JSP is willing to modify its longstanding opposition to the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty, in practice if not in principle, suggests the party may be preparing to adopt more-realistic policies. 

For Ms. Doi to convince voters that she's ready to govern, she must stop making statements such as those about upholding "Japan's treaty arrangements with America for the time being so as to preserve continuity in our foreign policies." People wonder what she really thinks; many conclude she is more worried about offending the JSP's left wing than about creating a principled and unifying campaign platform. 

Similarly, if the JSP hopes to lead an anti-communist, anti-LDP alliance into power, it will have to stop waffling on other emotionally explosive issues such as nuclear power and clarify the way it now regards its earlier positions about the need for class conflict.
The consumption tax is easy enough to oppose, but the JSP has not said how it plans to raise the $30 billion to $40 billion a year the 3% tax will. 

And while Ms. Doi was probably correct when she told me, "It is impossible to say what I could do as prime minister until a new government is actually formed," she cannot expect to win over voters without telling them what she believes. 

The Socialists have created other problems for themselves.
Ms. Doi says they will work to improve the living standards of Japan's hard-pressed consumers.
But she also has said the JSP will protect Japan's farmers and small retailers from foreign competition.
That may get her the support of some rural voters, enraged by the LDP's decision to liberalize Japan's agricultural market, but it will also keep food and distribution prices high. 

If the "new vision of socialism" the JSP offers to Japanese voters addresses their frustrations sensibly, and shows that the party is capable of breaking free from its ideologically inflexible past, Ms. Doi may be able to dislodge the increasingly unpopular LDP.
But unless her party can convince the public that it is capable of approaching Japan's problems in a more realistic manner, she will not win the chance to do so. 

Mr. Platzer is a visiting fellow at the University of Tokyo. 

