.START 

Data General Corp. said it plans to slash its work force by 2,200 employees, or 15%, in a restructuring that will result in a charge of $80 million for the fourth quarter ended Sept. 30. 

The computer maker said its operating results for the quarter were near breakeven before the charge.
In the year-earlier quarter, the company had a net loss of $49.8 million, including a restructuring charge of $48.7 million and a gain of $5.9 million from the sale of a facility.
Fourth-quarter results will be reported in the first week of next month, the company said. 

Despite the charge and expected loss for the quarter, the company's preliminary fourth-quarter report struck a positive note on Wall Street because of unexpectedly strong revenue and the lowering of future costs by a projected $95 million annually from the restructuring.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Data General closed yesterday at $15.50 a share, up 62.5 cents. 

The company said it expects to post record revenue for the quarter "well above" year-earlier revenue of $342 million.
Data General added that initial shipments of its new Aviion workstation contributed to the strong revenue, but a spokesman said the strong revenue was due mainly to sales of the company's high-end MV40000 minicomputer. 

"The MV40000 has been selling well, but I was looking for flattish revenue" for the fourth quarter, said Jay P. Stevens, an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
He added, however, that it is too early to assess the prospects of the Aviion, which is critical to the company's plans to transform itself into a maker of computers based on the industrywide UNIX operating system. 

Data General had been expected to take cost-cutting steps during its product transition, but analysts were surprised by the size of its planned reduction and resulting charges.
Data General said it will sell four facilities as part of the restructuring, including ones in New Hampshire, Maine and North Carolina, leaving it with only one major U.S. plant, in Apex, N.C. 

The restructuring "represents surgery throughout the company," said Barry Bosak, an analyst with Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. "It gets them down to the kind of sleek production operation they had pre-1975, when they had good {financial} numbers." 

About 700 jobs will be cut immediately, and an additional 1,500 will be trimmed over the next 12 months, the company said.
Data General employed about 14,200 people before the cuts.
The measures will save about $75 million in fiscal 1990 and $95 million annually after that, the company said. 

"Advances in technology and automation and our increasing use of industry-standard components have resulted in less need for plants and people," said Ronald L. Skates, the company's executive vice president and chief operating officer. 

Smith Barney's Mr. Bosak estimated that Data General's restructuring charges will give it a loss of about $118 million, or $4 a share, for fiscal 1989.
For the year ended Sept. 24, 1988, the company had a loss of $15.5 million, including restructuring charges of $48.7 million and a gain of $5.9 million, on revenue of $1.36 billion. 

