.START 

United Telecommunications Inc. reported third-quarter net income jumped 75%, on a 21% increase in revenue, but its stock moved sharply lower on the disclosure. 

The Kansas City, Mo.-based communications concern, citing "continued growth" at its US Sprint long-distance unit, said net rose to $94.6 million, or 90 cents a share, from the year-earlier $54 million, or 52 cents a share.
The year-earlier period's results were damped by a $3.7 million loss from discontinued operations. 

Revenue rose to $1.93 billion from $1.71 billion.
The flagship Sprint unit, which became profitable for the first time in the fourth quarter of 1988, contributed $1.11 billion in revenue, marking the second consecutive period in which it surpassed the billion-dollar mark, United Telecom said.
Sprint reported operating profit of $60 million, against a $5 million operating loss a year earlier. 

United Telecom also announced a 2-for-1 stock split, and raised its post-split quarterly dividend to 25 cents a share from 24 cents.
Both measures are effective Dec. 28 to stock of record Dec. 7. 

Despite the split and the near-doubling in earnings, United Telecom's shares tumbled $3.375 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, to close at $83.25.
Wall Street had anticipated per-share earnings of 95 cents to $1 a share, with the long-distance unit performing slightly better than it did. 

Some analysts called the punishing drop an overreaction.
Jack Grubman, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc., called the market's reaction "stupid.
You have continued progress at Sprint, terrific results at the local {telephone} operations. . . the direction is very strong, and revenue growth is very strong." Paul Aran, an analyst with Bear Stearns & Co., said that "some people took the opportunity to take profits" on results only "slightly below expectations." Mr. Aran said he continues to recommend United Telecom, as well as its competitors MCI Communications Corp. and American Telephone & Telegraph Co. "The whole sector has been showing strength." 

United Telecom said in a release that the Sprint unit foresees "significant opportunities for revenue growth in the fourth quarter of 1989 and beyond." President William T. Esrey said the company will focus on controlling costs to boost margins. 

In the first nine months, profit was $261.5 million, or $2.49 a share, more than double the year-earlier $129.4 million, or $1.25 a share, which included a $1.7 million loss from discontinued operations.
The increase came on a 17% rise in revenue to $5.55 billion from $4.76 billion. 

