.START 

Terrence A. Larsen is a card-carrying economist, but he seems to prefer acquisitions to predictions. 

As chairman and chief executive officer of CoreStates Financial Corp., Mr. Larsen decided late last month that acquiring First Pennsylvania Corp. makes sense for CoreStates.
Even though his bank holding company was late jumping in, he pursued the target with zeal and snatched it from the arms of another suitor that left a higher bid on the table. 

First Pennsylvania's board, swayed by Mr. Larsen's assurances that massive layoffs could be avoided, agreed to snub Reading, Pa.-based Meridian Bancorp and instead be acquired by CoreStates for stock valued at about $730 million.
The merger would put Mr. Larsen in charge of the third-largest banking operation based in Pennsylvania, with some $23 billion in assets. 

It also would present him with the challenge of combining First Pennsylvania's operations with those of CoreStates effectively and to the liking of shareholders, while keeping his promise on layoffs. 

The boldness of Mr. Larsen's eleventh-hour maneuver illustrates how much the banking community here has changed in recent years.
Spurred by competition from banks in Pittsburgh and elsewhere, Philadelphia is now viewed as less stodgy and provincial, less dominated by a few oldline families and institutions. 

Indeed, Mr. Larsen himself hardly fits the city's traditional mold.
The tall, amiable chairman is only 42 years old.
He favors loud, green neckties.
He doesn't even claim the predictable East Coast academic pedigree of Philadelphia bankers.
Rather than getting a master's degree in business administration from, say, Wharton and then working his way up through a bank's credit side as a loan officer, Mr. Larsen earned a doctorate in economics at Texas A&M University.
He was hired in 1977 as an assistant economist at Philadelphia National Bank, which later became CoreStates' principal operating unit. 

His knack for management was soon noticed by top executives.
In the early 1980s, he was part of a special committee that worked on matching the maturities on the bank's assets, such as loans and investments, with those of its liabilities, which include deposits and borrowings. 

Even as an assistant economist, "he had strong opinions on how we should handle our asset-liability mix," recalls Frederick Heldring, a retired vice chairman who was Mr. Larsen's boss during the early 1980s.
Since 1983, the mix advocated by Mr. Larsen has helped boost CoreStates' earnings about 70%. 

Now Mr. Larsen faces the even bigger challenge of blending First Pennsylvania operations and employees into the CoreStates organization.
In Wall Street's eyes, the agreement isn't all roses.
The day the pact was announced, CoreStates shares fell $2.125 in over-the-counter trading, to close at $47.50.
The stock has since lost about $1 more, closing yesterday at $46.625. 

Analysts recognize that any buyer of First Pennsylvania must reckon with its rather hefty portfolio of loans to developing countries.
And CoreStates has acknowledged that the merger would result in some temporary dilution of per-share earnings.
Mr. Larsen must quickly achieve enough cost-savings to offset that dilution.
CoreStates predicts it can save $89 million in expenses during the first 24 months after the proposed merger is completed. 

Mr. Larsen insists he isn't eager to snare First Pennsylvania just for the sake of making a deal.
Instead, he says expanding CoreStates' lending relationships and fee-related services are his top priorities. "Acquisitions are just used to support these efforts," he says. 

The addition of First Pennsylvania, which has been known best as a retail bank, would boost CoreStates' presence in this market while keeping fast-growing Meridian from gaining a major foothold.
Indeed, plans call for most branches of Philadelphia National Bank to be converted to First Pennsylvania offices. 

Philadelphia National, meanwhile, would handle a wide range of wholesale banking activities, everything from processing checks to electronic money transfers for hundreds of correspondent banks around the country.
For instance, CoreStates owns the MAC (Money Access Center) system, one of the nation's largest automated-teller networks.
MAC has about 6,700 machines used by 16 million customers of more than 800 financial institutions. 

Over the next few months, Mr. Larsen's management skills will be tested as he works to consolidate the two banks and tries to keep promises he made at the bargaining table.
Fear that layoffs would be massive was a big obstacle in First Pennsylvania's negotiations with Meridian. 

Several years ago, Mr. Larsen won high marks from banking analysts for consolidating Hamilton Bank of Lancaster, Pa., and New Jersey National Bank into CoreStates in the time span he forecast.
Yet when CoreStates moved some administrative operations to Philadelphia and to Wilmington, Del., after acquiring Hamilton Bank, about 265 Lancaster jobs eventually were eliminated. 

At the time of a merger, the acquirer "always says the new bank makes a good fit and there's isn't too much overlap," says a Philadelphia banker who knows Mr. Larsen. "But they always have to let people go." 

Mr. Larsen says he believes that with strong growth and the traditionally high turnover of employees in a bank, job cuts won't be needed. 

