.START 

There are only about 180 sovereign states today.
It is doubtful that this number will change much anytime soon.
Some artificially divided states, such as East and West Germany or North and South Korea may merge; some nominally sovereign states in Eastern Europe may recover their independence; and a few new states may emerge as a result of national liberation struggles or peaceful constitutional arrangements.
These developments, however, will not radically change the fact that the world is populated by more than 1,600 stateless nations, most of which are in one way or another engaged in national movements. 

The integrity of multinational states, such as India, that came into existence before the national identities of the people in them were properly formed, is now threatened.
The Tamil struggle for separation from the Sinhalese-dominated state of Sri Lanka and the strivings of the Sikhs to win independence in Punjab are just two examples of this explosive tendency.
The common Moslem identity of the peoples of Pakistan was unable to prevent the splitting away of Bangladesh in 1972.
There are signs too that the Hindu Bengalis of India identify more and more with Moslem Bangladesh, and that they are toying with the idea of uniting the whole Bengali nation into one distinct nation-state. 

The Ibos' attempt to form an independent state of Biafra in 1966-70 emits a powerful signal of the potential reorganization of many African states.
Even black Africa's one pre-colonial state, Ethiopia, is a multinational empire, where the ruling Amharas, together with the acculturated southern Tigre nation, constitute only about a quarter of the total population. 

There are stateless nations whose territory is occupied by several states and which are fighting against all of them, as the Kurds do against Turkey, Syria, Iraq and Iran.
Similarly, the land of the Baluchis is divided among Iran, Pakistan, India, Afghanistan and the Soviet Union.
Pathans live on both sides of the Afghan-Pakistan border. 

Meanwhile, national conflicts that have simmered for decades are coming into the open in the communist world: in the Ukraine, in the Baltic states, in Georgia, in Armenia, in Central Asia, in Romania. 

It is true that liberal-democratic states are much better equipped to deal with the problems of multinationalism than are their non-democratic counterparts, and the more developed and entrenched the liberal democratic order in a state is, the easier it will be to arrive at a mutually agreeable solution.
Belgium is a typical example.
In July the finishing touches were put on the transformation of Belgium into a full-fledged federal state consisting of two separate territorial communities -- one for the Flemings and one for the French-speaking Walloons -- with the binational capital becoming a third autonomous zone.
It goes without saying that this settlement could not satisfy all Belgians and that it contains any number of shortcomings.
But it was a solution. 

After becoming a liberal democracy, Spain has begun to respond to the demands and grievances of non-Castilians.
Not only the assimilated Andalusians and Galicians, but also the acutely nationalistic Catalonians have accepted the new regime's offers of autonomy and self-government.
Under the late dictator Gen. Franco, many Basques supported the radical nationalist resistance organization ETA; now, ETA finds itself isolated.
Once the majority of Basques understood that their desires could be achieved non-violently, they roundly rejected ETA's terrorism.
Democratic institutions have also assured Canada a peaceful solution to its Quebec problem. 

It was Immanuel Kant, the great German philosopher, who demonstrated that only equal rights for every nation, great or small, can provide an adequate foundation for a peaceful world order.
Such a distribution of sovereignty is probably the only way nations can coexist harmoniously.
The viability of world order depends mainly on the ability of states to agree about basic principles.
There is, fortunately, one universal ideology that corresponds to human nature and that can accommodate humanity's heterogeneity.
This is the ideology of human rights. 

Mr. Shtromas is a professor at Hillsdale College in Hillsdale, Michigan. 

(See related editorials: "Nationalism Is as Deadly as Ever" and "The Great Delusion" -- WSJ Oct. 11, 1989) 

