.START 

PUNITIVE DAMAGES, based on defamation, are tax-free, the Tax Court holds. 

Even as the House tax bill would narrow the exemption for damage payments in personal-injury cases to those involving physical injury or sickness, the court has voted 15-2 to broaden the scope of present law.
Bonnie A. Miller of Westminster, Md., sued her former employer and others for defamation, alleging a conspiracy to hide a bribery scheme by accusing her of embezzlement.
In 1983, she got $525,000, after legal fees and costs, to settle her claims. 

The settlement agreement didn't specify what claims the payment was for or how much was compensatory and exempt and how much was punitive.
The IRS sought to tax it all.
But the court says the payment clearly was for defamation, a personal injury under federal and Maryland law, and rejects the IRS's contention that punitive damages are taxable.
Thus, the whole payment is exempt. 

The law exempts "any damages" received for personal injury, and "any" means "all," Judge Wells writes. 

THE RESEARCH CREDIT sparks far less spending than its cost, the GAO says. 

The twice-extended credit, designed to spur increased spending for product innovation, is to expire Dec. 31.
House and Senate proposals would make the credit permanent and easier to obtain.
The General Accounting Office now estimates that in 1981-85, the credit stimulated between $1 billion and $2.5 billion of research spending at a cost of $7 billion in lost tax revenue -- or 15 to 36 cents of spending for each $1 of forgone tax. 

Corporations with assets over $250 million claimed 80% of the credits.
IRS auditors have found the credit difficult to administer and have questioned credits in 79% of their audits, the GAO says, but recent IRS regulations may clear up definitional problems.
The GAO report suggests ways to encourage use of the credit by modifying its terms, but it makes no recommendations. 

A COMPUTER MISFIRE may force 5,006 Army Reservists to amend their returns. 

In 1988, 105,270 Ready Reservists were paid for reporting -- if only to a recruiting office -- for a one-day muster, a sort of nose count.
But owing to a computer glitch, the Army Finance Center at Indianapolis failed to send W-2 wage statements for that day's pay to 5,006 of them.
Now it has mailed belated W-2s for a total of $224,000 -- an average of $33.77 for enlisted personnel and $89.06 for officers.
An apologetic letter adds that recipients may have to amend 1988 returns to reflect any unreported income. 

There's the rub.
But the Army says 96 Judge Advocate General offices will amend returns free; it also will reimburse up to $50 for a commercially prepared federal return and up to $20 for a state return.
That may be unnecessary.
Marc W. Miller of Bloomington, Ill., a Reserve captain who was paid $92.15, says he reported it on his return.
As the Army withheld tax of $17.81, he may owe none; but the Army says it will repay Reservists for interest paid on any added tax.
There should be no penalties. 

Any reimbursements -- which could equal the muster pay -- would be reported as income on 1989 W-2s. 

MORTGAGE POINTS -- interest paid in advance -- aren't reported by recipients to the IRS now; but the House bill would have lenders report points to foster compliance.
The law allows current deductions of points paid out of one's own funds in buying a home, but not in refinancing a mortgage. 

THE HEFTY PENALTY for substantial understatement of tax is figured after giving a taxpayer credit for withheld tax, the Tax Court said in 1988.
Now, it tells Dean B. Smith and others subject to the penalty that they get no credit for withheld taxes for which they claimed and got refunds. 

U.S. REINSURERS providing coverage to American property- and casualty-insurance companies complain that tax revision raised their taxes without hitting foreign concerns.
But the GAO says neither industry nor government data suffice to support the claim that taxes on the foreigners should be raised to offset a competitive handicap. 

OUT ON A LIMB for a limo, he said he wanted the bread, not just the Rolls. 

Auto buff Frank S. Lockwood of Barrington, Ill., bought a 1938 Rolls-Royce Phantom III in 1980 for $25,000, meaning to restore it for $15,000 and rent it out.
But over two years, he spent $120,806 on restoration and got only one rental, for $500, in 1982, when he had $591,400 in wage income.
In 1983, he rented it seven times at $500 and had to chauffeur it himself.
When he deducted $37,306 in depreciation on his 1982 return, the IRS denied it. 

Lockwood appealed to the Tax Court.
But Judge Ruwe says the rental activity wasn't a business engaged in for profit.
Lockwood didn't conduct it in a businesslike manner.
He didn't investigate the market for antique-car rentals, seek written deals with car-rental concerns, or keep separate books.
He didn't advertise, beyond posting a hand-written sign in a supermarket.
The judge upheld the IRS claims for tax and negligence and tax-understatement penalties. 

"It seems likely" that Lockwood just hoped to trim taxes on his other income, the judge commented. 

BRIEFS: Simplification isn't a lost cause, say the American Institute of CPAs and the American Bar Association; they plan a conference of tax-policy experts Jan. 11 and 12 on reducing complexity. . . . Eleven Southeastern states -- from North Carolina to Arkansas and West Virginia to Florida -- have agreed to cooperate to collect sales taxes on goods shipped out of state. 

