.START 

Good intentions weren't enough. 

The overriding aim of the designers of the savings-and-loan bailout was to ensure that the disaster never happened again.
But in their caution, the Bush administration and Congress created a structure so sprawling and complex that it makes it difficult for anything to happen.
Those structural flaws now appear to be raising the cost and slowing the pace of the bailout. 

A dozen agencies and departments were assigned roles in the $166 billion bailout, scrambling the regulatory structure that had governed the industry for more than 50 years.
Instead of pulling together to lift the thrift industry out of its financial morass, the bureaucrats running the bailout are feuding over mismatched computers, changing industry standards and their own salaries. 

Such problems might be resolved if there were someone clearly in charge of the bailout.
But its designers sprinkled responsibility across the government, giving half a dozen top officials a role, but giving no one the final word.
The bailout lacks one "czar" to direct the charge, set the pace and resolve conflicts.
The zeal to have prudent supervision has instead meant that the buck stops everywhere. 

Architects of the bailout concede it is behind schedule but say the problems are, in the words of Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, the kind of "healthy friction" associated with any start-up.
They promise that things will get better with time.
Indeed, several multibillion-dollar sales of sick thrifts are expected to finally begin later this week. 

But thrift-industry executives and analysts say the problems run deeper than that. "This is bigger than start-up angst," says Daniel Brumbaugh, a Stanford University economist who follows the industry. "This structure leads to artificial, arbitrary outcomes." 

For example, the structure put the Resolution Trust Corp., the new agency created to dispose of sick thrifts, in the peculiar position of being forced to spend billions of dollars making deals before it even had figured out how it would raise working capital.
Under a congressional budget compromise designed to make the nation's budget deficit appear smaller, $20 billion was dumped on the RTC to be spent in fiscal 1989 -- just seven weeks before that fiscal year ended on Sept. 30. 

In its effort to spend that money arranging thrift sales, the RTC tangled with the comptroller of the currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. over how much capital it should require of bidders.
Next the RTC tussled with its own Oversight Board over what sort of transactions the board would allow.
Then the RTC fended off industry complaints about who would be qualified bidders.
In the end, it spent just $12 billion, missing a chance to show the bailout was on schedule. 

Distracted by those squabbles, the RTC still hasn't determined how it will raise its working capital, the cash it will use to "carry," or finance, assets of failed thrifts until they can be sold.
One solution being kicked around would add yet another layer to the bailout structure, conjuring up one more agency to issue debt.
The RTC already is funded by one such entity, the Resolution Funding Corp. 

Strong and effective leadership might have cut through such bureaucratic snarls.
In the eyes of many in Congress, the forthright William Seidman, who was assigned several key roles in the bailout, most notably as chairman of the FDIC, appeared to fit that bill.
Congress showed its admiration for Mr. Seidman, until then a regulator only of banks, by making him responsible for selling insolvent S&Ls and overseeing the thrift-insurance fund. 

But Congress failed to give Mr. Seidman -- or any other single regulator -- over-arching authority.
And while it piled the work on the FDIC, it also piled on additional layers of supervision, hamstringing the agency that had distinguished itself by decisive action.
Before the bailout, for example, a small band of FDIC officials put together a deal to sell First RepublicBank Corp. of Dallas in just three days.
Now transactions drag on for weeks, partly because they must be cleared by the FDIC, the RTC, their boards and, in some cases, the Oversight Board as well. 

Indeed, Mr. Seidman in some areas enjoys less authority than he did under the old regime.
Five large thrifts are to be sold this week, but they are the simplest of transactions that leave the bulk of the bad assets with the government, because that's all the Oversight Board will initially approve.
In the past an independent regulator, Mr. Seidman now must have his congressional testimony approved by the White House's Office of Management and Budget.
Mr. Seidman's own board at the FDIC was expanded to include M. Danny Wall, the thrift regulator who presided over the industry's plummet into billions of dollars in losses. "We are not as independent as we used to be," says Mr. Seidman.
He says he is growing nostalgic for "the good old days" when the FDIC regulated only banks. 

Regulators are finding the structure of the bailout confusing and frustrating.
Their efforts to sell off sick thrifts have been delayed in part by differing interpretations across the agencies of basic changes contained in the new law.
For example, after months of debate, Congress set explicit numerical capital standards for the thrift industry.
But it also ordered that those standards shouldn't fall below those for banks.
Then, banking regulators began arguing among themselves about their own capital standards, creating uncertainty among thrifts about which standard to follow.
In recent weeks, as the RTC was trying to sell sick thrifts, it couldn't tell bidders which standard to follow. 

The structure has exacerbated what would be otherwise commonplace start-up problems.
Thousands of employees have yet to be hired or transferred between agencies.
Until this week, Mr. Wall was the only official employee of the Office of Thrift Supervision.
The Oversight Board has one but employee as well: its president, Daniel Kearney.
Everyone else is on loan from the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and the thrift and banking agencies. 

At the RTC, two separate and incompatible computer systems -- one for banks, one for thrifts -- run side by side.
Technical difficulties abound in transferring new records. "It's like trying to merge two nations with different languages and the cars on different sides of the street," says Russ Cherry, acting director of administration for the 

In another wrinkle, the bureaucrats most directly involved in the thrift disaster, those in the newly created Office of Thrift Supervision, are getting raises in their salaries, even as other regulatory agencies are kept for the present at lower scales.
That's because hundreds of former private-sector employees of the Federal Home Loan Banks have been brought into the new OTS, and salaries of others in the agency are being raised to the level of those new employees. 

But that disparity has provoked fury in the FDIC, where employees doing the bulk of the bailout work are currently paid on a lower scale.
The bailout seeks eventual parity between the agencies, but Mr. Seidman, among others, remains skeptical. "Parity, like beauty, is in the eyes of the beholder," he says. 

Staff salaries and the like may only cause classic inside-the-Beltway disputes, but they aren't helping calm a chaotic and loss-plagued industry.
Jay Mottice, a Florida developer, says he was told his bid to renegotiate loans at an S&L under government management was approved by the thrift.
But a week later, he says, he received a foreclosure notice from the RTC.
And Ron Miller, an executive at Princeton Business Forms, spent a week of frustration on the telephone to learn when new forms required under the law would be put in use. 

"You never know with the government if they think about these laws, or just make them up," he says. 

