.START 

Unisys Corp. plans to announce today a check-processing system for banks that consultants say is one of the most promising applications in the fledgling area of image-processing technology. 

Image-processing lets computers handle documents easily, allowing, for example, insurance companies to process forms electronically; hospitals to route X-rays to a doctor's office; and businesses to transmit documents.
The idea behind image-processing is not only to speed such processes but also so that someone trying to find the information later wouldn't have to rummage through filing cabinets. 

Some image-processing proponents clearly are ignoring all the talk about the "paperless office," which, according to futurists' blithe projections, should have arrived long ago.
The proponents also ignore the fact that it's quite possible to misplace information electronically -- as many people with big hard disks in their personal computers have discovered. 

But computer companies, faced with slowing growth, are counting on image-processing as a driving force for sales in coming years.
They need some good examples of how to apply the technology if they are to pique customers' interest, lest image-processing become just another solution in search of a problem. 

"We expect image-processing to be one of the major sources of demand for new computing iron (hardware) through the mid-1990s, so I think this is fairly important even though it's only Unisys's first shot in what will obviously be a multipart strategy," said George Lindamood, a consultant at Gartner Group Inc., Stamford, Conn.
He added that "it looks pretty good for a first shot." 

The Unisys system is aimed at helping automate the check-processing work at banks, which currently is done in huge back-offices where people must handle each check and punch in the value.
Unisys said its system -- consisting of a high-speed scanner, a dedicated disk drive, a printer, an encoder and numerous workstations -- should double the productivity of those workers, largely by routing the work more efficiently to the operators.
The system will also automatically spot most checks that need to be handled quickly or that are for huge amounts, letting a bank move faster to collect big payments. 

Unisys said an average system would cost $5 million to $6 million and would pay for itself over three to 3 1/2 years. 

Consultants added, though, that the system has considerable additional potential.
The scanner is good at clarifying the image on the check so that it can use software that recognizes typewritten or even handwritten characters.
That means that within a year or so Unisys could eliminate the need for operators to type in the value of a check; they would just have to watch for mistakes. 

Michael Goulde, a consultant at Bis Cap International, Norwell, Mass., said that kind of character recognition lends itself to all sorts of use at any business or government agency that collects lots of payments. 

Unisys, which has had its problems of late, said the system has already generated considerable interest, even among customers that don't typically buy from the company.
O.G. Greene, president of the Unisys Financial Systems Division, said that of 21 customers Unisys is actively talking to, only five currently are Unisys users. 

"Chase Manhattan is one new customer.
Northern Trust is another," he said. "Now, I've been in this business 24 years, and I can't recall that Northern Trust ever bought anything from us." 

Unisys, Blue Bell, Pa., is also introducing an image-processing system that helps engineers coordinate the work they do with drawings and other documents.
But that involves little new technology, and the announcement seems to be mainly designed to emphasize that Unisys plans to apply image-processing technology in numerous areas. 

