.START 

Integrated Resources Inc. said Whitehall Financial Group failed to obtain financing under its August agreement to acquire Integrated's core financial businesses for $310 million. 

Integrated also said that Whitehall was seeking a "significant adjustment" in the purchase price for the financial services businesses, and that Whitehall was proposing to pay partly in cash and partly in securities in the new core company that would be created.
Whitehall is a partnership of a branch of the Bronfman family and London investor Mandy Moross. 

Integrated, which has been trying to avoid a bankruptcy-law filing since it failed to make interest payments in June on nearly $1 billion of debt, would use proceeds from the sale of the core businesses to restructure debt. 

The company, which also has interests in insurance brokerage, said that it is continuing negotiations with Whitehall and that it is also "engaged in serious discussions" with another bidder that it didn't identify.
As previously reported, an Integrated official confirmed the existence of a rival suitor in a telephone conference call to Integrated's field force of financial planners and brokers. 

But the official said in the conference call that Integrated expected the Whitehall transaction to be completed at the target date of next Sunday, or the following day.
Whitehall in late August signed a letter of intent to acquire five of Integrated's core financial-service businesses. 

Reaching a definitive agreement by the deadline has been seen as critical for Integrated to maintain its field force and to keep creditors from growing more restive. 

But although Integrated said in its statement it is still seeking to enter an agreement to sell the core businesses by Sunday, it cautioned that "there can be no assurance that current discussions will lead to an agreement." 

Officials of Integrated and Whitehall couldn't be reached for comment. 

Creditors are to meet this morning to discuss the latest twist in the Integrated saga, and the progress of the debt restructuring. 

One senior creditor said they "were still quite confident" that Integrated would reach an agreement, although maybe not by Sunday or Monday and perhaps not with Whitehall. 

"Everybody hopes there will be a way to appropriately satisfy the senior noteholders," said James Spiotto of Chapman & Cutler, which represents some Integrated senior bondholders.
Mr. Spiotto said that he hoped the situation could be resolved among all creditors, and that a bankruptcy filing wouldn't be in anybody's interest. "The end is the end," he said. 

There has been some speculation that some Integrated junior creditors, whose debt was trading at about five cents on the dollar yesterday, might try to force Integrated into bankruptcy-law proceedings.
But Robert Miller, an attorney representing Integrated senior creditors, said he "hasn't heard of anybody reaching the breaking point." 

All told, Integrated senior and junior creditors are owed about $1.8 billion.
When the company announced the Whitehall transaction in August, it said proceeds from the sale of the core assets would go to Integrated senior creditors, who hold claims of about $1 billion.
Later they and other creditors would get a stake in Integrated's remaining real estate and other partnership assets, which the company has valued at about $700 million. 

Integrated's senior debt, which as recently as several weeks ago was trading at about 38 cents on the dollar, yesterday was down to about 21 cents on the dollar, according to R.D. Smith, which trades in securities of troubled companies.
The junior debt, which had been trading at about eight cents on the dollar, was down to about five cents on the dollar. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Integrated closed at $1.875 a share, down 12.5 cents. 

