.START 

The bond market rally came to an abrupt halt yesterday after the Federal Reserve sent strong signals that it isn't ready to relax interest rates. 

That was a big disappointment to some bond buyers, who have speculated for days that the Fed would ease credit conditions in response to the Labor Department's surprisingly weak September employment report, released last Friday.
The Fed also has come under pressure from the Bush administration to reduce interest rates to bring down the value of the dollar and to steer the economy clear of a recession. 

But yesterday, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan suggested that lower interest rates may not be the long-term solution for the strong dollar.
Speaking to U.S. and Soviet officials in Moscow, the Fed chairman warned that in setting monetary policy, "inordinate attention to some types of intermediate targets," such as the level of exchange rates or interest rates, "may not promote the attainment of long-term goals." 

His remarks were interpreted by credit market analysts as a sign that the Fed is unlikely to lower interest rates based solely on foreign exchange concerns. 

The remarks were backed up by the Fed's execution of matched sales purchase agreements, a technical trading operation designed to drain reserves from the banking system.
That put slight upward pressure on the Federal Funds rate, which was at 8 7/8% when the two-day matched sales were arranged. 

The combination of Mr. Greenspan's remarks and the draining operation "took the wind out of the market's sails," said William Sullivan, director of money market research at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. "That's when profit-taking set in." Still, Mr. Sullivan and many other credit market analysts remained optimistic that rates will come down during the current quarter as more evidence of a slowing economy emerges. 

In the corporate bond market, some $2.47 billion of new debt was issued yesterday as companies rushed to take advantage of falling interest rates. 

Included in yesterday's burst of new corporate borrowings was a $30 million offering managed by a unit of J.P Morgan & Co.
It was the first corporate debt offering underwritten by a commercial banking concern since the early 1930s. 

J.P. Morgan Securities Inc., a unit of the big New York bank, won a competitive bid to offer Savannah Electric & Power Co. 's 30-year first mortgage bonds. 

J.P. Morgan Securities and several other big banks were given authority in July to underwrite corporate debt in a move that significantly eroded the Glass-Steagall Act.
Although several banks have been included in underwriting groups for corporate bonds, until yesterday, none has managed an underwriting.
Last month, a unit of Bankers Trust New York Corp. was designated lead manager for a $150 million junk bond offering of seven-year notes by MorningStar Foods Inc., a Dallas-based producer and distributor of dairy products.
That transaction has yet to be priced. 

Meanwhile, the government announced yesterday that it would increase the size of next week's Treasury bill auction to $15.2 billion, continuing a recent trend. 

The size of the weekly bill auctions has grown from $12.8 billion in July to $14.8 billion last month.
The Treasury has been increasing the amount of new bill, note and bond auctions to raise additional cash to fund Resolution Trust Corp., the new agency created by Congress to bail out the troubled savings and loan industry. 

Some credit market analysts contend that the size of the Treasury's monthly one-year bill auctions also will rise.
The government "needs to borrow such a substantial amount in the quarter that it will need to raise the auctions a couple of times," said Nancy Vanden Houten, economist at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets. "The fourth quarter is typically a period when borrowing is high." 

Treasury Securities 

The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond, which was up about 1/4 point in early trading, ended more than 1/8 point lower, or off about $1.25 for each $1,000 face amount. 

Despite the reversal, some bond market analysts remained decidedly bullish. 

The benchmark 30-year bond was quoted late at a price of 101 6/32 to yield 8.007% compared with 101 11/32 to yield 7.994% yesterday in London.
The U.S. bond market was closed Monday in observance of Columbus Day.
The latest 10-year notes were quoted late at a price of 99 22/32 to yield 8.025% compared with 99 29/32 to yield 7.993% in London trading on Monday. 

Here are details of yesterday's auction: 

Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year. 

Both issues are dated October 12.
The 13-week bills mature January 11, 1990, and the 26-week bills mature April 12, 

Corporate Issues 

The corporate new-issue market was swamped Tuesday with another deluge of debt. 

Among the corporate heavyweights that tapped the market was Du Pont Co., which offered investors $300 million in seven-year notes.
Underwriters at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. priced the noncallable issue at par to yield 8.45%. 

Late in the day, two issues of liquid yield option notes were priced by Merrill Lynch & Co. for Loews Corp. and Turner Broadcasting System Inc. 

Loews offered $1.075 billion (redemption amount) of 15-year LYONs, which are zero-coupon convertible subordinated notes.
The issue was met with strong demand, and the size was increased from an originally planned $600 million.
Turner offered $650 million (redemption amount) of 15-year convertible liquid yield option notes. 

In the secondary market, corporate bonds ended unchanged to as much as 1/8 point higher. 

Municipals 

Municipal bonds were narrowly mixed in late dealings, having held to tight ranges for much of the afternoon. 

Traders said waffling Treasury coupon prices have provided guidance for prices during the session.
The long end of the government market has preserved slight session gains but is under some pressure from belief that the Federal Reserve isn't in the midst of engineering easier credit. 

Seasoned dollar bond issues were quoted generally from 1/4 point weaker to 1/8 higher on the day. 

New Jersey Turnpike Authority 7.20% issue of 2018 was off 1/8 at 98 1/2 to 98 5/8, a move boosting its yield .02 percentage point on the day to 7.32%. 

Mortgage-Backed Securities 

A summertime drop in mortgage rates to below 10% and sizable mortgage sales by thrift institutions led to issuance of $15.8 billion of 30-year mortgage securities in September, the highest monthly total in more than two years. 

The September volume total is for 30-year fixed-rate mortgage securities issued by the Government National Mortgage Association, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and the Federal National Mortgage Association, as compiled by First Boston Corp. 

September issuance was up from $12.2 billion in August and was the most since July 1987, when more than $19 billion of securities was issued. 

In the mortgage securities market, prices ended unchanged to down 4/32 in moderate dealings.
Premium Ginnie Mae issues, such as 10% securities and 10 1/2% securities, fared worse than did discounts, such as 9% securities. 

Foreign Bonds 

Italy's $1.5 billion five-year Eurobond, the largest ever, dominated the Eurobond market. 

The 8 1/2% bonds were priced at 99 7/8 to yield 8.53%. 

Meanwhile, General Electric Capital Canada is expected to issue soon $150 million of 10-year Eurobonds, guaranteed by General Electric Capital Corp. via Kidder Peabody International. 

In other foreign markets, a wave of nervousness triggered by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan's comments in Moscow pushed down the value of most foreign bonds. 

Britain's benchmark 11 3/4% bond due 2003/2007 fell 7/32 to 111 1/8 to yield 10.19%, while the 12% notes due 1995 rose 2/32 to 102 31/32 to yield 11.22%. 

West German's benchmark 6 3/4% treasury bond due June 1999 ended 0.15 point lower at 98.4 to yield 6.98%, while the new 7% bond due October 1999 dropped 0.15 point to 100.2 to yield 6.97%. 

Financial markets were closed in Japan for national sports day. 

