.START 

The Supreme Court let stand a verdict that anti-abortion protesters violated the federal anti-racketeering law by repeatedly interfering with a Philadelphia abortion clinic. 

The high court refused to hear an appeal by 26 protesters who a jury in 1987 concluded had interfered with clinic operations and patients and had destroyed clinic property. 

The justices didn't issue an opinion about whether civil lawsuits against protesters are a proper use of the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law.
But the court's action is likely to spur increased use of the RICO law by abortion clinics that face protests aimed at blocking their operations.
It also may expose other protesters to RICO lawsuits for interfering with other businesses. 

The RICO law allows civil lawsuits for triple damages by individuals whose business or property is injured by a "pattern," or repetition, of illegal activity. 

A federal appeals court in Philadelphia ruled last March that the RICO law applied to the actions of the protesters because they damaged property at the abortion clinic, the Northeast Women's Center, and engaged in extortion through intimidation of the clinic's staff and its patients. 

In a lawsuit filed by the clinic, a jury awarded triple damages totaling about $2,600 under the RICO law for repairing medical equipment, plus compensatory damages of $42,087 under other legal claims for the clinic's installation of a new security system. 

Justice Byron White was the only one of the nine justices to say that the high court should hear the protesters' appeal. (McGonagle vs.
Northeast Women's Center) 

Patent Appeal 

The justices agreed to decide whether a legal defense -- created by federal patent law -- to charges of patent infringement applies to all patented inventions, or only to drugs.
The law allows a company to avoid charges of patent infringement by showing that its use of a product was intended to acquire test data to submit to the Food and Drug Administration. 

In its appeal, Eli Lilly & Co. says that Medtronic Inc. infringed on its patent for a pacemaker that regulates tachyarrhythmia, or a too-rapid heartbeat.
Medtronic counters that it's making its own heart regulator for clinical testing to provide data to the FDA. 

A federal court in Philadelphia ruled that Congress intended the clinical testing defense to apply only to drugs.
The judge allowed Eli Lilly's claim to go to trial against Medtronic, and a jury awarded $26.6 million to Eli Lilly for patent infringement.
But the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Washington, D.C., ruled last March that the patent infringement defense isn't limited to drugs.
The appeals court sent the case back to the district court to decide if Medtronic made its devices for FDA testing.
That step will await a high court decision. (Eli Lilly & Co. vs.
Medtronic Inc.) 

Pension Investments 

The high court ordered a federal appeals court in New York to reconsider its ruling that disputes between brokers and their clients over investment of retirement funds may be brought in federal court and aren't required to go to arbitration.
The justices have said most securities disputes should be settled by arbitration, as required by standard brokerage contracts.
But the appeals court said lawsuits over investment of pensions and retirement funds may go to court under the federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act. (Shearson Lehman/American Express vs.
Bird) 

Tax Shelters 

In a defeat for the Justice Department, the high court refused to hear the government's appeal of a tax-shelter ruling by the federal appeals court in Philadelphia.
The case involved deductions for so-called nonrecourse loans, which are loans that are secured only by the value of property and not by the borrower's other assets. 

The appeals court ruled that when nonrecourse mortgage loans exceed the fair market value of property in a tax shelter, investors may still claim partial depreciation and interest deductions for the portion of the loans that don't exceed fair market value.
The November 1988 ruling rejected the Internal Revenue Service's view that no depreciation or deductions are allowed when nonrecourse loans exceed the property's fair market value. 

Justices White, Harry Blackmun and Anthony Kennedy voted to hear the case, but it takes four justices for the court to grant a hearing. (Commissioner of Internal Revenue vs.
Prussin) 

Punitive Damages 

The justices signaled that they are again wrestling with the issue of whether punitive damages may be unconstitutional.
Although they haven't yet agreed to hear arguments on the issue this term, yesterday they granted two stays of punitive awards.
The stays give the justices more time to decide whether to take up the issue and in which cases they will do it. 

Last spring, the high court rejected arguments that punitive damage awards in civil lawsuits violate the Eighth Amendment ban on "excessive fines." But several justices said damages awarded without legal guidelines may violate the 14th Amendment guarantee of "due process." 

Yesterday, the high court stayed payment of a $2.75 million punitive award in an Alabama car accident case in which a 16-year-old girl was killed. (Clardy vs.
Sanders) They also stayed a $1.8 million punitive award against a HealthAmerica Corp. unit for fraud by an Alabama health-maintenance organization. (HealthAmerica vs.
Menton) 

Mining Lawsuit 

The high court let stand the dismissal of a suit by Coastal Petroleum Co., a Caribbean Oil & Minerals Ltd. unit, against International Minerals & Chemical Corp. Coastal sued for $800 million in compensation, charging that International Minerals mined phosphate and uranium from land in central Florida that was leased to Coastal by the state.
A federal district court in Florida, upheld by a federal appeals court in Atlanta, ruled that Coastal's legal property interest was insufficient to file the lawsuit. (Coastal Petroleum Co. vs.
International Minerals & Chemical Corp.) 

