.START 

London share prices fell sharply after a sluggish opening on Wall Street refocused attention on weaknesses in the British economy and the pound. 

Shares were also lower on a majority of other European and Asian markets, but Hong Kong stocks continued to rally.
Markets in Tokyo, Taipei and Johannesburg were closed for holidays yesterday. 

In early trading in Tokyo Wednesday, the Nikkei Index of 225 selected stocks fell 19.57 points to 35356.78. 

On Tuesday, London opened firmer on a technical bounce after Monday's broad decline, but dealers said it wasn't able to maintain its early momentum after New York opened weaker. 

The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index, London's most closely watched market barometer, closed 28.2 points lower at 2218.8, almost at its intraday low of 2218.6.
The Financial Times 30-share index finished 26.2 points lower at 1796.7.
Volume was 518.8 million shares, compared with 424 million Monday. 

Dealers said the market was hit late in the session by word of a negative report from U.K. brokerage concern Barclays de Zoete Webb Ltd. on the outlook for London shares and the U.K. economy. 

Dealers said the report, which the brokerage firm said is due for release today, gained credence largely because its author predicted the October 1987 stock market crash.
The report, entitled "Beginning of the Bear Market," discusses recessionary pressures in the U.K. economy and the likelihood of a slump in the 100-share index to around the 1800 level. 

Even though the report helped to accelerate the market's downturn, dealers said, prices are depressed mainly by the belief that the pound will remain under pressure and that the government can do little to support the currency other than continue to raise interest rates. 

A dealer at a large U.K. brokerage firm said British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson isn't expected to take any significant action this week to support sterling.
The dealer pointed out that the governing Conservative Party's annual conference is now under way and that last week's increase in U.K. banks' base lending rate to 15% spurred considerable critcism of the government's economic policies. 

"Lawson's hands are tied, at least this week," the dealer said. 

Much of the market action yesterday was focused on a handful of shares linked to takeover talk or activity.
Blue-chips were featured early in the session as investors sought companies with relatively strong and stable overseas earnings. 

Among the most active stocks was ASDA Group, a major British food manufacturer that has been the focus of repeated takeover rumors.
ASDA closed at 157 pence ($2.48) a share, down 10 pence, on 11 million shares.
Dealers said the stock has come under pressure from profit-taking now that the long-awaited takeover has failed to materialize.
In addition, some U.K. brokerage firms recently reduced their ASDA earnings forecasts. 

Jaguar was pressured further by rumors that Ford Motor reached agreement with Saab over a stake in the Swedish car maker.
A Saab spokesman said there hadn't been any developments recently in the talks, but dealers said the rumors further dimmed prospects for a hostile takeover of Jaguar by Ford, particularly after General Motors was named Monday as a potentially friendly partner. 

Jaguar fell 32 to 653 on 5.8 million shares. 

Ferranti International slumped 4 1/2 to 55.
It gained early in the session after British Aerospace said it and France's Thomson-CSF are planning a bid for Ferranti.
Dealers said Ferranti was relatively firm, compared with the broad market's decline. 

Burmah, a British oil concern, bucked the trend to close at 635, up 16, on turnover of 3.8 million shares.
Dealers said Burmah was supported by continued talk of stakebuilding by SHV Holding, among the Netherlands' largest companies. 

Saatchi & Saatchi fell 17 1/2 to 332 after Fininvest, the Milan, Italy, holding company for Sylvio Berlusconi's media interests, said it acquired a "small stake" in the international marketing group for investment purposes.
Saatchi had risen in previous sessions on bid speculation, and the Fininvest statement was taken by some as a sign that Mr. Berlusconi isn't interested in bidding for all of Saatchi. 

Hong Kong shares continued to surge in active trading as strong institutional buying overcame a morning sell-off. 

The blue-chip Hang Seng Index rose 17.83 points to 2844.04, continuing Friday's 23.04-point advance.
The broader All Ordinaries Index advanced 9.28 to 1696.23.
Turnover climbed to 1.59 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$203.8 million), the heaviest in two weeks, from Friday's HK$1.37 billion (US$175.3 million). 

The commercial and industrial sector made the strongest advances, with property and utility issues turning in more modest gains.
The finance sector posted moderate declines.
The market opened sharply lower on delayed reaction to weekend news of tension between China and Hong Kong over immigration matters as Chinese citizens continue to seek asylum from the Beijing regime.
Institutional buying quickly absorbed the selling and reversed market sentiment.
A buying spree in the afternoon pushed the market solidly higher, and it closed within a point of its intraday high. 

Market participants said the rally was supported by foreign investors, particularly from the U.K., seeking dollar-related equities in the face of the pound's weakness.
The Hong Kong dollar's value is pegged to that of the U.S. currency. 

A further supportive factor was a widespread expectation that the Hong Kong government will announce an international airport project today that will cost an estimated HK$100 billion. 

Local participants were said to be relatively cautious, and many took profits in anticipation that the market, which has gained more than 30% since early June, will enter a consolidation phase. 

The day's standout performer was Jardine Matheson, which surged 70 cents to HK$24.40 a share on speculation that it could become a takeover target.
Other major trading houses also were strong, with Hutchison Whampoa gaining 20 cents to 9.55 and Swire Pacific Class A shares jumping 40 cents to 

In the properties sector, Cheung Kong was steady at 9.75, Hang Lung Development climbed 5 cents to 5.25, and Hongkong Land rose 5 cents to 9.45. 

Among major banks, Bank of East Asia was unchanged at 15.70, Hang Seng Bank fell 20 cents to 21.70, and Hongkong & Shanghai Bank lost 5 cents to 6.25. 

In the utilities sector, China Light rose 10 cents to 13.30, Hong Kong & China Gas gained 30 cents to 19.60, and Hong Kong Telecom edged up 2.5 cents to 4.825. 

In other Asian and Pacific markets, shares were lower in Sydney, Seoul and Wellington, mixed in Manila and little changed in Singapore and Paris. 

Elsewhere, stocks closed higher in Brussels and Stockholm, lower in Frankfurt, Zurich and Milan. 

Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end. 

% This 

Oct 9 Oct 6 Year 

