.START 

MCI Communications Corp. turned up the heat in the phone wars by suing American Telephone & Telegraph Co. for allegedly false and deceptive advertising claims. 

AT&T said it is planning a countersuit, an action that guarantees an intriguing insight into the ferociously competitive long-distance telephone industry. 

MCI filed suit in federal district court here under the Lanham Act, a law that allows competitors to seek damages for false advertising.
MCI, which asked for a jury trial, wants preliminary and permanant injunctions to stop AT&T from making allegedly false claims that AT&T service is better or cheaper than MCI's, or that MCI has misrepresented the price or quality of its service.
MCI also asked that AT&T's ads contain a "court-approved corrective notice" to mitigate any lingering effects of the allegedly deceptive advertising, and it seeks an unspecified amount of damages. 

"Our goal is to put an end to this torrent of lies, misstatements and distortions," MCI Chairman William McGowan told a news conference.
Among the examples he cited were AT&T's warning to business customers who weren't using AT&T that "you could be doing business up to 30% slower than your competition." Mr. McGowan also cited ads about MCI Fax being more error-prone than AT&T's switched network. 

Mr. McGowan said the company has been examining AT&T's ad campaign since it was launched in January.
He said MCI became alarmed at the broadcast and print ads that appeared this summer after MCI announced a push for more of the $23 billion residential market. 

MCI's outside counsel, Richard J. Leighton of the Washington law firm of Leighton and Regnery, said MCI has begun conducting surveys of consumers and businesses to determine the negative effect from the advertising campaign.
In August, Mr. Leighton's firm won $10.4 million in damages for Alpo Petfoods Inc. after filing a Lanham Act suit against Ralston Purina Co., alleging false claims made for Purina Puppy Chow, which dominates that market niche. 

News of the lawsuit and expected counterclaim -- and perhaps some fallout from US Sprint earnings that didn't live up to analysts' projections -- sent shares of both MCI and AT&T lower.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, AT&T closed at $43, down 75 cents, and in over-the-counter trading, MCI's shares lost $1.375 to close at $46.375. 

"I can't believe this," said Jack Grubman, a telecommunications analyst with PaineWebber. "I love these stocks, but these two yahoos are throwing darts at each other when they should be counting their money." 

Mr. Leighton suggested that other long-distance carriers might join the suit.
In Kansas City, Mo., a spokesman for US Sprint Communications Co., a unit of United Telecommunications Inc. said the third-largest long-distance carrier would carefully examine the lawsuit. "US Sprint and MCI differ on a lot of issues but not on AT&T's use of misleading ads," he said. "We're fans on their side of the stadium, but it remains to be seen whether we will stay in the stands or suit up and join them on the field." 

An AT&T spokesman said the company stands by its advertising campaign and was surprised by the suit. "Long-distance is ferociously competitive," he said. "This is not a patty-cake operation. . . . The fact of the matter is that prices vary across the lot and the customer must be the ultimate arbiter of quality." 

The AT&T spokesman said the company recently sent letters to the major television networks about allegedly misleading MCI ads aimed at residential customers.
AT&T asked the networks to stop airing ads that claim "MCI always saves you money over AT&T," and that "every week 100,000 AT&T customers switch to MCI." AT&T said that ABC and CBS officials have said they are looking into the matter. 

MCI expects to pull in a raft of economists to analyze how the AT&T ad campaign has bitten into its growth.
That may prove difficult because the suit comes at a time when MCI has been growing rapidly.
Analysts expect third-quarter earnings due out next week to exceed 60 cents a share, up from 38 cents the year before.
The company claims about 12% of the $50 billion long-distance market. 

