.START 

{Last of three articles on going public.} 

Jason Gilman had a problem common to many entrepreneurs.
He had an ambitious plan for his company, but he needed money. 

His Rainbow Music Inc. chain of music and video stores wasn't ready for the public markets three years ago.
So the South San Francisco, Calif., entrepreneur turned to venture capital, obtaining about $500,000 from a local venture group, Terranomics, in exchange for a 6% stake in the company and a board seat.
Then he hired a San Francisco investment banker, Sutro & Co., which led him to deeper pockets, and another $2 million.
Today, the company has nearly 40 outlets, annual sales of $25 million and is well on its way to its ambitious goal of 100 stores. 

What pleases Mr. Gilman the most, though, is keeping the company in private hands. "You have much more flexibility when you're a private company.
You work with a smaller group of people, and you're able to do things more quickly," he says. 

For the majority of closely held companies looking to raise money, an initial public offering isn't even an option.
The companies are often too small or don't have the earnings track record to generate excitement on Wall Street.
Especially since the October 1987 stock-market crash, small companies frequently have been forced to hunt elsewhere for funding. 

And typically they are happy they didn't go public.
As these companies have discovered, remaining private is cheaper, simpler and allows so much more freedom in operating, that many experts in the field think it's an idea whose time has come. 

"The big question is, why is there this train of thought about going public?," asks Leon A. Danco, founder and chief executive officer of the Center for Family Business, a Cleveland-based consulting firm. "For most small-business owners, selling equity is like pawning off your children.
The flexibility and freedom the owner enjoyed so much {as a private company} is denied." 

Sometimes the solution is venture money.
John Kobacker, a family-business consultant in Columbus, Ohio, says such venture-capital setups are a good alternative to going public. "The CEO can be very comfortable in the arrangement.
He's not giving up control or destroying his secrecy, having to disclose such things as salary and perks" or information about contracts and sales that could benefit competitors, he says. 

But venture capital has its drawbacks.
One growing problem is that it has gotten harder to come by as returns on investments for venture-capital firms have dwindled.
As a result, the firms are driving harder bargains and taking a more active role in managing the companies in which they invest. 

Thus, executives have identified a number of cash-raising alternatives to IPOs that include buy-outs of inactive shareholders; recapitalizations; employee stock ownership plans, which allow the owners to sell interests in the company to employees while deferring capital-gains taxes on the proceeds; and industrial joint ventures, which often link a small company developing a new technology with a larger company looking to exploit that technology. 

Interpore International of Irvine, Calif., is a company that was well-suited for an industrial joint venture.
Interpore makes a bone graft substitute used in oral surgery and other dental products and had discussed going public two years ago to raise money for continued research, development and marketing.
But the company, with annual sales of around $10 million, was still too small and not yet profitable, and therefore not a good candidate for Wall Street. 

Through its investment banker, Montgomery Securities, Interpore located Tokuyama Soda Co., a billion-dollar Japanese company that had a small dental-products division and was interested in Interpore's new technology.
The result?
Tokuyama got the distribution rights to the bone graft substitute in Japan and Interpore received a capital infusion of more than $1 million along with an international market for its product.
Interpore is also testing the compatibility of a growth factor being developed by the Japanese company with its own bone graft material. "It's almost like cross-fertilization," says George Smyth, Interpore's chairman. 

One concern Mr. Smyth had at first was that Tokuyama would want to own a big chunk of Interpore's stock or actively participate in managing the company.
That wasn't the case.
Tokuyama doesn't have a seat on Interpore's board and doesn't take part in management decisions. "We try to produce a monthly report to them about our company and that's about it," Mr. Smyth says. 

Strategies for raising capital tend to differ when a company is looking to create liquidity for the founding shareholders rather than raise money for expansion. 

A few years ago, the Danis clan of Dayton, Ohio, wanted to get cash out of the construction company that their grandfather founded more than 80 years ago. "This is a capital-intensive business with a low dividend payout rate . . . and the shareholders wanted liquidity," explains Danis Industries Corp. Chairman and Chief Executive Thomas J. Danis, who along with 10 other grandchildren of founder B.G. Danis Sr. are the sole shareholders. 

After considering going public or recapitalizing, the company, on the advice of investment banker Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co., opted to sell off its $75 million-a-year construction manufacturing operation in a leveraged buy-out to T.M.B. Industries.
Deciding which piece of the company to sacrifice wasn't easy. "It's like when you have five kids and someone asks which one is your favorite.
Well, they're all your favorite," Mr. Danis says.
In the end, the determining factor was that none of the 11 grandchildren had any day-to-day experience in manufacturing. 

The sale allowed the family to remain out of the public eye. "We find it much more comfortable dealing privately.
We're not worried about third-party instant reaction," Mr. Danis says. 

Another option for owners looking to get cash for themselves is a leveraged recapitalization, in which the company borrows large sums of money, usually in exchange for an equity position, and uses those funds to buy part or all of the holdings of existing shareholders. 

Bill Stroud had considered taking his chain of 35 bath-supplies and linen stores public in 1987 as a means to achieve some personal liquidity.
But there were two big problems.
First, the Industry, Calif., company, which has annual sales of about $100 million, had experienced a drop in earnings in the previous few years, so it wasn't about to be welcomed on Wall Street.
And although Mr. Stroud wanted to liquidate part of his investment, he didn't want to cash out completely, since he felt there was still strong growth potential 

"This was a way for him to get capital and still own part of the company," explains Noel Urben, president of BT Capital Corp., the unit of Bankers Trust New York Corp. that arranged the May 1987 recapitalization of Strouds.
The transaction gave Mr. Stroud the cash that he and the other shareholders wanted, while allowing the group and current management to retain a combined stake in the company of more than 50%, with the remaining stock going to BT Capital.
Operations at the company went undisturbed. "Everyone went back to work the next day just as if nothing had happened," Mr. Stroud marvels. 

Leveraged buy-outs and recapitalizations have become the financing vehicle of choice for companies with shareholders who want to turn their stock investments into cash. "There's more activity in this than at any other time in my 10-year career in this industry," says Lloyd Greif, executive vice president, corporate finance, at Sutro & Co., which introduced BT Capital to Strouds. 

Yet highly leveraged transactions can leave a company buried under a mountain of debt that can be impossible to level. 

Ted Suzuki had considered arranging a leveraged buy-out of his JAC Creative Foods Inc., which makes imitation crabmeat and other shellfish substitutes called surimi.
But a leveraged buy-out would have left the Los Angeles company with no funds for a much-needed $15 million expansion of its manufacturing facilities. "I couldn't really expose this company and the employees to the potential of major disaster" if the debt payments couldn't be met, Mr. Suzuki says. 

The executive was under pressure from the other founding shareholders who wanted to cash out, and after considering several options, the group decided to sell the entire company. 

Since its founding in 1981, JAC, with annual sales of around $25 million, had received several takeover offers from public companies, among them International Multifoods Corp., the big Minneapolis food products concern, which JAC had helped to establish its own imitation shellfish business. "We decided that if we're going to get together with a big company, the best one would be International Multifoods," says Mr. Suzuki, who stayed on as executive vice president of the new SeaFest/JAC Creative Foods division of International Multifoods after the sale last April. 

Yet having now worked both the private and public arenas of American business, Mr. Suzuki, 33, sees clear advantages in staying private. "You might have an executive title in a public company, but there it all boils down to profit.
If your company's stock value shows a decline, you become a good target for takeovers, so management has to always do whatever it can to keep the value of the stock up," he says. 

"In a private company, it's not necessarily the same.
Of course you have to make money to keep the company going," Mr. Suzuki says. "However, on a private company's board, you have other factors by which you measure success." For example, spending heavily to launch a product in a new market, as Mr. Suzuki did with surimi, might mean little or no profit for a company for several years. "This might not benefit the bottom line today or tomorrow, but then with a private company you don't really have to worry about the day-to-day profit.
You can have longer-term planning." 

