.START 

Telerate Inc. said a committee of independent directors rejected as inadequate an $18-a-share tender offer from Dow Jones & Co., owner of a 67% interest in the electronic financial information services company. 

Telerate said the directors suggested that Dow Jones meet with them to achieve "a mutually agreed upon transaction that would be fair to all Telerate stockholders." 

The committee, as well as directors who aren't employees of or consultants to Dow Jones, received an opinion from Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. that the offer is inadequate for non-Dow Jones shareholders from a financial point of view. 

Neil S. Hirsch, president and chief executive officer of Telerate, said that he won't tender any of his shares, about a 6% interest, and that no other Telerate director or executive officer intends to tender any shares in the offer.
He said the committee had received "clear indications" from other holders of more than 5% of Telerate's shares of "genuine dissatisfaction" with the offer. 

Dow Jones said it was "disappointed" at the committee's response to the offer and a spokesman said "we have no plans for a meeting" with Telerate directors.
Meanwhile, Warren H. Phillips, the company's chairman, said, "We are proceeding with our $18-a-share offer and continue to believe that the offer is fair to all Telerate stockholders." The offer is scheduled to expire Nov. 3. 

At the time the offer was announced, Dow Jones said that if, as a result of the offer, it owns 90% or more of Telerate's shares, or if the two companies reach an acquisition agreement, Dow Jones will acquire the remaining shares in a merger at the same price. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Telerate shares closed yesterday at $20.375 a share, up 12.5 cents, while Dow Jones closed at $37.25 a share, down 87.5 cents. 

Telerate shares generally have traded at $20 a share and more after Dow Jones, publisher of The Wall Street Journal, announced plans Sept. 21 for a $576 million offer to acquire the remaining Telerate shares.
At the time, a number of analysts suggested the offer was underpriced. 

In a recent Securities and Exchange Commission filing, Dow Jones said four lawsuits, in addition to a previously reported suit, have been filed on behalf of Telerate shareholders.
The suits name Dow Jones and certain of its officers as defendants, and generally assert that the offer is unfair and inadequate and that it denies minority shareholders the true value of their shares. 

Dow Jones also publishes Barron's magazine, other periodicals, community newspapers and offers electronic business information services. 

