.START 

It is a familiar picture of Indochina's refugees.
A reception hall has become a crammed dormitory where men nap in their underwear.
Elsewhere in the building, five people crowd their lives into rooms that used to house two.
Outside, men sit listlessly on patches of lawn.
Fights break out occasionally between newcomers and old-timers. 

But such scenes, painfully common around Southeast Asia, are new for Japan, which has been facing its own small version of a refugee crisis in the past five months. 

The experience has rekindled the country's latent xenophobia and sparked a debate over how to handle immigrants in general, particularly the 3,000 refugees that have landed in southern Japan since May.
One response has been to initiate, as of last month, a screening process common around Asia and in the West to determine if new arrivals are the political refugees from Vietnam that they claim to be. 

But the debate is complicated by what, for Japan, is the much larger question of how to deal with illegal immigrant workers, who now number some 100,000, with more arriving every day, either sneaking in or overstaying their tourist or student visas.
Although the country's doors have been firmly and officially shut against these unskilled aliens, attitudes are changing, domestic economic pressures are increasing and, as one of the world's richest nations, Japan knows it can't keep evading its international obligations. 

However much social attitudes and economic realities are changing, the mere threat of large numbers of any kind of immigrant can still trigger a knee-jerk fear among many Japanese that their racially homogeneous paradise will be violated. 

Japan's Foreign Affairs and Justice ministries have been bombarded with phone calls and letters, "99.9% against accepting the boat people," says Toshio Tsunozaki, director of the Foreign Ministry's human-rights and refugee division. 

Moreover, such resistance isn't confined to Japanese natives.
Nguyen Van Vu fled Saigon in 1982.
His wooden boat floated, engineless and aimless, for 15 days until he was rescued by an Italian merchant ship and brought to Japan.
Since then, he has made a new life for himself in Japan. 

When Mr. Vu sees the latest arrivals on Japan's shores, who land in steel-hulled boats, appear well-cared for and say they are Vietnamese refugees, he echoes the Japanese government position. 

"What kind of people are they?
Why did they come here?" he asks. "We're very sensitive to the difference between economic refugees and political refugees.
We want the government to carefully separate them." 

Some of the Vietnamese may have been directed toward Japan by arrangers who heard that other Asian countries are tightening security.
Others took off for wherever they could get to. "We landed in Japan, so we want to stay in Japan," says Luc Minh Phuong, a 36-year-old carpenter who arrived in August. "Any free country will do.
We don't care." 

If he stays, Mr. Phuong may find that the Japanese attitude toward refugees is better than it used to be.
In the past, most refugees who landed in Japan preferred to move on to a third country. 

When Mr. Vu arrived, he looked for a job on his own and was turned away "10 out of 10 times." He says the same thing happened when he hunted for an apartment.
For years, he worked odd jobs, mounting and dismantling trade show booths and displays, before finally landing work as a translator for new refugees. 

The people he helps face a Japan where the economy is booming, an acute labor shortage is worsening and people are at least a little more open-minded.
Some small-business owners have even asked the government to let all the newly arriving refugees stay in Japan. 

In theory, Tokyo could do this.
Japan maintains a comparatively low quota of 10,000 for Indochinese refugees allowed to stay in the country.
But until now, Japan was one of the few countries that didn't rigorously screen arrivals from Indochina.
Officials didn't want to seem coldhearted to international critics or risk drawing attention from domestic opponents. 

Before the screening process was imposed, Indochinese who arrived by boat in southern Japan were fairly smoothly transferred to refugee centers around the country.
From there they were resettled within Japan or in a third country. 

Japan's new screening process conforms to a system agreed on at an international conference in Geneva in June.
Those who meet the U.N.'s definition of a refugee -- persecuted for race, religion or politics -- will be settled here or sent to third countries. 

Those who fail to meet the criteria will be held in reception centers until they choose to return home.
Negotiating their voluntary return could take years.
To accommodate the huge numbers for what could be lengthy stays, Japan will expand its reception centers. 

But as people around the world are finding, the question of who is a refugee and who isn't is hard to answer.
Most of the 6,200 Vietnamese settled in Japan so far came from southern Vietnam and were perceived to be in danger of political persecution after the fall of Saigon in 1975.
Most of the recent arrivals come from northern Vietnam, near the border of China, and their background is complex.
Some of them are ethnic Vietnamese, some are Vietnamese of Chinese descent who speak Chinese as well as Vietnamese, and some are other minorities. 

Vietnamese refugees will only be accepted back by Vietnam if they choose to return.
Such repatriations are usually monitored by international organizations.
But the Chinese, if caught, are deported with no international monitoring, as are illegal immigrants from South Korea or some other Asian countries.
Such deportations have already begun.
The crackdown has exacerbated tensions at the Tokyo refugee center, sparking demonstrations by old-timers demanding that newcomers be separated out. 

