.START 

If your friends on Capitol Hill can block the nomination of the most qualified nominee to the Supreme Court this century because he is a conservative, why not go all the way and try to undermine the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court?
A group of mostly liberal federal judges has just launched an unprecedented assault on Supreme Court Chief Justice William Rehnquist, who apparently has committed the political crime of proposing that appeals of death penalties be streamlined. 

Last year's anti-drug law authorized the Chief Justice to submit a plan to end the current endless appeals by prisoners on death row.
The law also provided that a reform bill would get quick consideration in the Senate.
The Rehnquist proposal has now set off a mini-revolution in the lower courts among judges who don't believe in executing convicted murderers.
A letter distributed by 14 senior judges last week effectively asks the Senate to ignore the law and the Chief Justice. 

Chief Justice Rehnquist last year appointed a group of judges, led by retired Justice Lewis Powell Jr., to look into the problem of death-penalty appeals.
It noted that while 2,200 people have been sentenced to death, there've been only 116 executions since 1972.
The average length of appeals is more than eight years; the shortest appeal nearly three years; the longest so far more than 14 years.
As the report noted, "The inmate under capital sentence, whose guilt frequently is never in question, has every incentive to delay the proceedings." Some judges and "pro bono" lawyers are only too happy to oblige. 

The Powell report has moderate proposals.
It urges a law limiting appeals to two rounds -- still more generous than any other kind of case -- for states that agree to pay lawyers to handle the appeals.
This would ensure adequate legal representation while ending delays. 

Still, a group of judges on the 28-member Judicial Conference, the federal courts' policy-making group, objected last month when Chief Justice Rehnquist passed the Powell report to Congress.
The judges sent a letter urging the Senate to "request that hearings be held" to take the Judicial Conference's presumably contrary position into account.
Chief Justice Rehnquist was not amused by this challenge to his authority.
He responded by issuing a statement that cited the anti-drug-law provision seeking reform of death-penalty appeals. "My obligation to transmit the report was not dependent on approval of the Judicial Conference," he said, noting that he had informed the Senate that the judges' group hadn't yet taken a position. 

The benign view of this action is that liberal judges fear losing the tactic of delay to effectively repeal the very popular death penalty.
But these judges have raised the ante by challenging the authority of Chief Justice Rehnquist, whose position makes him the top judicial spokesman on changes in federal court procedures.
The less benign view is that next we can expect liberal judges to announce that because of the newly conservative Supreme Court they will no longer be bound by the precedent system of "stare decisis." 

