.START 

This is in response to Michael Novak's Sept. 12 editorial-page article, "To Honor Auschwitz's Catholic Dead -- Move the Nuns." 

My father and brother were in Auschwitz -- my father managed to survive, my brother was killed there.
My mother's father, sisters and brothers also perished there.
Perhaps 50 members of my family died in Auschwitz's ovens. 

The fact that thousands of Jewish survivors around the world have been emotionally hurt by this convent is enough reason for it to move the half-mile that has been requested.
The fact that an agreement was made and consequently broken and that Cardinal Jozef Glemp came out with his anti-Semitic remarks are like rubbing salt into an old and painful wound. 

No one doubts the purity or right of these nuns to pray for their religion's losses at Auschwitz.
But no one can dispute that the primary reason for Auschwitz was to attempt to wipe the Jewish race off this earth.
Jews haven't set up a religious sanctuary on its grounds.
Why should nuns? 

Robert Korda 

Los Angeles 

The prayers of a small group of aging nuns soar high above the miasma of horrors past.
Perhaps their silent, unobtrusive presence is the vague symbol of the moments of saintliness and heroism Mr. Novak so poignantly describes. 

The church agreed to move them, according to the demands of the Jews -- then procrastinated.
It is hard to evict the aged and the innocent.
Not everybody thinks this is the right thing to do.
It is surely far from certain that hurting these innocent ladies would add any glory to the monument that Auschwitz has become.
Time will do it for us. 

Let the nuns stay -- and pray.
Let the flight of angels sing them to their rest. 

Netty Turner 

Riverside, Calif. 

Mr. Novak touched on the familiar theme that the horrors of a holocaust shake or destroy one's belief in God. 

But this theme turns the real lesson on its head.
The real lesson is that such horror should deepen one's belief in the objective existence of evil, that the devil is a real presence in the world. 

Because humans have free will, they commit petty acts and enormous wrongs.
Good has no meaning unless there is the capacity for evil. 

John Adam Moreau 

Richmond, Va. 

I want to thank Mr. Novak for his moving words, which express so well my own thoughts as a Catholic whose grandparents came here from Poland.
God measures neither time nor place.
The good Carmelites' prayers will be heard just as well from a location that does not offend the human sensibilities of those who suffered or whose loved ones suffered at Auschwitz. 

Rosemary T. Strekel 

Lyme, Conn. 

In a recent letter to an Israeli newspaper, a Dutch Jewish survivor of Auschwitz recalled how Polish doctors and nurses, many of them nuns and priests, refused to treat Jewish survivors after the liberation of the camp.
Neither could the survivors leave out of fear of the pogroms that were perpetrated on Jews outside the camp, often incited during church sermons and led by priests. 

By purposefully ignoring what the dispute over the convent at Auschwitz is really about, Mr. Novak becomes an apologist for the Catholic Church that the Dutch survivor wrote about.
If he is not familiar with that history, the statements of Cardinal Glemp should be sufficient to indicate why Jews are upset about Polish Catholic anti-Semitism. 

Contrary to Mr. Novak's position, the nuns should leave Auschwitz not to placate Jewish sensitivities, but because they don't belong there.
They cannot worship God properly on that soil if they refuse to see their church's complicity in the Holocaust. 

Timna Horowitz 

San Francisco 

I visited Auschwitz recently and was shocked by the state of disrepair.
The wooden watchtowers are crumbling; the entire area is overgrown with weeds; the remains of the crematoriums are barely marked and cannot be approached because of surrounding debris. 

It would take relatively little to maintain the area properly.
Otherwise, the site will decay and become unidentifiable; and people will then have reason to deny that it ever existed. 

This cannot be allowed to happen.
The death camp should be maintained as a proper monument to those who perished there. 

Herbert M. Linsenberg 

Philadelphia 

It has been estimated that 12 million people died in the death camps during World War II and that only about half were Jews.
The remainder were Christians.
Today it is almost as if the Christians never existed and never suffered. 

The Holocaust has become not a tragic remembrance and a reminder of man's brutality to man, but a political and economic weapon.
The Carmelites have every right to be present at Auschwitz and their prayers should be welcomed, not only for the dead, but for a better world. 

Richard A. Gilman M.D. 

Chula Vista, Calif. 

Our Jewish brothers and sisters cannot ever forget the abomination that was Auschwitz, and the Jewish request to relocate the convent affords Catholics a unique opportunity to show the world their sensitivity, love and respect for all who perished at that dark and hateful place. 

Mr. Novak is right.
Prayers will be heard regardless of the locale.
And by our fruits the world will know us. 

William J. Powers Jr. 

Pascagoula, Miss. 

