.START 

Many of the usual gloom-and-doom investment gurus have suddenly turned into raging bulls -- and that makes some market watchers nervous. 

For years, individual investors have paid good money for the privilege of being regaled with blood-in-the-streets prognostications at the annual conferences sponsored by Blanchard & Co., a New Orleans precious metals firm. 

But what the 2,000 or so investors attending this year's conference got was more like dancing in the streets.
Speaker after speaker told one of the nation's largest gatherings of individual investors that the economy is set to soar and that the stock market is on a long winning roll. 

"A wave of unparalleled prosperity" is the way one newsletter editor summed up the future.
Richard Band of Personal Finance newsletter said this great good fortune is certain to result from a world-wide collapse of communism, a rebirth of fiscal responsibility, deregulation and shrinkage of the state. 

Paul Erdman, who has made a living writing books about financial disasters ("The Crash of '79," "The Panic of '89"), foresaw a U.S. resurgence, complete with a disappearing budget deficit, low inflation and disarmament, all leading to an economic boom.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average, he maintained, "could reach 4000 or 5000 by 1994 or 1995." 

James McKeever, a newsletter editor who has been highly rated in Hulbert Financial Digest's independent rankings, said the stock market will soar until 1992.
A massive inflow of money from Hong Kong, will help fuel the climb, he said.
His advice: buy cellular stocks. 

Douglas Casey, editor of Crisis Investing newsletter, had some hot buys for speculators: land in Nicaragua ("they'll eventually throw the Sandinistas out") and an estate in Poland. 

This year's five-day conference, which ran through Sunday, did include a few doubting Thomases.
Stan Weinstein, editor of the Professional Tape Reader, a Hollywood, Fla., newsletter, spoke of "termites" gnawing away at the woodwork of the market.
The rally, he cautioned, is "in the eighth or ninth inning." 

But the nervous Nellies and naysayers didn't have much of a chance against bulls like Donald Rowe, a Sarasota, Fla., investment adviser. "Buy stocks and real estate now]" he declared. "All will explode in the 1990s]" 

Optimism like that is fine, of course, as far as it goes.
But so many of the 65 investment experts who spoke at the meeting said so many positive things that some other investment advisers are worried. 

Take Peter Eliades, a Los Angeles technical analyst.
The fact that the speakers were so bullish "may be a danger signal," he says. 

Glen King Parker, publisher of Market Logic, a Ft.
Lauderdale, Fla., newsletter, agrees.
He says he "would feel so much better if the conference would have been talking about the decline of Western civilization." 

Even James U. Blanchard III, whose company has sponsored the conference for the past 16 years, admits to some concern.
The conference -- once called the National Conference for Monetary Reform -- began out of efforts to legalize gold ownership in the U.S., and the speakers have tended to advocate gold and other "hard" investments that are supposed to provide a measure of security during times of financial and economic travail. 

"This year, the speakers seem overly optimistic," Mr. Blanchard says. "I hope we're not a contrary indicator." 

What about the investors who paid an average of $1,500 {including registration, hotel and meals} to attend? 

Some of them were so intent on the speakers that they didn't even allow themselves to be distracted by New Orleans' creole and cajun cooking or the jazz on Bourbon Street.
One Seattle businessman, who declined to give his name, was so enthusiastic he attended every single session -- from 8:30 in the morning to 10 at night -- breaking only for fast food in the nearby Riverwalk shopping area. 

At least a few investors, however, seemed pragmatic. "I discard 90% of the stuff," said Herbert Poyne, a 63-year-old Houston businessman. "If I get two or three ideas from this, it's worth it." 

