.START 

The dollar shot higher while stocks and bonds retreated after traders interpreted remarks by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan to mean the central bank won't lower interest rates to halt the dollar's rally. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 6.08 to 2785.33, breaking a five-session string of new highs.
The benchmark 30year Treasury bond fell about 1/8 point, or $1.25 for each $1,000 face amount. 

Mr. Greenspan, in a prepared speech, said governing monetary policy through intermediate targets for exchange and interest rates may not coincide with the Fed's long-term inflation-fighting goals.
The dollar responded immediately by rising sharply against other major currencies. 

"It is very surprising to have the Fed chairman backing away from a G-7 commitment in public," said Louis v.
B. Crandall, economist with R.H. Wrightson Associates Inc. "The policy disputes have happened before, but behind closed doors.
He is drawing a distinction between a policy to stabilize the dollar and one to drive it lower." 

But even before Mr. Greenspan's remarks hit the news wires, the British pound was sinking further.
Traders said the United Kingdom's currency is facing a crisis of confidence.
Last week, Britain raised commercial bank lending rates to 15% in an effort to defend the pound from further declines.
But that rate may be high enough to choke off economic growth in Britain; institutional investors are fleeing from U.K. investments because of the threat of recession.
In late New York trading, the pound stood at $1.5530, down from $1.5775 Monday. 

U.S. stocks lost some ground on Mr. Greenspan's comments.
Monday's buying of stocks that are sensitive to the economic cycle turned abruptly into profit-taking yesterday.
Compaq Computer shares rose $6.25 Monday, but yesterday sank $2.625 to close at $102.25. 

Treasury bonds rose a bit yesterday morning, but after Mr. Greenspan's remarks the market fell back to near Friday's closing levels. (The Treasury market was closed for U.S. holidays Monday.) Short-term Treasurys, from bills to two-year notes, were hit hardest by the reversal.
Many dealers had stocked up on those securities in anticipation of a rate cut by the Federal Reserve. 

In major market activity: 

Stocks fell back.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 6.08 to 2785.33.
New York Stock Exchange volume was anemic, with 147,560,000 shares changing hands. 

Bonds eased.
The yield on the benchmark Treasury bond rose to 8%. 

The dollar rose sharply.
In late New York trading, the dollar was quoted at 1.9080 marks and 144.55 yen, up from 1.8875 marks and 142.80 yen. 

