.START 

Nervous investors decided to take profits in the big technology issues that have posted handsome gains recently, sending the Nasdaq over-the-counter market down for the first time this month. 

The Nasdaq composite index, which eased 1.59 points, or 0.3%, to 484.14, had set seven consecutive record highs before yesterday. 

The culprit was the interest rate outlook, and the victims were the OTC's biggest technology issues, traders said.
Amid speculation that interest rates won't fall any time soon, investors decided to unload some of the OTC market's leading technology stocks.
The Nasdaq 100 index, which includes those issues as well as other big non-financial stocks, fell 1.40, or 0.3%. 

The interest rate speculation also led to weaker prices on the New York Stock Exchange, where the Big Board's composite index and the Dow Jones Industrial Average both fell 0.2%. 

Traders said the selling in the OTC market wasn't wild, but was widespread.
Of the 4,346 issues that traded, 1,119 declined and only 840 advanced.
Total trading volume was almost 137 million shares. 

"Every time there was an uptick, there was some stock for sale," said Robert C. King, senior vice president of OTC trading at Robinson-Humphrey Co. in Atlanta.
He believes the interest rate worries were just an excuse for the already-nervous. "They'll start selling on any negative news," Mr. King said. 

Among the computer-related issues that were lower, Intel fell 5/8 to 34, Conner Peripherals lost 1/2 to 14 3/8, Microsoft declined 1/2 to 81 1/4, Ashton-Tate eased 3/8 to 10 1/4, and Lotus Development was off 1/4 to 30. 

Apple Computer and Sun Microsystems were unchanged, however. 

Nasdaq's biggest financial stocks were down as well, losing 0.74, or 0.2%, to 475.08. 

It was a busy day for Nasdaq's telecommunications issues. 

Giant LIN Broadcasting soared 3 3/8 to 113 1/4 on turnover of 1.5 million shares after McCaw Cellular Communications raised its bid for the New York cellular telephone company to $125 a share, for 22 million shares, from $110 a share for all of the approximately 51 million shares outstanding.
LIN has already agreed to a stock-swap merger with BellSouth. 

McCaw said it now owns about five million LIN shares, and the stock it is offering to buy represents about 45% of the fully diluted LIN shares McCaw doesn't already own.
If successful, the offer would result in McCaw's owning a total of slightly more than 50% of LIN's common shares on a fully diluted basis.
McCaw finished unchanged at 42. 

MCI Communications tumbled 1 3/8 to 46 3/8 on 2.3 million shares.
MCI said it filed suit against American Telephone & Telegraph for allegedly using false and deceptive advertising.
It said it asked the court to prohibit AT&T from making any false and deceptive claims that its products or services are superior to MCI's or from suggesting that MCI has misrepresented its services or rates to consumers.
The company also said it asked the court to order AT&T to display corrective notices in any advertising and promotional literature. 

Telos took a giant step forward, adding 6 1/8 to 14 1/2.
Contel said its Federal Systems unit signed a letter of intent to acquire the company for about $65 million in cash, or about $16 a share. 

Volvo's American depositary receipts surged 6 5/8 to 81.
The Swedish auto maker is in talks about heavy-truck manufacturing joint ventures with France's Renault and Spain's Empresa Nacional de Autocamiones.
Monday, the company announced a pact with Japan's Isuzu, to cooperate on the Japanese truck market. 

Great Country Bank lost 5/8 to 14 7/8.
The Connecticut bank said late Monday that it will report a loss of about $3.5 million for its first quarter ended in August.
The bank earned $856,000 in the year-earlier quarter.
This year's loss in the quarter is from increased reserves for bad real estate loans. 

S-K-I Ltd. jumped 3 3/4 to 22 1/2.
S-K-I is a holding company for the Killington and Mount Snow ski areas in Vermont, and the Bear Mountain Ski Area in Southern California.
Killington opened for business yesterday morning, the company said, the first ski area in the country to do so. 

Jaguar's American depositary receipts again headed the most-active list.
The ADRs slipped 7/8 to 10 on volume of more than 4.4 million.
Both General Motors and Ford Motor have expressed interest in taking a stake in the company. 

In other news, the National Association of Securities Dealers said the Tokyo Stock Exchange will now accept applications from the largest two-thirds of Nasdaq-traded stocks for trading.
To win approval, the stocks must meet the exchange's foreign-stock listing requirements. 

The Tokyo exchange decided to consider Nasdaq stocks for listing because the National Market System, home to the big issues, is "a highly organized market with a regulatory framework that is as solid as those of the U.S. stock exchanges," an exchange official said. 

Joseph Hardiman, NASD president, said stock listings on the Tokyo market will give the U.S. companies "improved access to capital from that part of the world." 

