.START 

As policy analysts and intellectuals worry over "The End of History" and congratulate each other about "The Obsolescence of Major War," it might be wise to temper all the giddy optimism with the recollection that we have been here before.
In 1910, an English journalist named Norman Angell published one of the most influential books of the early 20th century, "The Great Illusion." 

"The Great Illusion's" thesis will be familiar to any reader of op-ed pages: The ever more intimate connection between the leading economies, and the advent of modern telecommunications technology, had made war futile: 

"The complexity of modern finance makes New York dependent upon London, London upon Paris, Paris upon Berlin to a greater degree than has ever yet been the case in history.
This interdependence is the result of the daily use of those contrivances of civilization which date from yesterday -- the rapid post, the instantaneous dissemination of financial and commercial information by means of telegraphy, and generally the incredible progress of rapidity in communication which has put the half-dozen chief cities of Christendom in closer contact financially, and has rendered them more dependent the one upon the other, than were the chief cities of Great Britain less than a hundred years ago." 

In the tense international situation of 1910, this message was understandably a welcome one to many people. "The Great Illusion" was published in half a dozen languages simultaneously, and sold more than a million copies in the four years before the outbreak of the First World War.
Angell's argument was essentially this: As the long and careful preparations they make for it suggest, nations don't make war out of enflamed passion.
They fight because they think they can profit by it, principally by eliminating commercial or financial rivals. 

It was this belief that Angell considered the great illusion of his time and he painstakingly took it apart.
War would redound on the winner's head just as cruelly as on the loser's.
In those days, Germany borrowed money for its expanding industry on the English capital markets.
So what would happen if Germany beat England in war?
The English economy would collapse, and German interest rates would therefore rise. "The German Generalissimo in London might be no more civilized than Attila himself, but he would soon feel the difference between himself and Attila.
Attila, luckily for him, did not have to worry about a bank rate and such like complications; but the German general, while trying to sack the Bank of England, would find that his own balance in the Bank of Berlin would have vanished into thin air and the value of even the best of his investments dwindled as though by miracle." 

Nor could Germany hope to eliminate England as a commercial rival: "{T}o destroy the commerce of 40 million people Germany would have to destroy their coal and iron mines, to destroy the energy, character, and resourcefulness of the population; to destroy, in short, the determination of 40 million people to make their living by the work of their hands." 

After 1914, Angell passionately denied ever having said that war was impossible.
He insisted that he had only claimed that it was pointless.
Still, the frightened readers of "The Grand Illusion" can be excused for having understood Angell's demonstration of the instant financial disaster that would hit any modern economy in wartime as a guarantee that war could never come again, or that if it did come, it would be over within weeks. "Few of us realize to what extent economic pressure . . . has replaced physical force in human affairs," because while "{i}n very primitive conditions, robbery is a moderately profitable enterprise. . . . The instincts of the City man may be just as predatory as those of the cattle-lifter or the robber baron, but taking property by force has become one of the least profitable and the most speculative forms of enterprise in which he could engage." To disagree, Angell wrote, was to practice "economics a la Tamerlane." 

Anxious readers in England and on the continent bought "The Grand Illusion," and even coined the term "Norman Angellism," to reassure themselves that technology and the interpenetration of capital markets could dispell the incomprehensible urge that large masses of people sometimes feel to kill other large masses of people.
But war erupted anyway.
Angell maintained that the 1914 war only confirmed his ideas, and others agreed: He was knighted in 1931 and won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1933.
He lived until 1967, seeing another world war, even more terrible than the last, but also the creation of GATT, the IMF and the European Community. 

To the end, Angell maintained that events had vindicated him.
But perhaps what the events of this century, not to mention all the others, have really proven is that so long as politics is to be conducted by human beings, it shouldn't be assumed that anything ghastly or evil is ever impossible or obsolete or that anything happy or good is permanent. 

Mr. Frum is an assistant editorial features editor for the Journal. 

(See related editorials: "Nationalism Is as Deadly as Ever" and "Grievances Around the World" -- WSJ Oct. 11, 1989) 

