.START 

Is it possible for an exhibition of a great painter's work to include none of his very greatest paintings and still be first rate?
One would think not, but the Metropolitan Museum of Art's "Velazquez" is the exception that proves the rule.
Although the Spanish master's great historical and allegorical compositions, such as "Las Meninas," "The Weavers" and "The Surrender of Breda," could not be lent by the Prado Museum in Madrid, what the Prado and other museums have lent offers us a rare and wonderful overview of his work. 

The Prado, for example, which owns more of Velazquez's paintings than anyone else, very rarely lends any of them.
Indeed its loan of no fewer than 17 paintings to this show is a unique, even a grand gesture.
In a certain way it also is a very personal gesture, one made not only to the Met as an institution but also to its head of paintings conservation, John Brealey.
In recent years he restored several Prado masterpieces, notably "Las Meninas," and with such marvelous results. 

In fact, this show of 38 paintings is a marvelous and exciting event in many ways.
Diego Rodriquez de Silva y Velazquez, who was born in Seville in 1599 and died in Madrid in 1660, was not only the most outstanding Spanish artist of the 17th century, but also was one of the very greatest painters of all time.
And since the socially ambitious Velazquez spent a great deal of time and energy on his activities at court, he painted only about 100 pictures.
The Met's relatively small show therefore makes available nearly half his life's work. 

It is useless to regret what is not here, especially since the modest size of the show in no way restricts its ambition and is in fact an invitation to intense viewing.
The installation is similarly inviting.
The walls have been painted in muted tones to show the pictures to good advantage, and the discreetly placed descriptive panels are concisely informative. 

The paintings reaffirm in the most direct fashion that Velazquez is perhaps the greatest optical realist in Western art.
Right from the beginning of his career what he could describe with his brush was no less than amazing.
This is readily apparent in "An Old Woman Cooking Eggs," done when the artist was not yet 20 years old.
Here, as in the slightly later "Waterseller of Seville," everything is rendered with such sharp-focus clarity that you almost could mistake the image for the real thing.
But even in these meticulously detailed early paintings, everyday reality also is invested with something more -- a sense of ritual and solemnity that transcends mere naturalism. 

Indeed, this show demonstrates that for all his apparent matter-of-factness, Velazquez remains one of the most mysterious of painters, and that part of his greatness was his uncanny ability to see, and give form to, the mystery that lies below the surface of things. 

From 1623 on, shortly after he settled in Madrid, he was royal painter to the highly cultivated King Philip IV, six years his junior, who became something of a friend as well as a patron.
Velazquez's work from that time forward was confined largely to portraits of the royal family and members of the court.
But what he did with this fairly limited range of subject matter is quite astonishing.
He did not confine himself to the upper reaches of court society but painted its full spectrum, from the glorious and the glamorous to the grotesque. 

Outstanding in that first category are some amazingly accomplished renderings of the king, starting with three elegant full-length royal portraits near the beginning of the show, and culminating with a small but intensely moving portrait bust of the aged and world-weary monarch at the very end.
Also notable is the Prado's large and dazzlingly virtuoso equestrian portrait of the Count-Duke of Olivares, Velazquez's first major patron, and for many years the power behind the throne.
The rendering of Olivares is a tour de force of bravura brushwork, but at the same time the picture as a whole has a most impressive dignity and weight. 

Velazquez's double portrait of the elegantly dressed and doll-like infant prince Baltasar Carlos with a wayward-looking young dwarf is a moving study in contrasts of inherited privilege and natural gifts.
The portraits of the haggard court buffoon called "Don Juan of Austria" and of the freakish dwarf called "El Nino de Vallecas" are tragic in their unflinching forthrightness, and at the same time touching in their deep sense of human sympathy. 

Even Velazquez's relatively rare mythological paintings are as unusual as they are accomplished.
In the early "Forge of Vulcan," a positively radiant Apollo steps into a rather ordinary smithy to tell the blacksmith of the gods about his wife's infidelity.
It is an incongruous scene, this odd mixture of mythology and genre, but nonetheless it holds together and is surprisingly forceful.
In the later "Mars," one of the most subtly painted pictures in the show, Venus's erstwhile lover is ironically presented as uncharacteristically languid and depressed, made to look more than a little ridiculous by the contrast between his naked idleness and his elaborately decorated military helmet. 

In all of these paintings, as in almost everything else in the show, you are constantly aware of the artist's extraordinarily sharp capacity for visual observation, matched by a dispassionate but equally sharp sense of psychological insight.
No one before or since was a better "pure" painter than Velazquez.
Nor has any other painter better captured on canvas the subtleties of light and atmosphere, the elusiveness of passing time, or the illusiveness of the art of painting.
No wonder Manet and the impressionists later looked to him as a paradigm for their own ambitions.
Though very much of his own time, Velazquez's empiricism, skepticism and relativism also seem surprisingly modern. 

The exhibition, which was sponsored by the Banco Hispano Americano, will be on view until Jan. 7. 

