.START 

Jefferies Group Inc. named valuation analyst William M. Smith to the newly created post of managing director and senior vice president, institutional research sales, and signed an exclusive agreement to market the services of his former firm. 

The 45-year-old Mr. Smith, with his wife, Linda Zimbalist Smith, founded the Westport, Conn., firm of Zimbalist Smith in 1982. 

The move by Jefferies marks an expansion of the brokerage concern's emphasis on the institutional investment side of its business. "It represents our commitment to the institutional market," said Frank E. Baxter, Jefferies's president and chief executive. "A number of brokerages have pulled back from institutional but we believe there is a lot of potential in that marketplace." 

Mr. Smith, 45 years old, said his primary responsibility will be to market Jefferies's investment products and services to portfolio managers, and high on the list of services will be the valuations offered by Zimbalist Smith. 

Zimbalist Smith specializes in identifying undervalued companies that are likely targets for takeovers, buy-outs or restructurings, and assigning values to each of the possible outcomes.
In one recent study of stocks that were the subject of takeover rumors, the firm espouses selling rumored takeover stocks when they reach 75% of their merger value. 

Mrs. Smith will continue to run Zimbalist Smith, and Mr. Smith said he is now unaffiliated with the firm "except by marriage." The marketing agreement with Jefferies runs through the end of next year, and is renewable thereafter. 

Zimbalist Smith previously had marketed its services through W&D Securities, which provided execution services to Jefferies.
Mr. Smith served as president of W&D until his appointment to the new post at Jefferies on Oct. 1. 

"This is a recognition on Jefferies part that the institution can come to the company for both investment advice as well as Jefferies's highly-regarded execution ability" on securities trades, Mr. Smith said.
Jefferies specializes in block-trading in the so-called "third market," away from the major exchanges. 

Jefferies was founded by Boyd L. Jefferies, who pleaded guilty to two felony counts in April 1987 after being implicated in unlawful trading by stock speculator Ivan Boesky.
Mr. Jefferies, who resigned from the firm in 1987, helped the government in its investigation of securities-law violations and was given a suspended sentence and fined $250,000 in July. 

