.START 

The Agriculture Department has suspended a grain-exporting company believed to be controlled by Marc Rich, a fugitive commodity trader, from the government's export-subsidy program. 

Rep. Dan Glickman has pressed the department to stop subsidizing the grain sales of Richco Grain Ltd., after learning in April that the obscure company received $65 million in subsidies in the past four years.
A subsequent tally by the department showed Richco was one of the leading recipients of the subsidies, collecting more than $95 million since July 1986. 

At the urging of the Kansas Democrat, the department's inspector general investigated Richco's ties to Mr. Rich and his business partner, Pincus Green, who both fled to Switzerland in 1983 shortly before they were indicted on tax evasion, racketeering and other charges stemming from an alleged international oil-trading scheme to avoid paying millions in U.S. taxes. 

Department officials determined the multimillionaire fugitives own more than half of Richco's stock, with Mr. Rich holding 3,000 shares and Mr. Green holding about 1,100 of 8,000 shares outstanding, according to Mr. Glickman.
Although neither serves as a Richco director or officer, the officials concluded that Messrs.
Rich and Green still control the company, Mr. Glickman said. 

In confirming the first suspension in the history of the so-called Export Enhancement Program, a department official said: "There is some concern that Marc Rich and Pincus Green own enough stock between them that they could potentially have tremendous influence with Richco." 

Rep. Glickman, chairman of the House Agriculture subcommittee on wheat, soybeans and feed grains, expressed outrage over the case, saying the Richco subsidies undermined the credibility of an export program that is vital to U.S. farmers. "Not only is Marc Rich the largest tax evader in the history of the U.S., but he's a fugitive from justice," Rep. Glickman said in an interview. "How could the department keep doing business with him?" 

Robert Thomajan, an attorney for Richco, said the company will file an administrative appeal of the Sept. 29 suspension, which was recommended by Rolland Anderson, administrator of the department's Foreign Agricultural Service.
Mr. Thomajan wouldn't comment on whether Richco was indeed controlled by Messrs.
Rich and Green. 

Richco shares offices with Clarendon Ltd., a Rich-affiliated entity in Stamford, Conn., and has the same telephone number as Clarendon.
Ben Berte, a Richco commodity trader in Stamford, declined to comment. 

Unlike Clarendon, Richco was never charged with any wrongdoing.
In a 1984 civil settlement, Clarendon and Marc Rich & Co., the giant commodity-trading concern based in Zug, Switzerland, pleaded guilty to fraud and tax-evasion charges and paid $150 million to the U.S. government as well as contempt-of-court fines totaling $21 million.
In addition, the companies gave up as much as $40 million in tax deductions.
But the Internal Revenue Service is still offering a huge reward for information leading to Mr. Rich's arrest. 

Until recently, Richco had been competing with such big multinationals as Cargill Inc., Continental Grain Co. and Louis Dreyfus Corp. for export subsidies.
Under the Export Enhancement Program, the companies sell U.S. grain to customers overseas at prices below U.S. market prices.
To make up the difference, the companies then collect "bonuses," or subsidies, in the form of surplus grain from the Agriculture Department.
The program's primary purpose is to counter heavily subsidized exports from the European Community. 

Richco has collected bonuses on 73 overseas sales since mid-1986, according to the department's tally.
Most of the transactions were barley sales to Saudi Arabia and Romania and wheat sales to the Soviet Union and China. "It's difficult to know what their profit is," said Mr. Glickman.
Typically, grain exporters make 2% profit on such sales. 

Under the 1984 settlement, Mr. Rich's U.S. affiliates were allowed to deal with the U.S. government so long as they weren't acting as "alter egos" of Mr. Rich.
Although Agriculture Department officials thought they couldn't prove Richco was such an alter ego, according to Mr. Glickman, they still concluded that they had legal grounds for suspending Richco because the company is under Mr. Rich's control. 

In investigating Richco's capitalization, added Gregory Frazier, a Glickman aide, "they traced the line of ownership back through Marc Rich & Co. to Rich himself." 

