.START 

Steamed milk may make great cappuccino, but would people drink it all the time? 

Dairy producers are experimenting with new technologies -- including steaming cholesterol out of milk and ice cream and filtering milk through pressurized carbon dioxide -- that aim to make dairy products healthier without detracting very much from their taste and texture. 

"There's no question the market is there," says Mona Doyle, president of Consumer Network, a Philadelphia-based consumer research and marketing concern. "There's a very broad interest in low cholesterol across a spectrum of ages." 

Consider that between 1985 and 1988, whole-milk production in the U.S. declined 12% to 2.83 billion gallons, according to the Milk Industry Foundation.
But low-fat milk output increased 16% to 2.65 billion gallons, and skim-milk production increased 48% to 515 million gallons. 

So far, efforts to reduce cholesterol in dairy products have focused on reducing fat content, which often alters taste, or developing fat substitutes, which can invite lengthy reviews by the Food and Drug Administration.
Both olestra -- a fat substitute introduced by Procter & Gamble Co. in 1987 -- and Simplesse -- a fat substitute unveiled by Monsanto Co. last year -- are still under FDA scrutiny.
The latest entry, a nonfat ice cream with cellulose gel introduced a few weeks ago by Kraft General Foods, is also expected to attract FDA attention. 

The new technologies, because they focus on removing cholesterol from fat rather than replacing fat with another ingredient, will probably face much less red tape in Washington. 

But there are other problems.
Dairies are generally small, low-margin businesses that are notoriously conservative about investing in new products and equipment.
Moreover, while the new technologies remove cholesterol, they leave in butterfat.
And butterfat can stimulate the body to produce cholesterol on its own, which some nutritionists believe may be more of a problem than the cholesterol in the food.
Experts also say that for some people a diet high in fat, including butterfat, appears to raise the risk of getting certain kinds of cancer. 

The big dairy companies -- including Dairymen Inc., Borden Inc. and Kraft -- are close-mouthed about the new cholesterol-reduction processes, saying only that they are watching them with interest. 

But marketing specialists say that despite the hurdles, it may be only a matter of time before the industry giants follow the lead of small entrepreneurs. 

In Burnsville, Minn., OmegaSource Corp. has built a pilot plant that uses steam to remove 93% to 94% of the cholesterol from butterfat, says Richard D. Kiley, the company's president.
The process involves isolating the butterfat, heating it and moving it across a series of stainless steel plates and rings, forcing contact with steam.
The technique is close to commercial application, says Mr. Kiley, who estimates the process will increase the price of a gallon of whole milk by less than five cents. 

Mr. Kiley stumbled onto the technology.
In the mid-1980s, he was part of a General Mills Inc. group trying to neutralize the smell of fish oil.
Experimenting with the steam process, researchers discovered that it also removed cholesterol.
But General Mills decided against pursuing the technology, Mr. Kiley says, and licensed it exclusively to OmegaSource for 20 years. 

Ben & Jerry's Homemade Inc., among other food companies, is taking a close look at the process.
Jim Miller, director of manufacturing for the Vermont-based ice cream maker, has been experimenting with ice creams using butterfat from the OmegaSource plant.
The big question: Will the steam extract too many of the flavor nodes in the butterfat?
Mr. Miller says he is optimistic that the taste will match that of the company's current premium offerings. 

Another process designed to remove cholesterol, known as supercritical fluid extraction, uses pressurized carbon dioxide.
So far, costs are high -- about 13 cents for a gallon of milk, says Richard A. Novak, senior engineer at Supercritical Processing Inc., an Allentown, Pa., company that has been studying the technology. 

But the process may have other benefits.
Syed Rizvi, a Cornell University professor of food engineering, says it can help reduce the unhealthy saturated fats in butterfat that are still present after cholesterol has been removed.
It is still unclear what effect the process will have on taste. 

Still another approach to the cholesterol problem requires more marketing savvy than technological innovation.
Jersey Farms International Inc. of Charlotte, N.C., is trying to sell a concoction of soy and other vegetable fats to dairies.
Dairies would add the blend to skim milk, making the product taste something akin to whole milk. 

The Jersey Farms product contains less than two milligrams of cholesterol a serving, so it qualifies as "cholesterol free" under FDA regulations.
The idea of mixing skim milk and vegetable fats isn't new, but marketing the product as a cholesterol-free food is, says Pat Arcadipane, Jersey Farms's president and a former Citibank executive. 

But Jersey Farms still has to convince skeptical dairy producers that the product will sell.
One problem is what to call it.
Regulators in North Carolina have informally approved a label saying "Fortified Processed Skim Milk With 3% Vegetable Fat." Mr. Arcadipane says the product should be in groceries in Charlotte, the company's first target market, within a month. 

Other approaches to offering cholesterol-free products, including the use of enzymes to neutralize cholesterol in butterfat, are still on the drawing board.
But industry executives say demand for healthier foods will accelerate the research.
Says Mr. Novak in Allentown: "When you can go into a store and buy bananas that say, `No cholesterol, ' you know there's a concern out there." 

