.START 

British biologists said they developed a shortcut for making artificial antibody parts that promises to become a basic tool in biotechnology. 

Researchers in Cambridge, England, said they devised a laboratory technique that can make key parts of animal antibody molecules in as little as three days.
Today's most common technology for the task -- widely used monoclonal antibodies -- typically takes a month or more.
The new method will likely speed development of medical diagnostic products, and has already stirred intense interest among major drug companies. 

More significantly, the British discovery brings the world biotechnology industry closer to its goal of being able to fabricate designer antibodies at will -- an achievement that would greatly speed drug research. "What {the British team} has done is a very important step in this technology," said Richard Lerner, director of the Scripps Clinic's research institute, a La Jolla, Calif., nonprofit organization that has been pursuing similar research. 

The new method was developed by scientists at Cambridge's Laboratory of Molecular Biology, the same lab where monoclonal-antibody technology was invented in 1975.
Called "single-domain antibodies," the method strings together several already-known laboratory techniques to manufacture artificial antibody parts.
Although other scientists have been working on similar research, the British team is the first to publish research demonstrating such methods can produce a potent working antibody.
Their paper is to be published in today's edition of Nature, the British scientific journal. 

Antibody molecules are the body's front-line defense against disease.
They seek out and bind with invading bacteria or toxins, activating the body's immune system.
Since 1975, the most common method for manufacturing artificial antibodies -- used in diagnostic products, medicines and chemical analysis -- has been to fuse an antibody-producing cell with a cancerous cell.
The resulting cell multiplies like its cancerous parent but also produces antibodies.
Lab technicians then harvest the product-monoclonal antibodies. 

The Cambridge team skipped that long process entirely.
Instead, they worked with the genes the body uses when making its own antibodies.
An antibody molecule has three parts: a constant portion that's identical in all antibodies and alerts the immune system; and two widely varying segments tailored to recognize and bind with specific foreign intruders.
Each antibody-making cell has genes controlling the production of these segments. 

The Cambridge team isolated the genes for one of the varying antibody segments, the so-called heavy chain, and used standard lab techniques to make thousands of gene copies.
They then inserted the gene copies into common laboratory bacteria.
The bacteria, treating the new genes as their own, quickly produced the heavy chains.
When the scientists tested the heavy chains, they found they bound almost as well to their intended foreign targets as did the original complete antibody molecules.
Their effectiveness was comparable to that of monoclonal antibodies. 

Some products may be immediately possible.
For instance, a Nature commentary suggested that such heavy chains could be tailored to find and eliminate unwanted chemicals in the blood, such as medicine overdoses.
But further research is already under way to improve the technolology.
The Scripps team, collaborating with Stratagene Inc., La Jolla, Calif., is developing a variant method to allow rapid production of both the heavy chain and the other variable antibody segment, the so-called light chain. 

Ultimately, said Scripps's Mr. Lerner, such technology may allow scientists to build a library of artificial antibody parts that could be tapped quickly for research against any disease.
Commercial interest is intense.
Several companies, including Britain's Wellcome PLC and West Germany's Behringwerke AG, are in contact with the lab's government overseer about possible further collaboration. 

