.START 

In 1980, Kim Hyon-hui was an attractive 18-year-old studying languages at a North Korean college and looking forward to the life of a housewife.
By Nov. 29, 1987, she was a trained terrorist and a mass murderer. 

That day Miss Kim, with another North Korean agent posing as her father, put a bomb concealed in a radio on a South Korean airliner before the two disembarked in Abu Dhabi.
Hours later, the explosive destroyed the Boeing 707 over the Indian Ocean, killing every one of the 115 people on board. 

Captured in Bahrain, the man bit into a poison capsule and died.
Miss Kim was taken into custody.
She was put aboard a chartered South Korean jet, gagged so she couldn't bite her tongue and flown to South Korea. "She cried all the way," says a South Korean intelligence agent who accompanied Miss Kim on the flight. 

This year she was convicted -- and sentenced to hang.
But the South Korean government is expected to pardon her once she has exhausted her appeals. 

The South Koreans aim to use the now-repentant young woman to propagandize against the wicked ways of the North.
The South Koreans have published a booklet on the case and in 1988 staged a brief televised press conference here in which a weeping Miss Kim confessed to being a North Korean agent. 

The story of Miss Kim thus provides a rare portrait of a young woman caught between two sides in a nether world of intelligence and terrorism.
In a scenario reminiscent of "The Little Drummer Girl," John LeCarre's novel, Miss Kim worked for one side and now must perform for the other. 

While her legal appeals are pending, reporters aren't allowed to speak with Miss Kim.
But South Korean intelligence officials have continued to investigate the case, and to interrogate Miss Kim, for hundreds of hours.
In extensive interviews conducted recently by The Wall Street Journal in Seoul, two of the South Korean intelligence officials who have questioned Miss Kim almost from the moment of her capture discussed the case in detail.
They also provided videotapes, which they selected themselves, of the high points of her interrogation. 

The two officials are a bespectacled 45-year-old man and a 25-year-old woman, whom Miss Kim now calls "Onni," or big sister.
Both are members of South Korea's NSPA, the National Security Planning Agency. (As members of the NSPA, which has its similarities to the Central Intelligence Agency, the agents weren't allowed to divulge their true names.) 

The daughter of a diplomat, Miss Kim lived in Cuba in the 1960s when her father (her true father) was posted to the North Korean embassy there.
As a child she was terrified of Americans.
Her father took her to the beach a few years after the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion, which so embarrassed President Kennedy, and, pointing north, told her that the Americans might come again.
The anecdote is offered up by the male NSPA official.
Miss Kim has "a very good memory," he adds.
She even remembers the Spanish phrase for summoning an ice-cream vendor in Havana. 

When she and her family returned to Pyongyang, the capital of North Korea, Miss Kim proved to be a good student and excellent linguist.
She ranked first in most of her classes.
By February 1980, Miss Kim was in her sophomore year at the Foreign Language College in Pyongyang, majoring in Japanese.
But one day she and two other students were suddenly called in for an interview with a government official.
Later, she was interviewed alone.
In March, the official showed up once again, this time to tell her to turn in her library books, pay her outstanding school fees and make the most of one last night at home.
She was being "summoned by the {Communist} party," she says, for duties that were a complete mystery to her. 

Why Miss Kim was tapped isn't certain, although it obviously may have had to do with her father's government position and her own demonstrated facility for languages. 

Her family was of two minds about what was happening -- proud that Miss Kim was being honored by the state and distressed that she had to leave home.
But her father related to her a Korean proverb: "When the tiger dies, he leaves behind his skin, but when a man dies, he leaves behind only his name." Make good use of the Kim name, he told her. (It's an odd thought because Kim is a very common Korean surname.) 

The next day Miss Kim was driven away in a government car.
And in the ensuing seven years, eight months, she was allowed just three visits to her family, of three days each.
She was so isolated that she didn't learn until months after the fact that her 16-year-old brother had died. ("She felt loneliness in her bones," says Onni, Miss Kim's interrogator.) 

Miss Kim was provided with an alias and taken to Kimsong Political-Military College, a training base for North Korean espionage agents in Pyongyang.
From 1981 to 1983, she roomed in a guest house with a young Japanese woman who could tutor her in the language and manners of Japan.
The two attended classes in a lecture hall that was partitioned off so that various pairs of agents-in-training were never able to catch sight of fellow students.
Lectures covered economics, political ideology and small-arms fire. (Also long marches and the use of codes.) 

In 1984, Miss Kim was paired with Kim Sung-il, a North Korean agent in his late 60s who was to pose as her father.
In the summer of 1984, to practice their cover as Japanese tourists, they toured Europe using forged Japanese passports. 

The North Koreans' decision to use Miss Kim, by then 25 years old, and Mr. Kim (no actual kin of hers) to bomb a South Korean airliner was made in October 1987, according to what Miss Kim has told interrogators.
The goal was to disrupt the pending 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul, by discouraging nations from sending teams for fear of terrorism.
The target: Korean Air flight 858, which flies from Baghdad to Abu Dhabi (mainly picking up Koreans working on Middle Eastern construction projects), and then on to Bangkok and Seoul. 

The bomb was to be in two parts: A timer and plastic explosive in a Panasonic RF-082 radio was to detonate a liquid explosive concealed in a liquor bottle.
Mr. Kim was to set the timer.
Miss Kim knew how to do it if something happened to him.
Despite the violence of the mission, she felt honored to be given such an important assignment, she would later explain. 

In mid-November, Miss Kim, Mr. Kim and two other North Korean agents went to Moscow, Budapest, Vienna and Belgrade.
In the Yugoslav capital, the other agents gave the bomb to the Kims.
The pair flew on to Baghdad under the Japanese name Hachiya. (Miss Kim even carried Japanese cosmetics in her bags for the sake of verisimilitude.) In Baghdad, the two were to connect with flight 858. 

As midnight approached, a tired female security official at Baghdad airport searched Miss Kim as she prepared to board the aircraft.
The official found the radio in Miss Kim's carry-on bag, and tossed the batteries -- necessary to trigger the explosive -- into a wastebasket. 

Flustered, Miss Kim retrieved the batteries.
And Mr. Kim protested the confiscation. "Why do you search us so severely?" he demanded.
Mr. Kim replaced the batteries in the radio, and turned it on to demonstrate that it worked.
The security guard let them pass. 

While waiting to board, Mr. Kim set the bomb to explode nine hours later, which would leave the conspirators time to escape.
Despite her years of programming, when Miss Kim first saw the people she was about to kill, she wondered if it was wrong.
But she went ahead anyway, telling herself the sacrifice must be made to foster the historic goal of reuniting Korea under North Korean dominance.
During the three-hour flight to Abu Dhabi, Mr. Kim put a vinyl bag containing cigarettes, the radio and the liquor bottle full of liquid explosive in the overhead rack.
Miss Kim took a nap. 

She and Mr. Kim walked off the plane in Abu Dhabi, leaving the bag and its contents in the rack.
It was 3 a.m. Sunday. 

But a snag developed in their getaway plans.
The Kims had intended to wait in the airport a few hours, then make their escape on a flight to Rome.
But on leaving the KAL plane, they were asked to show either a visa for Abu Dhabi -- which they did not have -- or tickets on a continuing flight.
Mr. Kim produced tickets to Bahrain, which had been meant only as a ruse.
But Abu Dhabi airport authorities kept their passports and their tickets, and steered them, quite against their plan, onto the Bahrain flight. 

In Bahrain, the two Kims found flights to Rome fully booked until Tuesday.
They were to be stuck there, victims of their own subterfuge. 

Meanwhile, thousands of miles away, KAL flight 858 was high over the Indian Ocean, approaching the Burma coast en route to Bangkok.
Passengers included several South Korean executives, a South Korean diplomat and scores of construction workers.
Radioing Rangoon air traffic control, the pilot reported the jet had reached "Urdis," a geographic waypoint on its flight plan.
In the normal course of events, he would report flying over the next waypoint, "Tavoy," in 20 minutes. 

But 40 minutes later, KAL's manager in Bangkok flashed this message across the airline's communication system: "Checked Bangkok air traffic control; said Korean Air 858 was no report over Tavoy." 

The jet had vanished. 

Korean Air officials began scanning lists of passengers, especially the 15 who got off in Abu Dhabi, because of growing suspicions that the plane had been bombed by North Koreans.
The Korean Air branch chief in Abu Dhabi thought the two Hachiyas looked especially suspicious.
The itinerary he had for them on his computer screen showed previous stops in Eastern Europe, including Vienna and Belgrade, cities frequented by North Korean agents.
And though they were on a long trip, the "Hachiyas" hadn't checked any bags.
The KAL office in Bahrain was asked to try to locate them. 

A Korean Air official there began phoning hotels and found that the couple had checked into the Regency.
The official also checked with Bahrain passport control and got their passport numbers. 

What he learned added to the sense of urgency.
Japanese diplomats said the number on the young woman's passport (1530-1650) belonged to someone else, a man.
She must be using a false passport. 

So, early Tuesday morning, a young Japanese diplomat in Bahrain rushed to the Hotel Regency, arriving at about 7.
The "Hachiyas" had just checked out.
As it happened, they were on their way to catch an 8:30 flight to Rome.
The diplomat hastened to the airport, found the two Kims going through passport control, and asked Bahrain officials to arrest them. 

Mr. Kim immediately bit into the cyanide capsule he had concealed in a cigarette.
He collapsed and died.
Miss Kim pulled out her own poison cigarette, but a policewoman snatched it away.
Miss Kim was able to grab it back and bite into the tip.
She got a whiff of the cyanide but survived. 

A team of South Korean intelligence officials, including Onni, flew to Bahrain and put the extradited Miss Kim on a chartered jet to Seoul. "She was fearful, even panicky," Onni says of the young woman. "She had been told {by the North Koreans} that if captured she would be tortured, that parts of her body would be amputated and that possibly she would be killed." At first she refused to eat and was fed intravenously. 

Then the questioning began, employing a good-cop, bad-cop technique that works well in the movies.
Onni would sit beside Miss Kim, appearing sympathetic, sometimes offering her food from her own dinner plate to ease Miss Kim's fears that her captors were poisoning her.
The male interrogator faced Miss Kim, firing questions, often harshly. 

The questioning was surreptitiously videotaped (a camera was concealed in the ceiling).
Miss Kim appears in the tape dressed casually in slacks, her hair tousled.
But she is slumped in her chair with her hands folded between her knees, with an impassive expression on her face.
At first she pretends to be a Japanese tourist who knows nothing of any bomb.
Day after day, to question after question, Miss Kim says, "I don't know." 

But when agents start asking close questions about the contents of the apartment Miss Kim claims to have in Japan, her story begins to fall apart. 

Male agent: "Was there a television?" 

Miss Kim: "Yes, a television." 

Male agent: "Black or color TV?" 

Miss Kim: "Color TV" 

Male agent: "A color TV.
What company's product was it?" 

Miss Kim: "Azalea." 

Male agent: "Azalea?" 

Miss Kim has just given the name of a TV set sold only in North Korea, her interrogators say.
She is then asked to describe the land around Tokyo's Narita airport, and can't.
She is asked the name of a former prime minister of Japan, and gets it wrong.
She is asked where the driver's seat is in a Japanese car.
Left side, she says.
Wrong again. 

With her resolve weakening, Miss Kim is driven around Seoul and given a taste of the freedom she might enjoy if she decides to cooperate.
By now, she appears more animated in the videotapes, smiling occasionally and at one point even laughing.
And on the eighth day of questioning, she drops the pretense that she is Japanese and begins to give her real name. 

Male agent: "Chim?
Chin?
Kim?" 

Miss Kim: "Kim," (writing it down), "this is it." (Embarrassed laugh.) "I'm like a country girl, I hardly know anything." 

Male agent: "That's all right.
Just keep talking." 

Bit by bit, the rest of the story comes out. 

In the press conference in Seoul Jan. 15, 1988, Miss Kim admitted that she and the late Mr. Kim had indeed bombed flight 858. 

"She didn't want to do the press conference," says Onni, her interrogator and confidante. "Even at the last minute she begged not to, fearing what would happen to her family" in North Korea.
Defectors usually ask not to be publicized because they have been warned in the North, they say, that reprisals will be made, families imprisoned.
The fate of Miss Kim's father, mother, surviving younger brother and younger sister isn't known. 

The South Koreans insist Miss Kim hasn't been tortured and wasn't brainwashed. "We were trying to win her confidence, and beating her would just have hardened her," the male interrogator says.
North Korea, for its part, says the South Koreans have made the whole thing up.
In response to questions about the fate of Miss Kim's family, the North Koreans say they don't exist -- that Miss Kim must be a South Korean agent. 

The CIA actually has verified aspects of Miss Kim's confession.
She identified for American agents the photograph of a North Korean agent who had provided safe haven for her and Mr. Kim in Budapest, and she described the house.
The North Korean agent, Han Song-sam, is known to CIA agents, and her description of the house matches the recollections of CIA men who have seen it. 

Still confined at an undisclosed location in Seoul, Miss Kim has "stabilized emotionally," Onni says. "She has taken an interest in religion" and reads the Bible and Buddhist works in the evenings.
Meanwhile, Miss Kim still is being interrogated, with a session every morning and one every afternoon. "We want to know everything" about her and North Korea, the male NSPA interrogator says. 

If she ultimately is pardoned, Miss Kim will play a new role as a propagandist against North Korea, made available by the South for press conferences and other public displays.
Eventually, a South Korean official says, Miss Kim might be allowed to live privately in South Korea, pursuing the quiet life of a housewife that she had once envisioned for herself. 

