.START 

Toyota Motor Corp. plans to more than double its North American car and truck-building capacity by 1995, in a move that will turn up the pressure on the Big Three U.S. auto makers in an already glutted U.S. auto market. 

Toyota, the No. 1 Japanese auto maker, already has the capacity to build about 360,000 cars in the U.S. and Canada.
But the company wants to be able to build 750,000 cars and trucks in North America by the mid-1990s, said Robert B. McCurry, executive vice president of Toyota's U.S. sales arm.
With that added North American output, Toyota expects to boost its total U.S. car and truck sales to about 1.5 million vehicles a year from about 950,000 vehicles expected for 1990, he said. 

"To do what we want to do takes more production" facilities, Mr. McCurry said. 

Toyota already has announced plans to start building 100,000 trucks a year by 1991 at a Fremont, Calif., plant it operates in a joint venture with General Motors Corp.
But Toyota will have to add factory space to build another 300,000 vehicles to meet its 1995 goal.
Mr. McCurry didn't elaborate on how or where Toyota would accomplish this expansion -- the equivalent of about 1 1/2 Big Three auto plants.
But the company has more than 1,000 acres of property around its existing Georgetown, Ky., car facility it could use. 

Toyota's aggressive U.S. sales and factory expansion plans will intensify the combat among the Big Three and Japanese auto makers in the U.S. market. "Competition will be the `Nightmare on Elm Street'," said Mr. McCurry, referring to a gory film. "There are too many players in a volatile market." 

Japanese auto makers are on track to build more than one million cars and trucks in the U.S. this year, and some analysts estimate that could triple within five years.
Honda Motor Co., for example, is opening its second U.S. auto plant next month.
U.S. car and truck sales, however, are expected to stay flat at about 15 million vehicles a year. 

The result: Auto makers are starting a battle for sales and market share that is cutting sharply into profits, particularly at the Big Three.
GM, Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. all may have had losses in their core North American automotive operations during the third quarter, analysts say.
The Big Three not only had to cut production to shrink inventories, but had to offer discounts averaging an estimated $850 per vehicle to prop up sales during the period. 

Japanese car makers also are squeezing their profit margins in a bid to boost market share.
Toyota, for example, held price increases on its best-selling model, the Camry, to less than $100 on most versions of the car.
Further, Toyota has offered discounts of as much as $1,500 per Camry to dealers in order to support production of the car at the new Kentucky plant. 

But Japanese auto makers are gaining share in the U.S. car market in return for their efforts, while GM and Chrysler are not.
GM and Chrysler have together lost two percentage points of car-market share through the first nine months of this year, while Toyota, Honda and Mazda Motor Corp. have gained two percentage points combined. 

Meanwhile, Mr. McCurry said at a product preview yesterday that Toyota plans to step up its assault on another of Detroit's most profitable niches: the minivan market.
Toyota plans to launch in March 1990 an all-new minivan, designed in the U.S., that Mr. McCurry said should boost the company's U.S. minivan sales to 40,000 to 50,000 a year from about 12,000 a year currently. 

