.START 

The supercharged insanity of a Wall Street trading floor during the go-go years of the bull market -- as told by one of the frantically upwardly mobile Ivy League types who witnessed it.
Sounds good, a real story of the '80s. 

Especially since the young bond salesman in question worked at Salomon Bros., the most macho, at times the most powerful and at other times the most troubled of the major Wall Street firms.
Even Tom Wolfe sought out Salomon in his search for the Masters of the Universe he dissected in "Bonfire of the Vanities." 

Salomon had in its employ two of the most interesting businessmen of the decade.
Chairman John H. Gutfreund, a shy intellectual who nonetheless thrived on corporate intrigue, turned this gang of ruffians into a Wall Street power until, as his many detractors say, his second marriage to would-be socialite Susan left John's heart if not his head in the salons of Paris rather than in Salomon's gymnasium-sized trading floor. (Mr.
Gutfreund has recently thrown himself back into the job, trying to return Salomon to its former glory.) 

Then there was Lewis Ranieri, a fat, profane guy from Brooklyn whose rise from mailroom attendant to impresario of the huge mortgage-backed-securities market and unlikely heir apparent to the chairman ended just as dramatically with his abrupt firing by Mr. Gutfreund in the muggy summer of 1987. 

Unfortunately, faced with the book-breaking choice of telling their story or his, Michael Lewis picked his.
Even this might have made a compelling tale had Mr. Lewis given us some straightforward information: What was it like to be in the pressure cooker of a trading floor?
What values guided him and his yuppie friends as they made more money than they deserved?
And what did they do with it all?
But in "Liar's Poker: Rising Through the Wreckage on Wall Street" (Norton, 249 pages, $18.95), Mr. Lewis takes an insufferably glib attitude toward it all, as if he had been just a distant observer right from the start who stayed on long enough to gather a few choice anecdotes. 

The best of these gets right to the heart of Salomon's macho culture.
Mr. Gutfreund, who in the firm's heyday in 1985 and 1986 graced numerous magazine covers as the newly annointed "King of Wall Street," walks up to the firm's best trader and challenges him to one hand of liar's poker, a game played with the serial numbers on a dollar bill rather than a deck of cards.
He proposes stakes of $1 million.
The trader, also said to be Salomon's best liar's poker player, considers the odds, and then calls the chairman's bluff: He dares Mr. Gutfreund to play the hand for $10 million.
The chairman walks away. (A spokesman for Mr. Gutfreund denies the incident ever took place.) 

Mr. Lewis does a nice job describing the uncouth, juvenile behavior of the firm's mortgage-backed-securities department under Mr. Ranieri, who now heads his own investment bank, Ranieri, Wilson & Co. Department pranksters whooped it up, removing the clothes from the suitcase of a colleague about to embark on a trip; keeping clients on hold while they enjoyed a Friday afternoon food binge; or putting Salomon limousines at the disposal of friends. 

On the other hand, Mr. Lewis shows how a Salomon trader controlled costs by stiffing a client too small to matter.
The experienced Salomon trader, unable to unload some doggie AT&T bonds he had purchased, persuades young Mr. Lewis to pitch them to a client as a great deal.
He does, and the client eventually is fired.
The bonds had plunged in price, but that was OK: Salomon no longer owned them. 

Still, Mr. Lewis's narrative never gathers momentum, perhaps because he scants the amazing roller-coaster ride Salomon's fortunes took in the '80s.
Many of Salomon's senior people clearly got carried away with their new-found success and glamour.
A Salomon managing director once said to me, "If you think a million dollars a year is good money, you must not have kids." Meanwhile, hundreds of yuppies like Mr. Lewis showed up to ride the gravy train. 

Other firms were starting to make most of their money from investment banking, but Salomon's macho bond men never respected that business enough to let it develop properly.
In the latter part of 1986, as the bull market for bonds drew to a close, the Salomon money machine began falling apart.
Many Salomon traders and investment bankers left, and some who didn't were pushed out as Salomon became paralyzed by internal strife. 

But rather than capturing this Machiavellian drama, Mr. Lewis returns to his own personal journey, which comes to a highly unsatisfactory conclusion in early 1988, when he quits, still without a clue as to what he was doing at Salomon or why he was leaving. "My job became nothing more than showing up every morning to do what I had already done," he writes.
But couldn't the same be said for just about everybody? 

No matter how routine Mr. Lewis and his contemporaries may see it, companies and governments still need money and financial advice; institutions and individuals still need to buy stocks and bonds.
And whatever else you can say about old veterans like Mr. Gutfreund and Mr. Ranieri, now that the luster has once again fallen from their business and their own careers have sustained mighty blows, they still understand that -- and they still show up for work every day. 

Mr. Swartz is a page-one editor at the Journal. 

