.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

THE CONTINENTAL CONGRESS SET UP the Post Office in 1774 and for two centuries the U.S. took it for granted.
Benjamin Franklin, the first postmaster general, named his son-in-law as his comptroller and rewarding the faithful became an integral part of U.S. postal politics.
Patronage aside, the Post Office financed railroads, highways and airways and through rain, hail and gloom of night it delivered the mail. 

In the 1960s, however, the system unraveled.
Volume exploded as business expanded (by 1963 business accounted for 80% of all mail), but facilities, management, equipment and wages failed to keep up.
When 152,000 postal workers struck at 671 locations in March 1970 -- and the Army had to sort the mail -- Congress finally acted. 

On July 1, 1971, President Nixon's postmaster general, William Blount, left the cabinet and became the postmaster general of a new, theoretically self-supporting, U.S.-owned corporation.
The patronage-free Postal Service would set rates, bargain with employees and raise its own capital.
Congress would approve the board (named by the president), approve the budget and make good on deficits. 

Since then, the Postal Service has added overnight "Express Mail" (the first new class since 1918), bulk processing of parcel post and business mail and other services.
Financially, it has alternated between surplus and deficit.
In 1988, it had a loss of $597 million handling 160 billion pieces of mail; in 1970, its loss was $6.3 billion on 85 billion pieces. 

The newest postmaster general, banker Anthony Frank of San Francisco, has worked on new presorting techniques that he hopes will cut costs by $800 million a year and is opening mini-post offices in chain stores.
He also talks of selling bonds through post office windows (an idea that Congress will likely ignore).
As head of First Nationwide Financial, Tony Frank built the bank's assets from $422 million to $17 billion.
That's the kind of magic the Postal Service still needs. 

