.START 

A group of air-express companies has sued the U.S. Postal Service, alleging that the agency's low rates for overseas delivery represents "unfair and illegal competition." 

The suit, filed in federal court in Wilmington, Del., involves a rate change that the Postal Service made in April for express delivery overseas of packages weighing one-half pound or less.
The agency lowered the cost of the service to $8.75 from $18.
In June, the cost was fixed at $10.75.
By comparison, private carriers charge about $20. 

The plaintiffs contend that the Postal Service failed to have the reduced cost approved by the Postal Rate Commission, an independent federal agency that reviews proposed rate changes.
Moreover, the plaintiffs argue that the low rate takes advantage of the monopoly that the Postal Service has in other classes of mail -- a monopoly, the plaintiffs say, that allows it to subsidize international express delivery. 

The plaintiffs are asking the court to enjoin the Postal Servive from offering the $10.75 rate or any rate that isn't "fair and equitable." 

"That rate is below cost," says Robert Kendall, an attorney in the Philadelphia firm of Schnader, Harrison, Segal & Lewis, which is representing the air-express companies. 

A Postal Service spokesman said the agency hadn't received a copy of the lawsuit.
But he did acknowledge that the Postal Service didn't obtain approval to lower the rate from the Postal Rate Commission.
The commission, the spokesman said, is required to review changes only in domestic rates. 

David Stover, general counsel at the Postal Rate Commission in Washington, agreed that the commission has "never asserted jurisdiction over international rates." He added, however: "There's never been a court case, so we might be told we're wrong." The Postal Service said the lower rate has been responsible for a significant increase in its volume of international overnight packages.
In September, the agency shipped about 242,300 packages, a 66% increase from the year-earlier month. 

The companies involved in the suit are: DHL Worldwide Express's DHL Airways Inc. subsidiary in Redwood City, Calif.; Dworkin-Cosell Interair Courier Services, New York; Federal Express Corp., Memphis, Tenn.; Intertrade Courier International Inc., Miami; TNT Skypak Inc., a U.S. subsidiary of TNT Ltd. of Australia; and UPS Air Forwarding Inc., a subsidiary of United Parcel Service Inc., Greenwich, Conn.
Two industry associations are also parties to the suit: the Air Courier Conference of America/International Committee and the International Express Carriers Conference, both based in Washington. 

