.START 

The battlefield of politics is like the battlefield of war; old tactics rarely win new battles.
If the results from California over the past two years are any indication, the victorious tacticians for the 1990 elections will be the Democrats. 

Traditionally, urban voters received electoral information via the political machine.
The machine won votes by having precinct captains talk to each voter in a neighborhood about his problems and get city government to solve those problems.
Since the rise of suburbs and electronic media, however, it has become cheaper for candidates to contact voters without going through a machine.
But necessarily this has led to mass, not individual, appeals. 

Now California Democrats are revolutionizing campaigns for legislative office in large districts.
They are using grass-roots volunteers and paid precinct captains to ask voters about partisan preferences, positions on important issues, and basic demographic information.
These findings then are used to run separate campaigns among groups of voters, tailored to push individuals' hot-buttons. 

Direct mail, telephone banks and precinct walkers are used to tell a voter that the Democratic candidate agrees with his views on the one or two issues most important to that voter.
Once a voter tells a volunteer that he supports the party hopeful, Democrats produce an absentee-ballot application for the voter and maintain contact until he returns the ballot. 

The Democrats now can run powerful campaigns that, because they are targeted so selectively, go unnoticed -- and thus uncountered -- until after the voters have decided.
Since each voter hears exactly what he wants to hear, each has little reason not to vote Democratic. 

These new tactics were displayed most recently in the special congressional election to succeed Majority Whip Tony Coelho (D., Modesto).
Democratic State Assemblyman Gary Condit won with 57% of the vote.
An astounding 40% of his votes came from absentee ballots (10% would normally be high).
Democratic managers said they had delivered 24,000 absentee-ballot applications, and that 20,000 -- 80% -- were returned.
With more than 100,000 Democrats registered to vote in this district, it's clear that the managers mailed the ballots only to pre-selected Democrats. 

Former Gov. Jerry Brown, chairman of the state Democratic Party, boasted after the Condit victory, "When the Republican mud began to roll through the streets of Modesto it was too late because one-third of the Democrats had already voted." 

Other examples of this system at work: 

-- 1988 -- Michael Dukakis almost won California, losing only 51% to 48%.
The Almanac of American Politics says that "the Democrats' strategy {was} to reinvent the precinct organization. . . . The Democrats' organizational efforts were probably worth a couple of points. . . ." Tactics worth "a couple of points" in a presidential race will be worth more in less visible legislative races.
Not surprisingly, two GOP Assembly incumbents were defeated for re-election in California that November, the first Republican Assembly incumbents defeated in the state since 1980. 

-- 1989 -- "Pro-choice" Republican Tricia Hunter of the San Diego area defeated a "pro-life" Republican by 100 votes in a special Assembly primary, largely because of a phone and computer campaign run courtesy of Democratic Speaker Willie Brown's political operatives.
The operatives identified pro-choice Democrats and emphasized the abortion issue among them. (Special-election procedures allow cross-party voting.) In a district where 33% of the voters are registered Democrats, the only Democratic candidate on the ballot received 6.6%; the remainder voted for Ms. Hunter. 

California has long led the nation in political marketing, so these results are of national significance.
Indeed, the techniques already appear to be spreading.
In another special election last month, for Jim Wright's congressional seat in Texas, the GOP candidate "won on Election Day," as they say, but lost the race when now-Rep.
Preston Geren carved out a 3,000-vote margin in the absentee ballots, which constituted 20% of the total cast. 

Why have Republicans, traditionally the leaders in election technology, been caught flat-footed?
They're the victims of complacency born of past success, and they've tended to farm out work to consultants instead of centralizing campaign commands as these tactics require.
Meantime, Democrats, seeing defeats occur when marginal constituencies switched parties, had more of an incentive to plot a way to check that slippage.
Now the GOP will be lucky to get a rudimentary counter-apparatus in gear by next year's off-year balloting. 

This new system effectively recreates the political machine for legislative races in districts sufficiently large that standard door-to-door contact or an existing personal following aren't sufficient to secure victory for a candidate.
A computer makes communication cost-efficient by creating tiny clusters of people who share preferences, each cluster receiving the same campaign. 

Sound far-fetched?
Jerry Brown doesn't think so.
He crowed after the Condit win: "The message?
The machine is the message.
We are building the machine.
And when the party is powerful enough, we can pick candidates and hold them accountable." Individual candidates cannot afford the machinery needed to create this voting weapon.
Candidates in large legislative districts will quickly learn what their grandfathers knew in the 1930s -- to get elected, candidates will have to obey the party bosses.
Gary Hart, meet Mayor Daley.
Boss Tweed, meet Boss Brown. 

Mr. Olsen, a third-year law student at the University of Chicago, was a California GOP legislative candidate in 1986. 

