.START 

The inspector general's office of the Health and Human Services Department said it is conducting a criminal investigation of Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. for possible "false information" concerning applications to manufacture at least two generic drugs and other matters. 

The investigation was confirmed by Judy Holtz, a spokeswoman at the inspector general's office. 

She said the case has been discussed with the U.S. attorney's office in Baltimore, which has been leading a criminal probe of the generic drug industry that has already resulted in several convictions. 

But so far, she said, the U.S. attorney hasn't decided to act on the case, and the case hasn't been presented to a grand jury. 

On news of the investigation on the Dow Jones Professional Investor Report news wire, Bolar shares fell $1.875 to $17 in American Stock Exchange composite trading on volume of 1.2 million shares. 

Specifically, Ms. Holtz said the criminal investigation involves possible false information concerning Bolar's drug applications for its version of Dyazide, a blood pressure medicine, and its version of Macrodantin, a urinary tract antibiotic.
Together, those two drugs represent an estimated 50% of Bolar's annual sales. 

Bolar also is under investigation about circumstances surrounding the company's use of a brand name anti-psychotic drug as Bolar's product in outside laboratory testing in 1982.
However, FDA spokesman Jeff Nesbit said he believed the criminal statute of limitation had already expired and that Bolar couldn't be charged in connection with that drug testing.
The company has said that was an inadvertent mix-up. 

On Monday, Bolar President Robert Shulman said the company hadn't been informed that it was the target of a criminal probe.
Ms. Holtz said Mr. Shulman was interviewed Tuesday by an investigator from the inspector general's office and a representative of the Food and Drug Administration. 

Yesterday Mr. Shulman was out of the country on business and couldn't be reached.
Patricia Shukri, vice president at Bolar, said an outside lawyer for the company learned of the probe yesterday but didn't get any details. 

Gary Jordan, an assistant U.S. attorney in Baltimore in charge of the generic drug probe, declined to comment about Bolar.
He said his office has a policy of not confirming or denying criminal investigations. 

Earlier this week Bolar voluntarily recalled its 100mg version of the urinary tract antibiotic, then it expanded the recall to the 50mg capsules of the same drug.
Combined, those two versions of Macrodantin represent about 10% of Bolar's total annual sales. 

Macrodantin is made by Norwich Eaton, a unit of Procter & Gamble Co. of Cincinnati. 

Bolar had said the FDA presented evidence suggesting that Bolar passed off Macrodantin as its own to obtain government clearance to market a generic version.
Bolar denied the accusation and said an outside firm would audit its drug applications to clear the matter. 

As previously reported, the FDA issued a statement in August saying it didn't have any evidence of fraud in Bolar's application for its version of Dyazide, which is made by SmithKline Beecham PLC. 

Afterwards, however, FDA Commissioner Frank Young said Bolar hadn't been exonerated of suspicions that it substituted the brand name product as its own to gain governmental approval to market a generic version of Dyazide.
Mr. Nesbit, the FDA spokesman, said the agency continues to investigate. 

Bolar's version of Dyazide remains the sole generic on the market, but the FDA has downgraded the product so that it's no longer considered the therapeutic equivalent of the SmithKline product. 

