.START 

call it a "budgeted entitlement" -- that combines the features of entitlements with normal expenditure authorizations, we could get better control of the expenditure side of the national budget.
And we could reduce uncertainty on the income side as well by budgeting against last year's actual income instead of this year's estimated income.
In other words, we could limit this year's expenditure authorizations to the amount we earned last year. (Special provisions would be made to deal with the year-to-year fluctuations.) 

While unanticipated entitlements are not what's busting the budget, relatively small uncertainties at the margin are the subject of important political struggles.
And as this year's Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deadline goes to the wire, there is a $25 billion difference between the estimates of the Congressional Budget Office and the Office of Management and Budget.
With new programs, estimating costs is even more critical -- as the debate over catastrophic health care has shown. 

With the current form of entitlement authorization, the expenditure is unpredictable.
For example, suppose Congress were to give every woman whose family income is under $10,000 a year $100 a month for every child she is caring for under the age of 12.
Nobody would know what the cost would be in any given year.
But if Congress used a "budgeted entitlement" that said that such payments would be made only to the extent that there is money in a special appropriations pool to be used for that entitlement, then each month the administration would compare the amount of money claimed under the program with the amount of money in the pool.
If there were $10 million in claims but only $9 million in the pool, each claimant would get 90% of her entitlement that month. 

Such payments could be adjusted monthly, quarterly or annually, depending on the program.
They could cover all, or only part, of a program.
Provision could be made for giving advance warning of any reductions, and there could be a limit on how much of a reduction could be made in any one year or in any one month. 

We may not want to add conditional limits to existing entitlements, but such limits are appropriate and politically realistic for future increases, or for new programs.
Agricultural subsidies are reauthorized every few years, and part of the next round of subsidies might be made conditional.
Experimenting with a small program, like honey or sunflowers, would provide experience on how beneficiaries respond to the uncertainty -- and it would put this new form of appropriation into the government's vocabulary of possibilities, so that it would be available when political leaders are working out compromises. 

Another possible use of this idea is in the housing field.
Now many housing programs reach only a fraction of those who are eligible.
An entitlement format, aiding people in need of housing, rather than aiding houses, would address this problem.
But with the current concern about the deficit, there is no chance of adding a new entitlement program with large, unknown costs.
However, a "budgeted entitlement," which by making costs limited and predictable would avoid nasty surprises, might be possible. (Presumably there would be bargaining between tenants and landlords about which party would bear the uncertainty in the level of aid.) 

In general, the possibility of making part of a benefit conditional adds to the compromise possibilities.
If one side wants to give $100 and the other says "no more than $50," the outcome can be "$70 firm and $10 conditional." There is no reason why this new option should generally favor either savers or spenders.
If there is strong political support for an entitlement, such as agricultural subsidies, the option helps those who favor reducing it, since it may be easier to make part of that entitlement conditional than to cut it by a fixed amount.
But if there is strong political support for cutting an entitlement, the possibility of conditional appropriations might give the beneficiaries a way to mitigate the fixed cut they otherwise couldn't prevent. 

Under such a system, Congress could modulate programs without having to review all the formulas or predict how many claims would be made.
The cost of any program would be reduced (or increased) in any year by a set amount once Congress knew how much money was available. 

If someday about 10% of the entitlement expenditures used this option, there might eventually be 10 or 50 or 100 appropriations pools, and then each year Congress would decide the order in which money would be put into each pool, to the extent that the money was available after all the guaranteed expenditures were made: A simplified budget would look like this: 

In other words, Congress could unambiguously express its priorities with complete flexibility, but with no doubt about their budgetary impact. 

This says nothing about whether the budget should be balanced.
But if these ideas were used to take the uncertainty out of both the expenditure side and the income side, it would be reasonable to provide that each year Congress enact a law specifying a limit on total federal expenditures for that year.
The budget law would also provide that if the sum of all specific appropriations made by Congress was higher that the total enacted, the president could veto enough particular items -- or portions -- to bring the total down to the limit that had been decided on. 

Mr. Singer is a public-policy analyst in Washington. 

(See related editorial: "Take a Hard Look at Transfers" -- WSJ Oct. 12, 1989) 

