.START 

Ramada Inc. scrapped a $400 million offering of high-yield debt securities because of upheaval in the junk bond market, forcing the company to revise its restructuring plan and delay the sale of its hotel operations. 

As part of the restructuring, Ramada agreed in April to sell its hotel business to New World Development Co. of Hong Kong and Prime Motor Inns Inc. of Fairfield, N.J., for $540 million.
Although Ramada will have to ask for an extension of the Nov. 30 termination date for the agreement and other concessions, a Prime official and others familiar with the transaction said the delay won't affect the buyers' interest in the hotels. 

"We're confident it will be consummated," said David Barsky, vice president of corporate development for Prime. "We don't believe the transaction is in jeopardy." 

Prime will manage Ramada's domestic franchise system, and New World will own most of the hotel operation's assets.
New World officials couldn't be reached for comment. 

Ramada's stock tumbled $2.25 on the news to close at $11 in heavy composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange of 1.7 million shares. 

Originally, Ramada planned to offer $170 million of first mortgage notes and $230 million of senior subordinated debt of Aztar Corp., a new company that will operate Ramada's casinos in Nevada and Atlantic City, N.J. 

The plan also called for Ramada shareholders to receive cash and stock in Aztar.
For each Ramada share, holders were to receive one-half share of Aztar stock and $7 in cash, minus 40% of any amount by which the mean trading price of Ramada's common stock exceeded $14 a share the day the transaction was completed. 

Ramada said in a statement that a new plan will require the approval of shareholders and gambling regulators in Nevada and New Jersey, and said it could offer "no assurance" that restructuring will be completed.
A spokesman said he couldn't speculate as to when a new proposal would be presented or how long it would take to complete, and Ramada officials declined to elaborate. 

John Uphoff, a casino analyst with Raymond James & Associates, said a revised restructuring could have some positive effects in the long run because it could leave the surviving company with more manageable debt, among other things.
He also noted that Ramada's core casino business is beginning to show fundamental improvements, particularly at its expanded casino in Atlantic City. 

Industry experts said the junk bond problem doesn't show a lack of investor confidence in Ramada's basic plan or in its casino operations.
Ramada has repeatedly changed the terms of its restructuring since it was first announced in October 1988 as an apparent move to thwart a takeover attempt by the company's largest shareholder, the Pritzker family of Chicago. 

