.START 

PUBLIC WORKS NEEDS, favorable rates spur a muni boom. 

Water pipes explode with alarming regularity in New York City, highways and reservoirs are stressed in the West, and housing is a general problem.
Falling interest rates prompt cities and states to issue more municipal bonds. "We feel interest rates are pretty favorable now for long-term debt," says Philip Shapiro, chief financial officer of the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority.
New muni issues through September totaled $109.2 billion. 

More issues are planned by year end and the 1990 calendar looks plump, too.
New York City and state agencies plan to sell $3.05 billion of debt in the fourth quarter, up from $2.5 billion a year ago.
The single biggest issuer: the medical facilities finance agency with nine issues totaling $848 million.
Western officials say a fairly strong economy and compliant voters increase offerings. "We're catching up and taking care of a lot of things," says David Brodsly, a Los Angeles finance specialist. 

The $7 billion cleanup of Boston Harbor gets under way with plans to issue $600-$750 million in debt in early 1990. 

KICKING TIRES: 1990 car models draw oohs for style, gasps at the prices. 

Dealers report increased traffic from customers lured by slick new designs and new safety equipment such as motorized seat belts and air bags.
But they worry buyers won't dole out for added features.
Prices on most Big Three cars rise as much as 8% from 1989.
Manny Haro, salesman at Bill Luke Chrysler-Plymouth in Phoenix, says, "We have ways of helping" overcome sticker shock: rebates and special leasing programs that have already spread to some 1990 models. "People like the look of the cars but they don't like the prices," adds Bob Jones, sales manager of Jerry Harmon Buick in Los Angeles, where sales have remained steady in the 1990 model year. 

Philadelphia Honda reports few problems selling the new Accord despite a price boost of up to 5%.
General Manager Brad Skilton says Accord sales are up about 30% since the larger model hit the showroom last week.
Import buyers suffer reverse sticker shock as some European makers cut or freeze many vehicle prices.
Jim Prater, salesman at Capital Porsche Audi Renault in Columbus, Ohio, says people ask "why the '90s cost less than the '89s." He explains, "We're going to get out of the rebate business. . . . by lowering prices." 

WINDOW TINTING in autos is reviewed by the U.S.; states peer in for guidance. 

A federal rule says 70% of light must penetrate all car windows.
The U.S. traffic-safety agency reviews comments on a proposal by four window-film companies to allow drivers to apply film that would cut light to 24.5% for all windows except the front windshield.
Dairl Bragg, a Williamsburg, Va., consultant, says states are unclear on whether the 70% rule applies to both original new-car equipment and to add-on tinting films.
The U.S. regulates new-car equipment while each state decides how dark windows can be on its roads. 

Drivers tint car windows for privacy and to cut glare and heat; tinting-film makers say the product doesn't pose a sight hazard for drivers or police and may help prevent passenger lacerations if a window shatters in a collision.
But law enforcers oppose tinting at least in the driver compartment. "Being able to see what goes on in the front seat is important to us," says a California Highway Patrol spokesman.
GM, Chrysler and Ford say more research is needed. 

Traffic incidents rank second, behind drug arrests, as causes of police deaths, the California Highway Patrol says. 

CONTAMINATION TAINTS about 5% of cosmetic samples shared by shoppers, says a study prompted by U.S. Rep. Bill Green (R., N.Y.).
It also warns that products for home use may be impure due to preservative failure.
In 1990, New York state law requires more hygienic practices, such as disposable applicators, take-away samples. 

POOCH PERKS: A new Visa card offers savings on animal health insurance, a free subscription to Exceptional Pet, and product coupons.
From Travelers Cos. ' Massachusetts Co. bank, the card can be embossed with Bowser's name (plus yours). 

FARMER'S LICENSE: The Old Farmer's Almanac joins the new world of marketing by licensing its name.
One of the first takers: Anchor Swan garden hose. 

STUDENTS PROSPER at a conglomerate run by Cornell University undergrads. 

Founded 95 years ago as a laundry service, Student Agencies Inc. believes it may be the oldest all-student business operation.
It employs 150 to 200 students, has $4 million of assets and posts $1 million of annual revenue.
Sophomores run 15 businesses, the biggest a summer storage and shipping service.
Others include appliance and computer rental, typing and photography services. 

Up to $200,000 a year in profit goes to salaries; the rest funds scholarships for Cornell students. "We hire for enthusiasm and attitude" more than experience, says President Michael J. Karangelen.
The venture gets about 100 ideas yearly for starting a new firm or revamping an existing one.
It currently is considering preparing students for the Law School Admission Test. 

Officials prefer that students propose the new businesses. 

BRIEFS: AT&T's $200,000 second annual Collegiate Investment Challenge, a Wall Street investing contest, includes high-school students for the first time. . . . Hunters bagged 4,244 turkeys in the spring season, New York state reports, a 22% increase. 

