.START 

I appreciated Thomas W. Hazlett's review of my book, "The Farm Fiasco" ("Bushels of Dough," Leisure & Arts, Sept. 21).
However, it had numerous errors. 

Mr. Hazlett states that farmers "are ever close to the margin." This is very misleading: Agriculture Department studies show that the average full-time farmer has a net worth of more than $1 million (more than 12 times higher than that of the average American family).
The average full-time farmer enjoyed a farm income of $136,255 in 1987.
Full-time farmers have had far higher incomes than average Americans throughout the 1980s.
The comparative wealth of farmers was a major point of my book; I'm surprised Mr. Hazlett missed it. 

Mr. Hazlett characterizes farm landowners as "typically . . . rich Republican country clubbers who regularly denounce welfare handouts over gin-and-tonics." This may be true around Davis, Calif., where Mr. Hazlett resides, but that is definitely not the case in Kansas, Iowa, South Dakota, etc. Midwest farmers may be wealthy, but they are not "country club" types -- and they prefer beer and whiskey over gin-and-tonics.
Mr. Hazlett's caricature is a libel on most farmers. 

Mr. Hazlett implies (in his statements that farmers "are ever close to the margin" while landowners are rich country clubbers) that there is little overlap between farmers and farm landowners.
In reality, a substantial majority of farmers own the land they plant.
Thus, farmers have reaped most of the benefits of the federally induced rise in farmland values. 

Mr. Hazlett contrasts farm programs under Presidents Carter and Reagan: "ag subsidies had fallen to just $4 billion annually under Carter, but have totaled $260 billion in the '80s." But the $4 billion figure under Mr. Carter counts only government outlays, while the $260 billion figure counts both government outlays and higher food costs to consumers caused by federal policies.
Adding consumer costs to the Carter figure would produce a total cost of about $12 billion to $15 billion, and would weaken Mr. Hazlett's efforts to blame Republicans for soaring farm spending.
He observes, "The specific aim of recent Republican reforms is to shift the subsidies off-budget, imposing supply controls in USDA-sponsored cartels to raise commodity prices without direct subsidies.
Consider the 1983-84 PIK program. . . ." But under the PIK program, government did not impose involuntary controls on farmers and there was no cartel effort involved.
Many farmers who stayed out of the PIK program reaped huge profits.
The term "supply controls" usually refers to mandatory controls imposed by government on farmers.
Actually, most Republicans in Congress have fought tooth and nail to avoid supply controls, while the Democrats (Gephardt, Harkin, etc.) have led the push to impose mandatory controls.
The House (though not the Senate) voted in favor of mandatory controls in 1986: Probably six times as many Democrats as Republicans favored mandatory controls.
Both the Reagan administration and the Bush administration have been adamant in their opposition to mandatory controls. 

James Bovard 

Rockville, Md. 

