.START 

Last month, in the back of a Seventh Avenue showroom, about 1,000 fall dresses sealed in plastic bags sat aging like day-old bread.
Steven Stoller, the high-strung president of the manufacturer, Karin Stevens Apparel Group Inc., was frustrated.
He had spent thousands of dollars making these "working girl" dresses, as he calls them, but his banker halted shipment to Jordan Marsh and Rich's, two department stores owned by troubled Campeau Corp. 

Three tense weeks later, Mr. Stoller's banker decided that Campeau's financial problems had eased, and the dresses were shipped.
But for Mr. Stoller, a third-generation dress maker, this scrape with disaster was more evidence that operating in the retail world today is like walking through a mine field. 

The recent turmoil among the nation's top retailers has shaken scores of small and mid-sized apparel makers, including Mr. Stoller.
Three of the largest department store chains -- B.A.T Industries' Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field's, and Campeau's Bloomingdale's -- are up for sale.
Small manufacturers fear that new owners, will further streamline operations.
Following a buy-out, retailers look for new economies, curbing relationships with small vendors and seeking out large suppliers that will fill bigger orders. 

"There's no question, the smaller you are the more likely it is that you are going to get squeezed out," says Irving Spitalnick, owner of a women's apparel company bearing his name.
To survive a squeeze himself, Mr. Spitalnick has switched most of his operation into the private-label business, making garments that carry a store's brand. 

The garment industry has long been an obstacle course in which apparel manufacturers are constantly beset by production snags, billing disputes and fickle consumers.
For Mr. Stoller and others, success depends on regular orders from big retail chains, in addition to those from hundreds of smaller specialty stores.
If Mr. Stoller loses giant customers such as the Campeau stores, he says he will have to cut production. "I just can't replace that business because there aren't that many stores out there," he says. 

Although his deliveries to Campeau were stalled for a few weeks last month, Mr. Stoller didn't stop accepting new orders, hoping that the situation would work itself out.
In that case, it did, at least temporarily.
But a few months earlier Mr. Stoller lost a similar gamble: Just as he shipped $20,000 of dresses to Bonwit Teller, the store's parent, L.J. Hooker Corp., filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
Mr. Stoller still hasn't been paid for those dresses. 

Even before the recent round of department store troubles, the number of vendors had begun diminishing, says William Flatley, a principal at Kurt Salmon Associates, a retail and apparel consulting firm.
The garment manufacturers who remain complain they are being hurt by profit-driven retailers constantly seeking discounts. "The recent turnover in department store organizations has put pressure on the stores to produce short-term results," Mr. Flatley says. 

Compared with apparel giants like Leslie Fay Co., Karin Stevens is a bit player, with a steady $22 million in annual sales and a staff of 40, including designers, sales people and a production team.
Still, it has carved out a profitable niche.
The Karin Stevens strategy is to produce knock-offs of higher fashion clothes, using less-expensive fabrics and skipping costly steps such as lining.
The dresses, which are stitched together by independent contractors, retail for around $80 to $120. 

One of Mr. Stoller's competitive advantages is quick turnaround.
As one of the dying breed of apparel companies still manufacturing in the U.S., Mr. Stoller can fill orders faster than importers.
And if the order is large enough, he will cut his profit margins to compete with rivals offering cheaper imported merchandise. 

But as a "dress man," as he's known in the trade, the 45-year-old Mr. Stoller doesn't have much margin for error.
Many working women have moved away from dresses, choosing to wear skirts, pants and jackets instead.
Since 1980, women's dress sales have fallen 16% in unit terms, according to market researcher MRCA Information Services. "The dress business is the most sensitive and requires the fastest turnaround in order to stay on top of the fashion trends," says Alan Millstein, an industry consultant. 

One reason Mr. Stoller has been successful is that he knows how to exploit a "hot body" -- a specific dress style that sells briskly.
Mr. Stoller puts out dozens of variations, changing sleeves, collars, fabrics and colors.
He makes about 30,000 dresses a month, keeping an average 200,000 yards of fabric in stock.
Mr. Stoller brags that during his 22 years in the dress business, he has developed a "better-than-average batting average" on predicting fashions. 

On a recent day, as two department-store buyers visit his showroom, Mr. Stoller tries to steer them toward a jungle print. "This is colossal]" he exclaims, noting that it is flying out of stores.
Take something else, he adds, and "you'll come back and ask for markdowns." 

When clothes don't sell at full price, it's customary for stores to demand that manufacturers share the cost, in the form of "markdown money." "What other business is there where buyers are free to make their orders, but if what they order doesn't sell, they come back to the manufacturer?" Mr. Stoller complains. 

Later, Mr. Stoller accompanies his production manager, Helen Ebert, to a factory in lower Manhattan.
The hems on 300 dresses, due to be shipped to a major client the next day, are crooked, Ms. Ebert reports.
The defective dresses are held until the hems can be fixed. 

"The stores routinely test eight to 10 dresses," Mr. Stoller says. "If they get a bad one they'll send the order back.
I'd rather not ship if they're going to be wrong." 

The shipment will arrive a day late, which in this case isn't a problem.
But department stores often charge a fee or refuse the entire shipment if it's late, and the penalties have become more common and higher in the wake of buy-outs. 

As the top retail chains are reorganized or sold in coming months, Mr. Stoller says he's prepared to make changes to stay in business.
He says he would expand production to give the big chains better service or, if he were dropped by the chains, "I would take a hit" and reduce the business.
But Mr. Stoller has survived bad seasons before. "In this business," he says, "you gotta have guts." 

