.START 

When Woody Allen ponders the universe it's funny.
Yet his special comic talent doesn't seem to satisfy him -- and maybe it couldn't after all the movies he's made.
In recent years he's felt compelled to be more "serious," to take the nagging questions that have given his comedy its edge and to ask them straight.
He's been using this method, which he first experimented with years ago in "Interiors," in what he calls his "ensemble pieces." These pictures -- notably "Hannah and Her Sisters," "September," "Another Woman" -- have been extremely polished works, all very beautiful and all unsatisfying in varying degrees. 

In these problematic films, Mr. Allen has assigned other people the job of giving serious articulation to the angst that elsewhere so hilariously perfuses his Woody Allen screen personality.
These glum Allen surrogates usually sound hopelessly mannered, like people translating a foreign language with words that are technically correct but that miss the spirit of the original.
That's why Mr. Allen's funny short film, "Oedipus Wrecks" -- his one-third of this spring's "New York Stories" omnibus -- seemed like a reward to those who dutifully sat through "September" and "Another Woman." Comedy probably doesn't feel like serious work to him anymore, but it's a rare treat for the rest of us, who recently have been putting up with an eversteadier diet of his ethereal ensembles.
And since Mr. Allen's new "Crimes and Misdemeanors" came officially tagged with the dread E word, I wasn't whistling on my way to the screening room. 

But either his determination to succeed in this genre is wearing me down, or this picture really is more enjoyable than its predecessors.
Though he doesn't have much new to say about the lumpen-intellectual New York world on whose fringes he operates, this time around he's put a neat, cynical twist on his characters' labored musings about love and death and morality. 

As usual, he's divvied up the concerns that used to belong to him, back when he was his main and best character, among a number of different characters.
Like Mr. Allen, all of them are maneuvering their way through middle age, though none of them have much of a sense of humor about the passage.
He certainly knows these people.
And he's perfectly captured their look and manner with Sven Nykvist's elegant cinematography.
At the center of their overlapping stories is Judah Rosenthal (Martin Landau), a familiar type -- a successful physician who's also a philanthropist, also knowledgeable about art and music, also possessor of a lovely wife and daughter.
Judah's perfection, his smug acceptance of his fine lot in life, would be almost unbearable if he didn't have a big headache on his hands.
She's Dolores (Anjelica Huston), his neurotic airline-hostess mistress who's tired of being Madame X.
Her power over Judah is enormous because only she can expose his hypocrisy. 

While Judah figures out how to dispose of this problem, many other relationships are built, while others fall apart.
By far the most compelling figures are Cliff, the documentary film maker played by Mr. Allen, and his fancy TV producer brother-in-law Lester, played by Alan Alda.
Mr. Allen supplies the comic relief and Mr. Alda provides the surprise.
He's not the least bit ingratiating here, in a nicely nasty portrait of the vain, slick exercise of power, Hollywood style. 

The cast includes many Allen reliables, including Mia Farrow and Sam Waterston, and they are reliable.
There are a few cameo appearances by Allen-film newcomers, too, notably by the blonde actress Darryl Hannah and the brunette writer Nora Ephron.
The film also provides the bluntest blunt expression of Mr. Allen's sour vision of life since "Stardust Memories," a cynicism that usually is disguised by his nostalgia and his romanticizing angle of vision on architecture, music and women. 

I never managed to like "Breaking In" quite as much as I wanted to like it.
One wants to feel warmly toward a film that has a faded stud like Burt Reynolds playing the part of a codger, an old thief, with the greatest dexterity and charm.
He's just wonderful. 

The rest of the film isn't bad, just pokey about getting to a payoff that doesn't really exist.
Still, there is a sweetness to this tale of an experienced burglar who tries to teach a new thief old tricks.
Mr. Reynolds, jowly and limping, has a marvelous sense of the way a certain kind of precise older man goes about his business, whether he's an engineer or an editor or a thief.
He loves what he does because he does it well, and he doesn't expend much energy rhapsodizing about it or even spending the money he steals.
He's a prudent man, saves what he needs and spends the rest on his few luxuries -- including his steady "girlfriend," the hooker he's rented regularly for a year. 

He stumbles across his protege, when they bump into each other trying to rob the same house.
The kid is played by Casey Siemaszko, the pudding-faced young actor who's appeared in "Stand By Me," "Back to the Future" and "Gardens of Stone." Though the chemistry between them seems right, not much happens. 

That's the style of Scottish director Bill Forsyth ("Local Hero," "Gregory's Girl," "Housekeeping"), and usually the whimsical incidentals along the way make the trip a treat, even if you don't get anywhere.
But the director worked here with a script by John Sayles, whose considerable talents don't include whimsy.
It's hard to tell who was leading whom, but in any case the dance doesn't go smoothly and seems to take a very long time. 

VIDEO TIP: Mr. Forsyth knows how to pick his Burts, but he doesn't treat them all the same.
Burt Lancaster starred in Mr. Forsyth's most magical film, "Local Hero," about a Scottish town that charms the businessmen who come to corrupt it.
Not a missed step here. 

