.START 

Lyphomed Inc. plans to distribute for free to indigent patients an aerosol drug that can prevent a type of pneumonia that kills as many as 80% of all AIDS patients. 

The drug manufacturer has been considering the idea of free distribution for the last couple of months, but decided to give aerosol pentamidine at no charge only to patients who can't afford it, said John N. Kapoor, chairman of the Rosemont, Ill., company. 

Dispersals should begin within a week, Mr. Kapoor said.
It wasn't clear, however, how the drug will be distributed or how many patients it would effect. 

The target group will include patients whose insurance policies don't cover the cost of the drug, Mr. Kapoor said. 

The move follows months of criticism by AIDS activists who accused the company of profiteering.
Typically, aerosol pentamidine costs about $100 for a 300 milligram dose taken once a month. 

The drug, along with Burroughs Wellcome Co. 's AZT, is credited with helping prolong the lives of people with AIDS. 

Last summer, the Food and Drug Administration granted approval for aerosol pentamidine, which staves off both first attacks and recurrences of pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, a deadly AIDS-related form of the illness. 

Lyphomed currently is the sole supplier of the drug.
As a so-called orphan drug, or one aimed at a small market, aerosol pentamidine is protected by a seven-year exclusive patent.
Lyphomed's closest rival is a British company, Fisons PLC, which has submitted its own research to the FDA, but hasn't yet gotten approval. 

Candidates for the drug are AIDS patients whose count on T-helper lymphocytes, cells vital to the immune system, falls below 200 per cubic millimeter of blood.
Such a level places them in the highest danger of developing pneumonia. 

Estimates vary widely as to how many AIDS patients are candidates for the drug.
But the aerosal is also used by people who have contracted the virus that causes AIDS, but who haven't developed the disease. 

Separately, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co. said that Lyphomed shareholders had tendered 99.2% of the company's outstanding shares under its $31.87-a-share buy-out proposal.
The offer values the total company at $956.7 million. 

Fujisawa said it received 18.4 million shares under the offer, which expired Tuesday. 

