.START 

In 1929, total government outlays came to 10% of the gross national product, and state and local government outlays amounted to almost three times those of the federal government.
Today total government outlays come to about 35% of GNP, while federal outlays are more than twice as large as those of state and local government -- a remarkable concentration of power in Washington. 

But federal outlays for goods and services are responsible for neither the sharp run-up of federal spending nor the switch of the bulk of government spending to the federal level. 

Only $579.8 billion at an annual rate in the second quarter of 1989, or less than half of Uncle Sam's outlays, according to the August issue of Economic Indicators, went for such things as interest on debt, a new Defense Department computer, a space shot, or the salary of a postal worker or congressman.
Instead, $620.5 billion of a $1.2 trillion federal expenditure total -- annual rate, second quarter -- went for a growing phenomenon in recent decades: transfer payments. 

(This transfer growth, at 52% of budget, has seemingly slowed from the last Carter administration year of 1980, when it was 58%, but the "slowdown" stems mainly from the sharp run-up of debt interest in the 1980s.) 

A transfer payment can be defined as a government outlay for which no good is delivered or service rendered.
Transfer payments amount to redistribution.
Uncle Sam collects money from taxpayers and redistributes it as income to selected individuals and entities. 

Political implications should be apparent; transfers generate powerful constituencies, such as senior citizens.
Which reminds me of Voltaire's insight: "The art of government is to take from some to give to others." 

Federal transfer payments hardly existed in 1929; today they gush forth for such purposes as Social Security (about a third of the total), Medicare, Medicaid, food stamps, public housing, veterans assistance, Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), crop supports, and even transfers to states and localities. 

Individual transfer payments came to $466.7 billion at an annual rate in the second quarter.
Grants-in-aid to state and local governments for such purposes as education and economic development came to $118.4 billion.
Subsidies to farmers and others and losses incurred by government enterprises such as Amtrak and the U.S. Postal Service amounted to $35.4 billion. 

Strangely, conventional wisdom inside the Beltway regards these transfer payments as "uncontrollable" or "nondiscretionary." Transfers, the largest share of the budget, are of course the result of congressional enactments, and President Bush's Office of Management and Budget can do little about them.
Still, surely Congress can undo what it has done.
Privatization can be pushed; laws can be amended or repealed. 

For does it make sense for Congress to transfer money -- in the face of a mounting $2.9 trillion gross federal debt and net interest payments now at about $175 billion annually -- to states and localities that are themselves relatively debt-free?
Is it smart not to consider the progressive privatization of Social Security via Super Individual Retirement Accounts as set forth by George Mason University law professor Peter Ferrara and proposed by former Delaware Gov. Pierre du Pont in the last presidential campaign? 

With the number of farms falling by two-thirds since 1930, are not farm subsidies counterproductive and wasteful of taxpayers' funds?
Can't Congress see that AFDC only compounds the underclass problem? 

Or does Congress march to a different drummer?
After all, economists James Buchanan and Gordon Tullock have long reminded us that public choices by voters, legislators and officials tend to spring from self-interest rather than from altruism and public spirit, that modern democracies bleed from resulting myriad interest groups seeking and frequently gaining quasi-monopolistic "rents" via special privileges and perquisites -- the stock-in-trade of legislators and officials who dance the quid-pro-quo tango with voters organized into blocs. 

In sum, in an era of Gramm-Rudman budget constraints -- with Congress still haggling over the terms of the current fiscal year's budget, and mandatory across-the-board cuts looming -- does redistribution add up?
Or in any era?
Transfer payments are already unwieldy for budget management, yet such new burdens as child care are in the works.
A hard look at transfers is needed.
The sooner, the better. 

Mr. Peterson, Heritage Foundation adjunct scholar, teaches business philosophy at North Carolina's Campbell University. 

(See related editorial: "Cut Uncertainty Over Entitlements" -- WSJ Oct. 12, 1989) 

