.START 

I want to compliment you on your excellent Sept. 13 editorial "Hama, Beirut." There is no doubt that genocide of the Christians in Lebanon is impending.
Lebanon as a political entity has never been recognized by "greater Syria," and the civil war of 1975-76 gave the dictator al-Assad the opportunity he was seeking to intervene and stay.
The Israeli police action of 1982 was the last chance there was to get foreign troops out of Lebanon and bolster a republican form of government.
Since then, as your editorial pointed out, Lebanon has sunk into a dismal swamp of clannish anarchy. 

There is one thing that truly disturbs me, and I speak as a Methodist clergyman.
The newspapers and wire services seem to discuss this whole situation in the Middle East as though it were purely a conflict between Moslem and Jewish forces.
This astigmatism in reference to the Christian component is a major complication.
A few years ago there was indeed a secular, democratic, pluralistic "republic" in the Middle East, as well as a tolerating Jewish state.
The way in which this "Christian island" is meeting its final end is a very clear indication of what would happen if the "Jewish island" were to pay attention to our appeasement experts in the State Department rather than be clearheaded about survival. 

Franklin H. Littell 

Merion Station, Pa. 

The Bush administration so far has shown a total disregard for this tragedy, except for making now and then an asinine statement asking both sides to desist from shelling each other (thus putting the murderer and the victims on the same level) or "passing the buck" by asking the Arab League -- that group of incoherent nations that was never able to solve any regional problems -- to tackle this difficult one.
At other times we have declared publicly that we have no influence on Syria -- a tacit acknowledgment of our self-imposed impotence. 

Several laudable attempts by the French government to have the U.S. join the community of civilized nations to pressure the Syrian regime to desist from its planned shelling of Beirut and the slaughter of the Lebanese Christians were left unanswered. 

The pope has declared explicitly that the Syrians are committing genocide in Lebanon.
Even the Soviet Union was moved to send a high-level envoy to try to persuade the Syrians to leave Lebanon. 

The most recent retreat of the U.S. ambassador and the closing of our Embassy in Beirut are acts of abject pusillanimity, not worthy of the U.S.
And yet, there might still be time to stop the planned massacre of the Lebanese Christians.
Our administration can belatedly drum up concerted efforts with our European allies and the Soviet Union to exert massive, unrelenting pressure on Syria to stop the butchery; this certainly can be done by diplomatic and economic means that will force the tottering regime of dictator Hafez al-Assad and his minority Alaouite government to desist from their bloodthirsty goals to perpetrate a Hama-style massacre in Beirut. 

It is inconceivable that in our enlightened age the whole world watches the brutality committed against innocents with total detachment because of the lack of leadership shown by our great nation. 

Charles R. Farra M.D. 

Oak Brook, Ill. 

