.START 

The Oakland Athletics are in the World Series, so I thought I'd ring up my buddy, Jose Canseco.
Jose, the A's slugger, was nice enough to give me his phone number.
It's 1-900-234-JOSE.
A call costs $2 for the first minute and $1 for each succeeding minute, but, what the heck, the guy makes only $1.6 million a year playing baseball, so who can begrudge him a few bucks? 

Riiiing.
Riiiing. 

"Hi.
This is Jose Canseco.
Thanks for calling my hotline.
If you'd like to hear about the latest game and my personal life, press one.
If you want to hear me discuss steroids, fast cars and my ownership of guns, press two." 

Steroids?
Fast cars?
Guns?
Why would I want to hear about them?
I pressed one. 

"Well, we're the American League champs," Jose began chattily, and for a couple of minutes rehashed Sunday's 4-3 playoff win over Toronto that clinched the pennant for his team.
The Blue Jays "played us pretty tough" and the victory was "pretty thrilling," he said.
Pretty interesting, huh? 

Then he got to the personal stuff.
After the final out Sunday, "I expected the crowd to scream and go berserk, but they booed," he said. "I forgot we were playing in Toronto.
It was strange to celebrate with people booing." 

But the A's celebrated anyway. "We all jumped around and stepped on each other's feet.
Somebody stepped on my big toe and it still hurts.
We got to the clubhouse, where the champagne was waiting.
We call it 'so' because it's sooo bad.
It's the worst champagne in the world.
It gives you heartburn.
But we used it mostly to spray each other. 

"On the flight home, everybody was drinking and making jokes.
Some of the wives got together and acted like cheerleaders.
Boy, were they bad.
They'd been drinking, too.
You should have been there.
It was a great time." 

Boy, I wish I had been there.
But what about the Series against the National League champion San Francisco Giants, Jose? 

"I'm glad we're playing the Giants.
No more plane flights and hotels.
The food on the road is really bad.
I always come home feeling weak, like Manute Bol.
I'm going to the gym right after this. 

"As for the Giants, you can forget about them.
We're gonna beat them.
In spring training, they only won one or two out of 10 from us.
We feel this is our year." 

Forget about the Giants?
Oooo.
Those are fighting words, the kind that get pasted on locker-room walls.
Call the coming Series "The Fray by the Bay." Who needs Don King when home boys tangle? 

Actually, this Series might need a bit of hype for anyone living east of Stockton, Calif.
In keeping with the tenets of my profession I intend to be neutral, but it seems clear that factors of sentiment, which never are to be underestimated in matters of rooting, favor the A's. 

I don't say this out of lack of affection for San Francisco, a beautiful city that's hard to fault except on geological grounds, but Oakland is a town with true underdog appeal.
If you can forget Gertrude Stein's quip ("There's no there there"), which Oaklanders would like to do, it's been ignored by poets and songwriters even as its snazzier neighbor has been celebrated.
No one sings about leaving his heart in Oakland, although Al Davis might have left his hat there, and no pilgrim to California ever pleaded for the state to open up its Bay Bridge. 

Oakland's baseball representatives have shared this wallflower status.
The 1972-74 A's, arguably baseball's best team of the last three decades, won championships while averaging under one million in annual home attendance, and the franchise was thought to be shaky until quite recently.
Truth to tell, the same held for the Giants, who, when they were looking for a new stadium to replace windy Candlestick Park a few years back, considered one in Denver. 

But Bay Area baseball began to revive when the 1987 Giants won a divisional title, and picked up further with the A's pennant last season.
This year, en route to the first Subway Series since the New York Yankees-Brooklyn Dodgers match of 1956, the two teams together topped the 4.5 million mark at the gate. 

They did it with lineups that are mirror images of one another.
Strength is neither team's weakness, as they showed in their four-games-to-one playoff triumphs over the Blue Jays and Chicago Cubs.
The A's bashed seven home runs against the Blue Jays, including a shot by Canseco into the upper reaches of the Toronto Skydome that had to be tracked by NORAD.
The Giants clubbed eight against the Cubs, and three of them supplied game-winning runs. 

There's little to choose between Will Clark, Kevin Mitchell and Matt Williams, the Giants' strong boys, and Canseco, Mark McGwire and Dave Parker, the A's chief flexers, except that the Oakland trio has more hair to comb.
Suffice it to say that people with Series bleacher seats would be well advised to wear hard hats. 

I have no idea who's going to win, but I can provide a few historical guidelines.
The teams met in three previous World's Series in their New York and Philadelphia incarnations, with the Giants winning once, in 1905, and the A's twice, in 1911 and '13.
The Ex-Cub Factor, which favors the team with the fewest ex-Cubs, is a standoff at two each, with the A's Dennis Eckersley and Ron Hassey canceling out the Giants' Craig Lefferts and Rick Reuschel. 

Without wishing to appear Chicago-centric, I must point out that another Windy City-based measure gives a perhaps-decisive nod to the Giants.
Three times this year, Chicago teams (the football Bears, basketball Bulls and hockey Black Hawks) have lost in the semifinals of their respective playoffs, and the teams that beat them went on to win titles.
Make that four if you include the University of Illinois basketball team in the NCAAs.
You could look it up. 

