.START 

When students of the late 1960s were perceived to be to the left of the elders who elected presidents and ran universities, the progressive political goal was to unfetter the young as a force for revolutionary change.
For the New Left, universities acting "in loco parentis" were not merely oppressive (as, in many cases they genuinely were); they inhibited the moral power of a generation that otherwise would transform American political and social culture.
The whole notion that academic administrators charged with "student life" should lead undergraduates from moral darkness to moral light was swept away as absurd. 

In the 1980s, however, when students are perceived to be to the right of their academic mentors and "student life" administrators, the apparatus of universities "in loco parentis" is being rebuilt with a vengeance.
Progressive academic administrations are determined to enlighten their morally benighted students and protect the community from political sin. "Free speech," "Question authority," and "Leave us alone" are now conservative and libertarian battle-cries on campus.
A generation that when young trusted nobody over 30 today trusts nobody under 30. 

"Harassment policies" at a growing number of universities have used the real need to protect students and employees from sexual and racial abuse as a partisan pretext for, to borrow a favorite radical term, "privileging" one particular ideological agenda, and for controlling speech deemed offensive by those designated as victims of American society (including those "victims" about to receive Ivy League degrees]) 

The University of Pennsylvania's policy, promulgated in the 1986-1987 academic year, forbids as harassment "any behavior, verbal or physical, that stigmatizes or victimizes individuals on the basis of race, ethnic or national origin . . . and that has the purpose OR EFFECT of interfering with an individual's academic or work performance; and/or creates an intimidating OR OFFENSIVE academic, living, or work environment." (Emphasis added.) The University of Michigan tried such a policy last year, but when the faculty discovered that it inhibited free discussion, it chose to exempt the classroom from its provisions.
Penn applies its policy to the classroom (indeed, to the whole campus), leaving faculty committees to determine what is protected and unprotected "offense" on a case-by-case basis, inviting self-censorship.
Tufts, in a policy suspended (but not rescinded) only last week, applied limits on open expression to dormitories and classrooms, but allows free speech on walkways and the like. 

The Michigan ACLU successfully challenged the constitutionality of Michigan's policy in federal court this summer.
Its brief, describing a policy less rigid, in fact, than most, noted "the chilling effect on the free expression of ideas that is caused by the existence and threatened enforcement of the Policy, the terms of which are so overbroad and vague as to include within its sweep the expression of almost any controversial idea. . . . It is simply unbelievable that one of this Nation's great universities would enact a Policy that so flagrantly and patently violates the First Amendment." 

When Penn's policy was proposed, its advocates presented it as virtually mandated by federal law; in the wake of the Michigan decision, they proclaim Penn's immunity as a private institution from constitutional obligations in this instance.
Meanwhile, Penn's president excoriated Sen. Jesse Helms in a widely published speech this fall for trying "to cleanse public discourse of offensive material." At Tufts last month, conservative and libertarian students were almost prevented by campus police from symbolically protesting the new restrictions by mapping out the campus with tape and chalk into "free" and "unfree" zones. 

The ostensible goal of all this is "a humane community," but "humane" is a one-way political street.
You may characterize anyone white or male by whatever terms and means you choose on campuses; any variation of "all whites are racists" and "testosterone oppresses" is (rightfully) protected speech.
What is chilled is the speech of anyone whose views might "offend" the "victims" of those look-alike, think-alike white males. 

As one administrator put it in 1986, "We at the University of Pennsylvania have guaranteed students and the community that they can live in a community free of sexism, racism and homophobia." Who gets to define these evils and design this utopia?
Self-designated victims and self-designated spokespersons for victims. 

As in any coup, first, you make sure of the junior officers.
In 1982, the entire "student life" division of the Penn administration was subjected to mandatory "racism awareness seminars" predicated on the proposition that "all whites are racists." A follow-up questionnaire made the agenda quite clear: "1.
Now that you have completed the Racism Awareness Workshop, how much consideration have you given to the subject of American racism?" "4.
How much are you able to identify the indicators of American racism in a.
The University? b.
Your department/office?" "12.
How much do you feel that the training helped build a better sense of trust and teamwork on the problem of American racism in a.
The University Life Division? b.
Your office/dept.?" 

Similar seminars were meted out as punishments to students or, in one infamous Wharton Business School case, faculty deemed "racist," "sexist" or "homophobic." In 1984, one conservative campus columnist at Penn asserted that he ought to be free to hold a traditionalist Christian view of homosexuality if he respected the rights of individual homosexuals.
This prompted a self-righteous reply by eight administrators and social workers in student life, praising their own role in pioneering "increased awareness of the insidious ways in which racism, sexism and homophobia deny the human potential of students and others at the University," and concluding that "{the student's} column suggests that we should intensify our efforts to counter homophobic attitudes and behavior on the Penn campus." In short, Penn is a tolerant and diverse community, and if you do not agree with its particular notions of tolerance and diversity, it gladly will re-educate you. 

The subsidized activists, advocates, facilitators and social engineers who work in "student life" and support services are a powerful force in the academic world.
They attend conferences together and they testify to each other's successes.
They are the expertise that other activist officials call upon to justify their own programs.
They share language and conceptual schemes. 

"Racism" is not prejudice alone, but prejudice plus "institutional power," which only white males possess. "Culture" is not an evolved system that confers survival and life-enhancement benefits upon its inheritors, adapting as material conditions and ways of thinking change, but a system of creating and preserving "hegemonic dominance" for white males. "Diversity" is not the coming together of diverse individuals, but the recognition of the primacy of group-identity. 

One brave undergraduate on Penn's planning committee for "diversity education" wrote a memo to her colleagues about "my deep regard for the individual and my desire to protect the freedoms of all members of society." An administrator paid to think about such things wrote back to her, circling the quoted phrase, underlining the word "individual," and commenting: "This is a 'RED FLAG' phrase today, which is considered by many to be RACIST. Arguments that champion the individual over the group ultimately privileges {sic} the 'individuals' belonging to the largest or dominant group." 

Central administrations have the final word on such programs and they will inhibit or advance the full force of their ideological agenda as conviction, careerism, public monitoring, local unrest and the politics of universities dicate.
Make no mistake, however: The "in loco parentis" role of today's universities is meant to cleanse the souls of undergraduates of the political, social and moral sins of the communities, churches, high schools, peer groups and families from which they come.
It is, as well, to designate official agents for groups such as America's blacks, women and gays and to preach an official history of their place in America to them. 

The practical strengths of such a movement are obvious: the legitimate complaints of truly harassed individuals; the intellectual support for such notions of "culture" and America within the professoriate; the ability of New Age ideologues to threaten negative publicity and disruption; the radicals' almost uncontested control of moral symbolism.
Its moral vulnerabilities, however, are also legion: the Orwellian substitution of thought reform for behavioral sanctions; the desire for essential freedom of speech and expression by professors and undergraduates; the ability of its potential intellectual allies to distinguish between authentic education and tendentious indoctrination; the unwillingness of administrators to defend intellectual repression under public scrutiny; and the manifest wickedness of imposing group-identities upon the universities of a nation where the right to individuate according to private conscience remains the authentic criterion of liberation.
We shall see. 

Mr. Kors is a history professor at the University of Pennsylvania. 

