.START 

United Telecommunications Inc. and its US Sprint Communications Co. unit announced a long-awaited consolidation to curb costs, improve efficiency and react more swiftly to the market. 

The realignment, which essentially splits the business into its long-distance operations and its local telecommunications operations, comes nine months after United Telecom brought controlling interest in Sprint from GTE Corp. United now owns 80.1% of Sprint and has options to acquire the rest. 

William T. Esrey, United Telecom president and chief executive officer, said the realignment "allows us to operate as one company overall." He said some further changes will be made over the next few months to encourage "efficiencies and rapid decision-making." 

Analysts speculated that United Telecom not only is concerned about curbing costs but also wants to get its top management in place in anticipation of the retirement next spring of Chairman Paul H. Henson, who along with Mr. Esrey has reshaped United Telecom from a local telephone concern to a rapidly expanding long-distance carrier.
Mr. Esrey is expected to be named to the added post of chairman once Mr. Henson retires. 

Under changes announced yesterday, Mr. Esrey, 49 years old, takes on the extra job of chairman and chief executive officer of Sprint, the nation's third-largest long-distance telephone company. 

Long-distance operations would be led by Ronald T. LeMay, 43, who becomes president of United Telecom's long-distance division and president and chief operating officer of Sprint.
He had been executive vice president for corporate affairs.
The local telephone operations would fall under Curtis G. Fields, 56, executive vice president; he was named president of the local telecommunications division. 

All financial operations will report to Arthur B. Krause, 48, United Telecom's chief financial officer.
In addition, the company is merging all data systems and information management operations, reporting to Richard H. Brown, who was named executive vice president and chief information and planning officer.
Mr. Brown, who had been senior vice president, also has responsibility for strategic planning, business development and technology planning. 

Meanwhile, Telenet, Sprint's successful data unit, is taking on a new mission to expand international voice and data operations.
Telenet's public data network functions as well as its marketing operations and most of its sales force are being blended with Sprint's.
Even its electronic mail operations are being renamed Sprint Mail. 

Telenet president Paolo L. Guidi, 47, will head a new US Sprint International Systems and Services Group, to provide international voice and data services, electronic messaging systems as well as data and corporate networks overseas and in the U.S. Mr. Esrey said he anticipates a big push to develop a "global data network." 

Mr. Esrey said the company hopes the changes improve the Sprint sales force's ability to sell data as well as voice services and strengthen the company's postition overseas. "With an all digital, all fiber-optic network, we ought to be ahead in selling data services," he said, adding that Telenet's expertise has been "focused more narrowly than it should be." 

As for controlling costs, Mr. Esrey said the realignment was "a step in that direction.
I think we can do a better job than we have done." Nevertheless, Mr. Esrey said the consolidation isn't expected to result in layoffs because of the company's swift growth. 

On Tuesday, United Telecom stock plunged $3.375 a share after its third-quarter earnings report indicated the company hadn't curbed costs as much as analysts had anticipated.
Yesterday, the stock closed at $82.75, down 50 cents, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

The reorganization also included United's top legal post.
John F. Dodd, 58, executive vice president and general counsel, is taking early retirement at the end of the year to resume private practice.
He will be succeeded by Richard Devlin, 39, who will be responsible for the consolidated legal and external affairs operations. 

