.START 

SAATCHI & SAATCHI announced a major management reorganization that appears to remove co-founder Maurice Saatchi from day-to-day operations.
Meanwhile, a top Saatchi unit executive, Carl Spielvogel, said he has offered to lead a management buy-out of the troubled British advertising and communication giant, but the company rebuffed him. 

The Senate began debating its $14.1 billion deficit-reduction bill, with Democrats asserting the measure will pass quickly and without a cut in the capital-gains tax.
The House-passed version contains a capital gains cut. 

The Senate's bill opens two loopholes in the estate tax that benefit only the very wealthiest people. 

A top Chrysler official said the auto maker barely broke even on operations in the third quarter.
The assessment was worse than analysts expected, though not a total surprise in the competitive auto market. 

A move to put Bell companies under the control of the FCC rather than a federal court is gaining support among Bush policy makers because of the FCC's emphasis on deregulation. 

Aristech Chemical received a $25-a-share, or $817.5 million, buy-out bid from a group led by Jon Huntsman, chairman of closely held Huntsman Chemical.
Huntsman said Aristech has previously rebuffed proposals to sell its polypropylene business. 

The Amex named as its chairman James Jones, a lobbyist and ex-House Budget panel chief.
The decision appears to continue the exchange's plan to be a powerful voice in Washington. 

Two recent buy-outs engineered by Gibbons, Green van Amerongen have hit financial snags, another sign of a weakening in the buy-out business. 

Mazda lost its two top U.S. executives for the second time in less than two years.
The resignations were the latest sign of managerial problems. 

Bolar Pharmaceutical is under criminal investigation for possible "false information" in applications to make at least two generic drugs. 

A group of air-express firms sued the U.S. Postal Service, alleging the agency's low rates for overseas delivery were "unfair and illegal." 

Japan's trade surplus shrank in September for the fifth month in a row, helped by a stronger dollar.
But the surplus with the U.S. widened. 

Chemical Bank and Bank of New York posted losses for the third quarter.
Two Southeast superregional banks had lackluster results. 

General Electric's profit rose 16% in the third quarter, reflecting widespread productivity improvements and sales growth in several areas. 

Coca-Cola's profit jumped 22% in the third quarter as strong international sales more than offset disappointing domestic results. 

Markets -- 

Stocks: Volume 160,120,000 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 2759.84, off 13.52; transportation 1484.35, off 0.18; utilities 219.25, up 0.25. 

Bonds: Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3369.69, up 

Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 129.86, up 0.61; spot index 128.97, up 0.84. 

Dollar: 144.17 yen, off 0.40; 1.9083 marks, off 0.0083. 

