.START 

The Justice Department, as anticipated, said it will help prosecute a civil action against Northrop Corp. for alleged mischarges on equipment used to test MX missile parts. 

A copy of the suit couldn't be obtained yesterday, but a Justice Department spokeswoman confirmed that the U.S. has decided to intervene in portions of a complaint brought in 1987 by two former Northrop managers, David Peterson and Jeff Kroll.
The case was filed under the False Claims Act and unsealed in federal court here. 

Under the so-called whistle-blower statute, the government decides if it believes the evidence in a case is compelling and, if so, it may then join in as a co-plaintiff.
Messrs.
Peterson and Kroll stand to share as much as 25% of any monetary recovery made by the U.S. 

Last night, a Northrop spokesman said the company hadn't yet been served with a complaint in the case and therefore couldn't comment.
It is expected, though, that it will be served today. 

Northrop's outside counsel, Los Angeles attorney Gordon Greenberg, couldn't be reached for comment. 

The Justice Department's decision to take up portions of the Peterson-Kroll case -- the intent of which was first reported in The Wall Street Journal last month -- is significant in part because making the guidance systems for the nuclear-tipped MX, also called the Peacekeeper, is big business for Northrop.
Manufacture of the systems, known as inertial measurement units, is the major project in its Electronics Systems Division and accounted for 6.2% of the corporation's total $5.8 billion in sales in 1988. 

Even more important, it damages further Northrop's already much-maligned reputation.
The company's Precision Products Division currently is under criminal indictment for allegedly falsifying tests on the Air Force air-launched cruise missile and the Navy's Harrier fighter jet. 

And criminal charges related to Messrs.
Peterson's and Kroll's assertions are being actively considered by federal prosecutors, and could materialize very soon, according to people close to that investigation. 

The aspects of the Peterson-Kroll case being taken up by the Justice Department relate to three areas: that Northrop allegedly mischarged the government on its labor costs by improperly shuffling expenses between different contracts; that it used unapproved vendors to obtain supplies for parts; and that it wrongfully charged the government for equipment known as the dry integrated test system.
Many of these allegations were told to Congress in testimony by Mr. Peterson two years ago. 

In their original suit, Messrs.
Peterson and Kroll made other sweeping allegations, relating to auditing procedures and quality assurance standards, but the government declined to pursue those.
Still, the pair's lawyer, Phil Benson, said the government had chosen to intervene in "the primary portions" of the case and that was "certainly good news for us." 

In its complaint, the government left open the amount of damages it hopes to recover, as is customary in these matters.
Mr. Benson, who is with the law offices of Herbert Hafif, said his clients believe the mischarging may total as much as $200 million, though "that issue is unresolved." 

