.START 

Precious metals futures prices rose on a report, later denied, that certain Japanese insurance companies were being allowed to buy more precious metals than they previously could. 

Gold for December delivery advanced $1.30 an ounce to $367.40, December silver was up one cent an ounce to $5.1530, and January platinum gained $5.20 an ounce to $491.50. 

Demand for contracts followed a news service report from Tokyo that gold, platinum and silver futures prices surged after the Japanese News Agency said Japanese non-life insurers were buying precious metals.
The news agency said the buying was a result of a government ruling allowing the companies to increase their precious metals holdings. 

Subsequently, Knight-Ridder Inc., which had relayed the Japanese News Agency report, said Tokyo officials rejected that report as "unjustified." 

Traders in Tokyo said the Japanese News Agency story led some to believe a rule allowing the insurers to put 3% of their investment portfolios into precious metals represented an increase, Knight-Ridder said.
In fact, the 3% maximum has been in effect for more than a year, Knight-Ridder said. 

Knight-Ridder quoted traders as saying Japanese officials might have simply urged the insurers to bring their precious metals holdings up to the 3% limit to help combat the dollar's current rise. 

Knight-Ridder said the officials indicated that insurers' precious metals holdings are below the maximum allowed.
They didn't disclose specific levels. 

The buying sparked by the original news report had the strongest effect on platinum because of a Japanese affinity for that metal, and it had a smaller effect on gold, said William O'Neill, vice president, research, for Elders Futures Inc. in New York.
Silver edged up slightly in sympathy with the other two metals, he said. 

"It isn't likely these companies are going to rush out to buy platinum and gold simply because the government is encouraging them to do so," Mr. O'Neill said. "They still have a sour taste in their mouths from the last time they bought precious metals in substantial quantities and the market was unable to hold advances.
As a result, they're holding platinum and gold in their portfolios that are showing losses." 

Mr. O'Neill said buying of precious metals by these insurers is "only a minor factor in the long-term scheme of things." 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

ENERGY: Crude oil futures prices closed higher, continuing the week's strong showing on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
The benchmark West Texas Intermediate for November delivery closed 22 cents higher at $20.47 a barrel.
Heating oil finished the session higher, but November contracts for unleaded gasoline fell 0.16 of a cent to 55.57 cents a gallon.
Analysts and traders cited a large increase in U.S. gasoline supplies, as measured weekly by the American Petroleum Institute.
Gasoline for later delivery rose in price.
Market participants seemed to ignore the institute's statistics that showed somewhat higher crude oil inventories and held onto their optimism of the past several sessions, moving prices higher in light trading. 

COPPER: Futures prices rose on reports that a production disruption at a major U.S. refinery would delay shipments.
The December contract advanced 1.75 cents a pound to $1.3035.
The production problem at the Magma Copper Co. plant in San Manuel, Ariz., was described by a company spokesman as minor and temporary.
The spokesman said a failure in the refinery's electrolytic system a week ago caused material to accumulate on a group of cathodes, or sheets of copper, so that they didn't meet certain specifications.
The problem has been discovered and corrected, he said, and it will take about a week for the system to return to normal.
The spokesman said the problem affected only one batch of cathodes with special specifications. "The copper is perfectly fine otherwise and can be sold elsewhere," he said.
In any case, he said, there is nothing wrong with the plant, which is in full production. "We called a force majeure for an indefinite time to protect ourselves in this specific case until we can resume normal shipments," he said.
A declaration of force majeure refers to an inability to meet a contractual agreement because of forces beyond the shipper's control. 

ORANGE JUICE: Futures prices were slightly higher in thin trading ahead of a government crop report.
The November contract rose 0.75 of a cent a pound to $1.3705.
After the close of trading, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, in its first estimate of the Florida orange crop for the season beginning Dec. 1, said production will amount to 130 million boxes, compared with 146.6 million boxes in the current season.
A box is 90 pounds.
The projection was near the low end of estimates, which ranged between 125 million and 150 million boxes, said Judith Ganes, analyst for Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., New York.
Although prices are likely to rise today on the basis of the low estimate, she said, the advance "should be short-lived" because of expectations that Brazilian shipments of concentrate will fill a supply gap estimated at around 20 million gallons.
Brazilian shipments had been delayed but are expected to begin arriving in large volumes soon, according to Ms. Ganes.
She said this flow of juice into the U.S. could weigh on prices because it will be coming just before the start of the Florida harvest.
Ms. Ganes also said that now that the Florida estimate is out of the way, Brazilian processors are likely to cut prices to stimulate consumption of their product, which is expected to be in plentiful supply. 

