.START 

Is the peacock about to enter the lion's den?
The convoluted and drawn-out attempt by financier Kirk Kerkorian to sell MGM/UA Communications Co. took another twist with the disclosure that National Broadcasting Co. had agreed to be an equity partner in a buy-out of the television and film production company by Qintex Australia Ltd. 

The transaction, which earlier seemed deader than some of MGM/UA's recent films, might yet have a Hollywood happy ending. 

MGM/UA, based in Beverly Hills, Calif., abruptly announced Tuesday that it had terminated the $1.5 billion agreement with Qintex and filed suit in federal court against the Australian broadcaster and resort operator, charging that it had failed to deliver a $50 million letter of credit when it was due Sept. 22 and had misrepresented its ability to fund the acquisition.
MGM/UA had given Qintex an absolute deadline of 6 p.m. EDT Tuesday to present its financing. 

However, Qintex officials said they had reached a verbal agreement with NBC, a New York subsidiary of General Electric Co., to be a "substantial" equity investor in the acquisition.
An NBC spokesman confirmed that the company held talks with Qintex about an equity partnership but emphasized that the network wouldn't have been "a direct party to a purchase agreement." 

But when Qintex officials arrived at an MGM/UA board meeting Tuesday to present details of the arrangement, MGM/UA officials handed them a letter terminating the merger agreement, Qintex officials said. 

"We were never given the opportunity to make the NBC presentation, but we would still like to," said Kevin Wallace, an executive vice president at Qintex America, an affiliate of Qintex Australia.
However, Mr. Wallace says an MGM/UA senior official called a Qintex official at 7 a.m. yesterday to say, "Gee, NBC sounded like a good idea." MGM/UA officials declined to comment on whether the company was willing to reopen the talks. 

If the transaction doesn't get back on track, there will be an incredibly messy divorce.
Besides the MGM/UA suit and a counterclaim expected to be filed by Qintex, Hollywood observers note that Qintex has, in effect, been running MGM/UA for months -- hiring and firing executives, and making decisions on major film projects. 

Although the Qintex-MGM/UA deal appeared on hold last evening, NBC is ready to step back in should talks resume.
An NBC spokesman emphasized that Qintex approached NBC and that NBC's contacts have been only with Qintex, not with MGM/UA officials.
A year ago NBC acquired an option to buy up to 15% of Qintex, but that option hasn't yet been exercised. 

The move by NBC might run up against U.S. Financial Interest and Syndication Rules that block the networks from owning rerun-sales rights to TV shows and from sharing partial ownership of programs.
But NBC officials have been scurrying to come up with a way of backing the MGM acquisition without running afoul of the regulations. 

NBC President Robert Wright has been a leading critic of the "fin-syn" rules, imposed more than two decades ago when the three major networks were seen as a near monopoly on broadcasting and before the rise of cable and independent channels.
He has indicated before that he might try to contest them, and entertainment industry observers think that Sony Corp. 's recent agreement to acquire Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. for $3.4 billion makes the timing perfect for such a challenge.
Mr. Wright has expressed dismay that a foreign company could bid for a company like Columbia, but NBC apparently couldn't. 

It also may be that, for NBC, getting involved in the MGM/UA deal is a way to put more public pressure on Hollywood studios and Congress to lift the regulations on the networks.
But the NBC spokesman said that NBC's interest was never meant to be seen as a direct challenge to the "anachronistic and antiquated" rules. 

"Obviously any relationship we would have seriously considered entering into would have to be structured in a way that recognized the stark realities" of those rules, the NBC spokesman added.
It's unclear how that could be done.
It may be that the syndication operations of MGM/UA -- the business that sells old movies and old reruns of TV series to individual stations -- could be spun off into a separate entity in which NBC doesn't have a stake.
That would leave NBC possibly holding a stake in Qintex itself, or perhaps in MGM/UA's movie-making and series-production operations. 

Christopher Skase, the flamboyant chairman of Qintex, has said in the past that he was negotiating with as many as 10 equity partners to fund the acquisition of MGM/UA, but he has declined to identify them publicly.
However, Mr. Skase did disclose their identities to MGM/UA in September after the movie studio became nervous about his ability to finance the deal. 

There was widespread speculation that Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. -- which has made two failed bids for MGM/UA -- might make another offer.
However, insiders at News Corp. said the company hasn't contacted MGM/UA and isn't currently planning to launch another bid. "You would have to be a fool to make a third bid," said one insider.
However, he declined to rule out the possibility of another offer. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday MGM/UA shares fell $1 to $20.
The Qintex offer amounted to $25 a share, slightly more than the News Corp. offer of $23.16 a share. 

A breakup of the talks is likely to cause chaos at the movie studio.
David Evans, president and chief executive of Qintex Entertainment, a U.S. affiliate, moved into MGM/UA executive offices and has made major executive appointments and decisions on film projects.
For example, Qintex named David Forbes head of marketing and distribution and then let him go. 

Richard Berger, president of the MGM/UA film group, said Qintex initially put most projects on hold.
But Mr. Berger said that six weeks ago Mr. Evans told him, "We have to get going" and proceeded to set a film budget of $400 million over the next two years.
Just last week Qintex committed $5 million to an actor for a film project.
And Qintex decided to sell the screenplay for a movie sequel, "Child's Play II," on the ground that it was too violent. "They decided it wan't the kind of product they wanted to make," Mr. Berger added. 

Mr. Berger said that MGM/UA has continued to acquire film projects under the Qintex reign.
For instance, the studio acquired "Blue Steel," an already completed movie starring Jamie Lee Curtis.
However, he said, "It's a slower process when you are under this kind of question mark.
It's been extremely difficult to get things done." 

Since the first Qintex agreement to acquire MGM/UA in March, Mr. Berger noted, MGM/UA has released such previously completed movies as "Road House," "License to Kill" and "A Dry White Season," an anti-apartheid movie.
And he said MGM/UA plans to release "Rocky V" next summer.
However, he added, "For the next couple of weeks it's going to be wait and see." 

It might also be that way for holders of Los Angeles-based Qintex Entertainment.
In national over-the-counter trading, Qintex Entertainment closed at $4, off $1.625.
Qintex Entertainment is a TV production and distribution company that is 43% owned by Qintex Australia.
Yesterday, Qintex Entertainment said it wasn't a party to the terminated agreement with MGM/UA.
However, it also noted that it had been reviewing its right to participate in the merger. 

In recent days, Qintex Australia's price on the Australian Stock Exchange has sunk as low as 40 Australian cents a share from around A$1.50 last March when the company announced its original agreement with MGM/UA.
Wednesday, the price of Qintex stock rose to 53 Australian cents a share on news that MGM/UA had terminated the purchase accord, but closed at 44 cents, down two cents from Tuesday. 

Dennis Kneale contributed to this article. 

