.START 

A surprise discount rate increase by the Bank of Japan and several rounds of central bank intervention failed to derail the dollar, which finished higher against European currencies and little changed against the yen. 

Frustrated by the dollar's stubborn resiliency in recent trading, the Bank of Japan raised the official discount rate by one-half percentage point to 3.75%. 

But the dollar easily withstood the rate increase and several waves of selling by central banks.
The currency rose above the important 1.92 West German mark level and breached 145 yen before easing late in the session. 

"There are still strong reasons for buying the dollar," said Osamu Seto, a foreign exchange dealer at Mitsui Bank Ltd. "A one-half percentage point increase isn't enough." The discount rate is the central bank's base rate on loans to commercial banks. 

Foreign exchange dealers peg the dollar's strength to continuing confidence in the U.S. economy.
They said comments earlier this week by Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan helped bolster the dollar.
Speaking in Moscow, Mr. Greenspan questioned the efficacy of massive central bank interventions to restrain the dollar. 

Beyond the need to curb inflation, economists interpreted the Bank of Japan's move as a sign of frustration with market intervention as a way to check the dollar's rise.
Despite massive intervention by the Group of Seven industrialized nations in late September, the dollar has steadily gained strength. 

In late New York trading Wednesday, the dollar was quoted at 1.9166 marks, up from 1.9080 marks late Tuesday, and at 144.57 yen, up slightly from 144.55 yen late Tuesday.
Sterling was quoted at $1.5463, down from $1.5530 late Tuesday.
In Tokyo Thursday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 144.25 yen, up from Wednesday's Tokyo close of 143.90 yen. 

"The Bank of Japan got disheartened {Wednesday} at the lack of success of the central intervention policy," said Adrian Tschoegl, an economist for SBCI Securities (Asia) in Tokyo. "So they decided to take the market by surprise rather than have a long, drawn-out public debate." 

The market's lukewarm response to the Bank of Japan's rate hike led many traders to speculate that another Japanese rate increase may be in the offing. 

Samuel Lek, managing director of foreign exchange operations at Bear, Stearns & Co., called the rate rise "a token increase" of a "ceremonial rate." Noting that banks don't borrow at the discount rate but at the overnight rate, which now stands at around 6%, "the hike doesn't really mean anything." 

Tokyo dealers said the abruptness of the Bank of Japan's move underscores the Japanese central bank's concern about foreign exchange rates, adding that another one-half point increase may be on the horizon. 

Bank of Japan Governor Satoshi Sumita, explaining the bank's surprise move, said the rate increase was necessary to stabilize exchange rates and that stable prices are needed to ensure domestic economic growth. 

While many traders concede that a Fed move to ease its credit policy could send the dollar into a tailspin, few expect such action in the near term. 

Traders said Mr. Greenspan has again made it clear that the dollar isn't the Fed's highest priority. "Greenspan is more concerned with price stability in the U.S. than the level of the dollar, certainly in the short run," Bear Stearns's Mr. Lek said. 

The dollar initially fell after the Bank of Japan announced the rate boost at midday in Tokyo.
But it was able to shrug off that news, as well as intervention by the Bank of Japan and the Federal Reserve during the Asian trading day. 

A coordinated round of intervention by seven European central banks, the Fed and the Bank of Canada did little to curb dollar buying.
Dealers quickly snapped up dollars at a lower rate, reinforcing a belief that the central banks have lost their grip on the market. 

As the dollar continued its steady climb, breaking through the psychological and technical resistance levels of 1.92 marks and 145 yen, the Fed intervened twice more to blunt the ascent.
Those two rounds of dollar selling helped trim the dollar's gains by the end of the New York trading day. 

Traders said the market is looking toward tomorrow's release of two U.S. economic indicators.
Analysts say the Producer Price Index for September, which is expected to be up 0.8% after declining the two previous months, could reinforce the view that the Fed won't ease key rates soon.
Retail sales, the subject of the other report, are projected to be flat to down 0.2% after rising 0.7% in August. 

Opinion is mixed over the direction of the dollar in the next few days.
Some analysts forecast that it will hit 1.93 marks while others predict a move lower.
Bill Jansen, a vice president at Discount Corp. in New York, sees the dollar skidding as the market catches up with events of the past week. "The market never even paused to acknowledge a 100 basis-point rise in European rates," he said. "The dollar is overbought and bound to come lower in the next few days." 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $362 an ounce, up $1.
Estimated volume was a light 2.1 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Thursday, gold was quoted at about $361.75 an ounce. 

