.START 

Louisiana's fast-track effort to have a federal court revive its criminal-abortion laws ran into a delay. 

The three-judge federal panel that heard arguments in the case in New Orleans Friday ordered additional briefs from the lawyers, giving them 45 days to file the material and rebuttals.
That means there won't be a decision until December at the earliest. 

The wording of the judges' request suggests they view this as a complex test case, with potential significance for other states that may consider reviving abortion laws. 

The Louisiana attorney general and New Orleans district attorney have asked a federal district court to allow them to revive laws making it a crime to perform abortions, punishable by as much as 10 years in prison.
Enforcement was blocked in 1976 by a federal court that ruled that the laws interfered with the constitutional right to abortion.
Louisiana officials argue that the U.S. Supreme Court decision last spring, upholding Missouri's abortion restrictions, gave the states enough flexibility to make abortion illegal, except when necessary to save the mother's life. 

In an order mailed to the lawyers several hours after oral arguments ended, the three judges asked whether laws that have been declared unconstitutional may remain on a state's books -- as in this case -- and may be revived if circumstances change, or whether the laws must be passed anew by the state legislature.
The way the court decides this issue may affect a number of states that hope to revive abortion laws if the Supreme Court sharply curtails or overrules the abortion right. 

Rachael Pine, an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer who argued against the attempt to revive Louisiana's laws, said, "The order reflects that we can safely expect an opinion of substance from this court with implications for the legal treatment of attempts to revive old abortion laws." 

The judges also asked how certain they need to be that the Supreme Court is abandoning its 1973 Roe vs.
Wade decision in order to agree to Louisiana's request.
They also asked how to balance the competing values of the constitutional right to abortion and the state's "interest in protecting potential human life." 

The three judges are District Court Judges Martin Feldman and A.J. McNamara and Court of Appeals Judge W. Eugene Davis, all appointed by former President Reagan. 

