.START 

Resolution Funding Corp. said the auction of its securities to finance the savings-and-loan bailout will begin Oct. 25. 

Meanwhile, an important lawmaker is trying to thwart a plan by the new thrift-bailout agency, Resolution Trust Corp., to raise other working capital. 

Resolution Funding Corp. will issue $30 billion in bonds over the next two years, backed by zero-coupon Treasury securities financed by contributions from the S&L industry.
The amounts and maturity of the first Refcorp auction won't be announced until Wednesday. 

Refcorp said the bonds won't be subject to redemption prior to maturity, unless it designates those terms for a particular series of bonds.
Refcorp also said the bonds may be stripped into their separate interest and principal components. 

In addition, the Resolution Trust Corp., the new agency that will close or merge sick thrifts, will also require working capital to carry the assets of failed S&Ls until they can be sold.
The most likely way to raise that capital, RTC officials say, would be for the agency to create a private thrift or bank under its supervision.
That institution would acquire assets from the sick thrifts under government control, and then issue a security to the public, backed by the assets. 

Such a mechanism would keep the spending of those funds from adding to the federal budget deficit. 

But the RTC plan violates the intent of Congress in its massive savings-and-loan bailout law, said Rep. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.), an influential member of the House Banking Committee.
Yesterday, he sent Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady a letter vehemently objecting to such a plan, saying it shows "a complete disregard for the integrity of the budget process." 

Mr. Schumer said the notes issued by such an RTC thrift would require a higher interest rate that of regular Treausry debt.
Moreover, he said Congress intended to allow RTC to issue a certain amount of debt only to the acquirers of sick S&Ls -- not the public. 

Officials of RTC said the agency probably won't decide how to raise the capital for another week or so. 

