.START 

The Philippines is offering to buy back $1.3 billion of its foreign bank debt for $650 million, and it then plans to borrow about $1 billion more from banks through an international bond issue. 

The Philippines is the second nation to agree to a bank debt settlement under the Brady debt strategy.
That strategy, launched by Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady in March, initially stressed cutting back debt and interest payments, but recently it has placed more emphasis on continued bank lending. 

The price the Philippines is offering on its foreign bank debt -- 50 cents for a dollar in loans outstanding -- is roughly the same as is offered in the secondary market where bank loans are traded.
The Philippine offer thus represents something of an endorsement of the secondary market's valuation of Third World bank debt.
The secondary market often has been criticized by bankers and their regulators as a place for distress sales, where the true value of bank loans isn't properly reflected. 

The offer to banks was announced by the Philippine central bank governor Jose H. Fernandez, who is just ending a short visit to the U.S. 

To buy back its debt, the Philippines will borrow $120 million borrowed from the International Monetary Fund, $250 million from the World Bank, and $190 million from Japan.
In addition, it will use about $90 million in funds provided by the U.S. as partial payment for U.S. military bases in the Philippines.
Banks have three weeks to respond to the Philippine offer. 

The repurchase can't be closed until early January, bankers said.
For complex legal and financial reasons, the $1 billion bond issue can't be completed until the buy-back is completed, they added. 

Bankers blamed the delay in working out repurchase transactions on "bureaucratic delays" at the IMF.
But the IMF may be proceeding slowly because there is opposition to the bond issue within the Bush administration.
The U.S. is the IMF's biggest shareholder.
Some administration officials who have advocated cutting back debt and interest payments oppose the recent re-emphasis on continued bank lending and are trying to counter it. 

The Philippines has a total of about $28 billion of foreign debt, and about $12 billion of that is owed to foreign banks.
Of the money owed to foreign banks, only about $7.5 billion is in the form of medium-term and long-term debt.
The balance consists of trade credits. 

This summer, Mexico became the first nation to agree to a bank debt settlement under the Brady strategy. 

