.START 

The South African government, so long on the defensive, is moving to seize the political initiative from its opponents both at home and abroad in order to head off further economic sanctions. 

Pretoria's promise to release eight prominent political prisoners -- but not African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela -- is aimed at clearing the way for negotiations on a new constitution with black leaders inside the country as well as at derailing sanctions campaigns that are beginning to gather steam.
In particular, the government is hoping to keep political tensions from affecting talks on rescheduling $8 billion of foreign debt that falls due next year. 

Several days before the announcement, Finance Minister Barend du Plessis returned from a visit to the U.S. and Europe angered that bankers and government officials were being "misled" by anti-apartheid activists questioning the ability of the ruling National Party to deliver on promises made during the September election on reforms that would bring blacks into government at all levels.
In an interview this week, Mr. du Plessis bemoaned "the wrong perception" that the South African government, "having received a mandate, is not going to do anything." 

The pending prisoner releases are meant to counter this perception and signal Pretoria's sincerity about creating a climate for negotiation in South Africa.
The news was greeted with celebration by friends and relatives of the prisoners, some of whom have been jailed for as long as 25 years, and by unusual words of praise for the government by anti-apartheid groups.
And it will likely weaken any calls for more sanctions by members of the British Commonwealth at the group's annual meeting next week. 

At the same time, though, the move will surely raise expectations.
Yesterday, three leading anti-apartheid clerics, including Anglican Archbishop Desmond Tutu, met with President F.W. de Klerk and urged him to take the further steps of releasing Mr. Mandela, unbanning all political organizations, including the ANC, and lifting the state of emergency.
After the threehour meeting, they complained that Mr. de Klerk had given vague responses, and they said they would continue to call for further sanctions against South Africa. 

Sanctions advocates also will try to turn any government reforms and concessions to their advantage, arguing that they are the result of present measures to isolate the government and that additional measures will force Pretoria to do more.
Although the U.S. administration has officially opposed sanctions, State Department officials have recently acknowledged that sanctions have had a substantial impact on persuading white South Africans of the need for negotiations with black leaders. 

"What the government does understand is pressure," says Terry Crawford-Browne, a former South African banker who advises church leaders on sanctions strategy. "It is a fallacy that Pretoria reacts badly to pressure.
In fact, it's the only thing that works." 

Mr. du Plessis disputes this. "Our own political agenda bears an urgency that has been ratified by way of a mandate between the government and the electorate," he says. "The stamp of urgency doesn't come from the banks or businesses or church leaders." Still, the finance minister concedes that political steps are needed: "We understand as a government the necessity of resolving the internal issue, not with a view to satisfying the outside world in any way but with a view to getting confidence restored for our investors and overseas investors so that we can have an increase in investment and an increase in economic activity." 

This is why the government is so keen to divorce politics from the debt talks.
The biggest sanctions blow was delivered by international banks in 1985 when they refused to roll over their loans to South Africa and prohibited any new lending.
Pretoria subsequently declared a standstill on repaying its debt to commercial banks, which currently amounts to about $8 billion of the country's total $22 billion foreign debt.
In 1987, the government and its creditor banks agreed to a three-year schedule calling for payments amounting to about 2% of principal twice a year.
This agreement expires next June, and if there isn't a new contract the $8 billion will technically be payable on demand, which would force the country to default. 

Anti-apartheid activists are pressing the banks to attach political conditions to the signing of any new agreement, such as demanding an end to all apartheid legislation. "We're saying that the time has come for constitutional change in South Africa," says Mr. Crawford-Browne. "The banks must make that clear and back it up with their clout.
We must reach a point where South Africa achieves international acceptability." 

Mr. du Plessis says that is what Pretoria wants, too. "We have made tremendous progress, but that is forgotten," he says. "The goal posts are continuously moving." 

