.START 

The Georgia attorney general, in a move that soon might be duplicated in several other states, has charged 12 dairy companies with fixing milk prices in sales to Georgia public schools. 

The lawsuit, filed in U.S. district court in Brunswick, Ga., alleges that from as early as 1982 to as late as 1988 the companies rigged bids on milk-supply contracts to county and city schools.
The contracts were valued at more than $20 million annually. 

Georgia's action follows the settlement last month of a similar case in Florida.
There, officials investigating milk contracts and price-fixing eventually recovered more than $33.7 million from dairy companies throughout the South. 

"Other states will most definitely start looking at this," said W. Gordon Hamlin Jr., an attorney with Powell, Goldstein, Frazer & Murphy in Atlanta.
Mr. Hamlin, who is currently acting as a special assistant attorney general for Georgia, said the topic dominated discussions at a recent meeting of attorneys general in the Southeast.
He said Georgia began its investigation following disclosure of the Florida case last year. 

Thomas Hillstrom, special assistant to Florida's attorney general, said Florida has passed on evidence uncovered during its investigation to the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division, which is conducting several investigations.
The Justice Department didn't return phone calls. 

Mr. Hillstrom said Florida has also aided Georgia and Alabama in conducting their own investigations.
He added that seven other states have also approached Florida for help, but he declined to identify them, saying he didn't want to unnecessarily publicize their efforts.
Joy Patterson, a spokeswoman in the Alabama attorney general's office, confirmed that the state has been investigating milk contracts for several months, but she declined to comment further. 

In Georgia, the 12 companies named as defendants are: Dairymen Inc. and its Flav-O-Rich Inc. subsidiary, both based in Louisville, Ky.; Associated Dairy Farmers Inc. in Atlanta; Atlanta Dairies Inc. and Land-O-Sun Dairies Inc. in Johnson City, Tenn., both units of Finevest Foods Inc. in Greenwich, Conn. (Finevest itself wasn't accused). 

Also, Pet Inc. in St. Louis; Dempsey Brothers Dairies Inc. in Rome, Ga.; Borden Inc. and its Meadow Gold Dairies Inc. unit, both based in Columbus, Ohio; Coble Dairy Products Cooperative Inc. in Lexington, N.C.; Coburg Dairy Inc. in Charleston, S.C.; and Kinnett Dairies Inc. in Columbus, Ga. 

Dairymen and Flav-O-Rich denied any wrongdoing.
Kinnett said it has no knowledge of any illegal conspiracy.
Dempsey Brothers couldn't be reached.
The remaining companies said they were still reviewing the complaint or declined to comment. 

KRAFT'S LAW FIRM MAKES ROOM for Kraft's retiring chief in Chicago.
Until now the New York-based firm, Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz, has declined to follow the example of many other large law firms that have opened branches.
But in January, when John M. Richman retires as chairman of Kraft General Foods and joins Wachtell Lipton as counsel, the firm will open an office in Chicago. 

However, it is only a half-hearted break with tradition. "It's really an office for him in Chicago," says partner Martin Lipton. "We're not expanding into Chicago or trying to create a Chicago operation." 

Adds Mr. Richman: "There's a big difference between a Chicago office staffed with lawyers and a single guy who is taking phone calls and has a fax machine but doesn't have a staff there." Mr. Richman will advise clients on mergers and acquisitions, divestitures and corporate governance issues. 

Wachtell Lipton has had a long relationship with Kraft and Mr. Richman.
In the recent past, the law firm represented Kraft when it sold its Duracell Inc. unit and when Kraft was acquired by Philip Morris Cos.
The latter transaction reportedly generated a $20 million fee for Wachtell. 

So what will the sign on Mr. Richman's new door say? "I assume it will say John Richman and I assume it will say Wachtell Lipton," he says. 

MEXICAN LAW FIRM opens New York branch. 

The law firm, Bryan, Gonzalez Vargas y Gonzalez Baz, is the largest in Mexico, with 91 lawyers.
No other Mexican firm has a U.S. office, although several have informal affiliations with firms in this country. 

Bryan Gonzalez Vargas has seven offices in Mexico, including five along the U.S. border.
About 60% of its practice involves representation of foreign clients. 

Jose I. Cruz, who specializes in foreign investment and foreign banking work in Mexico, will be the resident partner in the New York office and will advise clients on Mexican legal issues. 

"Mexico as a country is becoming a more active player in international trade," says Mr. Cruz.
His firm decided it was "important to develop a stronger and permanent presence abroad," he adds.
Mr. Cruz says he does not expect the office to grow to more than four lawyers. 

Bryan Gonzalez Vargas's U.S. clients include Whirlpool Corp., Rockwell International Corp. Combustion Engineering Inc., and Johnson & Johnson, according to its managing partner, Aureliano Gonzalez Baz. 

"This is something we've been looking at for a couple of years," says Mr. Gonzalez. "We didn't really know whether having an office in New York City was going to (make it) easier to serve clients or not, but we decided to try it." 

FCC COUNSEL JOINS FIRM: Diane S. Killory will join 500-lawyer Morrison & Foerster as a partner in its Washington office in mid-November.
She will help develop the mass-media practice of the San Francisco-based firm's communications group.
Ms. Killory, 35 years old, resigned as Federal Communications Commission general counsel early this month after nearly three years in that post.
She was the first woman to be appointed FCC general counsel. 

RICHARD P. MAGURNO, FORMERLY EASTERN AIRLINES Inc. 's top lawyer, joined the New York law firm of Lord Day & Lord, Barrett Smith as a partner.
Mr. Magurno, 45, spent 17 years at the Miami-based airline and was named general counsel in 1984.
He left the company in 1987.
Mr. Magurno says he will split his time between the Washington and New York offices of the 200-lawyer firm, with specialties in aviation and labor law. 

