.START 

Tenneco Inc. said its board authorized a $300 million stock buy-back, the second sizable repurchase program in the past year, and suggested it may not be the last. 

James L. Ketelsen, Tenneco's chairman and chief executive, said in an interview that he expects Tenneco to continue to generate excess cash, and that some of that could be used to buy back more shares. "It would be in line with our philosophy down the road," he said. 

In addition, Mr. Ketelsen said analysts' forecasts that the company would earn between $3.85 and $4.50 a share in 1989 are accurate. "That's a fairly wide range and we'll be in there." In 1988, Tenneco earned $5.48 a share, but because of the company's huge assets sale and restructuring, year-to-year comparisons mask what analysts call improved performance. 

Tenneco officials have focused intensely on efforts to drive up the company's stock price.
Tenneco used the $7.5 billion it received last year from the sale of its oil company to pay down $5 billion of debt and to buy back $1 billion of stock.
The latest buy-back program goes through 

Tenneco closed at $62.375, down 50 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.
A year ago, the stock traded in the mid-to-high 40s. 

Mr. Ketelsen said that Tenneco, a widely diversified company whose operations include a natural-gas pipeline, a shipbuilding unit, a farm-equipment business and an automotive parts division, is still looking for small asset sales, in line with a recent $94 million sale in its automotive division. "But we're not looking at any major divisions," he said. 

Tenneco's major problems in recent years stemmed from enormous contract settlements related to its gas pipeline and the perennial losses of its struggling farm-equipment business, Case IH. Mr. Ketelsen said the pipeline problems have been settled and he noted that Case has been in the black every quarter this year.
The fourth quarter is usually the strongest for that business, he said, adding that the turnaround of Case isn't complete. 

