.START 

BUSH IS DESIGNATING a crisis committee following Panama's uprising. 

As a result of a review of its activities during last week's attempted coup against Noriega, the White House has decided that it automatically will convene a designated committee to coordinate the handling of emergencies.
The panel will include officials from the State Department, the Pentagon and the CIA. Despite the collapse of the coup, the administration has concluded that the current system needs only "fine-tuning," an official said. 

Members of Congress barred at least one covert operation in Panama that was proposed by the Bush administration, intelligence sources said. 

Lebanese lawmakers announced a compromise that gives greater political authority to Lebanon's Moslems in exchange for the start of a Syrian troop withdrawal from the country.
In Beirut, Christian military leader Michel Aoun rejected the plan, reached at talks in Saudi Arabia, and vowed to continue the 14-year-old civil war. 

A Swedish appeals court freed a man convicted in July of killing Prime Minister Palme, ruling that there wasn't enough evidence to blame Christer Pettersson for the February 1986 assassination.
The 42-year-old Pettersson, who has a lengthy criminal record, was released from a Stockholm prison, where he had been serving a life term. 

The Nobel Prize in chemistry was shared by U.S. scientists Thomas Cech and Sidney Altman for their discovery that the genetic material RNA could actively engage in chemical reactions.
The prize in physics was awarded by the Nobel committee in Stockholm to two Americans and a West German. 

Physicists have discovered strong evidence that there are only three families of fundamental particles that make up matter.
The finding, which came as scientists attempted to mimic the birth of the universe in an atom smasher, "puts the lid on the complexity of nature," said Burton Richter, 1976 winner of the Nobel Prize in physics. 

Costa Rica's opposition received funding from the National Endowment for Democracy, a bipartisan group established by Congress in 1984 to encourage democracy.
The funding by the organization's GOP wing continued until July of this year and was used against President Arias, documents show. 

The House approved a statutory ban on burning the U.S. flag, providing for as long as a year in prison and a $1,000 fine for anyone who desecrates it.
The bill was drafted in response to a Supreme Court decision in June that found a Texas law prohibiting such protest violated free-speech protections.
The measure was sent to Bush. 

Federal safety investigators found an apparently pre-existing crack in the engine disk of a United Airlines jetliner that crashed in July in Sioux City, Iowa, killing 112 people.
The disk had been found Wednesday by a farmer in an Iowa cornfield. 

Six anti-American students occupied part of the U.S. ambassador's home in Seoul before riot police arrested them.
Officials said the students, armed with firebombs and tear gas, were protesting U.S. trade pressure on South Korea.
They also called on Roh to cancel his planned visit next week to Washington. 

A top East German official rejected the democratic changes embraced by some of the nation's Communist allies.
Central Committee member Otto Reinhold said socialism would continue to dominate society.
The statements came amid persistent reports that the departure of leader Honecker was imminent. 

Poland unveiled an economic program aimed at introducing free-market mechanisms and capitalist institutions "in the swiftest possible way" after 45 years of communism.
The Solidarity-led government's program includes restoring private property and other forms of non-state ownership. 

Latin American leaders pledged to fight drug trafficking and condemned Noriega's regime in Panama.
In a declaration issued at the end of the two-day summit in Peru, the Central and South American presidents also urged that Cuba be readmitted to the Organization of American States. 

Soviet troops killed an Azerbaijani man in the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh, the second such shooting in as many days.
The soldiers had been sent to restore order in the enclave.
Activists in Azerbaijan, meanwhile, extended a railway blockade of Armenia to the neighboring republic of Georgia, local newspapers reported. 

Israel's Shamir dismissed as "inflated" and unnecessary a suggestion by the U.S. for a meeting with the foreign ministers of Israel and Egypt in an attempt to revive peace efforts.
Separately, the premier said Israel's air defenses failed to detect a Syrian jet whose pilot landed Wednesday in Israel and reportedly sought asylum. 

A bar fight in Portugal escalated into a brawling rampage involving as many as 500 U.S. and British seamen that left cars overturned, windows smashed and more than 100 people injured.
Police said 121 of the sailors were arrested following Wednesday night's incident along Lisbon's dockside. 

Security forces in East Timor battled with pro-independence demonstrators during a Mass at which Pope John Paul II told Indonesia to uphold human rights after what he called years of "destruction and death." About 100,000 people attended the service in Dili led by the Roman Catholic pontiff. 

Nelson Mandela held an unprecedented meeting with leaders of the Mass Democratic Movement, considered South Africa's "new generation" of anti-apartheid activists.
The 72-year-old black nationalist, who is serving a life prison term for treason, said he had urged Pretoria to negotiate with the outlawed African National Congress. 

