.START 

The House approved legislation expanding federal assistance for child care after it rejected two narrower proposals supported by the Bush administration. 

The action put Congress closer to enacting federal child-care legislation, though much shaping remains to be done in conference with the Senate, which passed its own child-care subsidy and tax-credit bill last June.
The legislation still faces other hurdles: The administration opposes both the Senate and House versions. 

The House bill actually includes two separate sets of proposals, although it's widely expected a House-Senate conference committee won't approve all the various recommendations. 

One set of proposals, which originally emerged from the House Education and Labor Committee, would expand the Head Start program for disadvantaged preschool children into an all-day, year-round system for children of working mothers, provide for before-school and after-school day care, and distribute grants to states for child-care services. 

The other, which came from the Ways and Means Committee, would expand the earned-income tax credit for working families and increase block grants to states for child-care services. 

The first proposal would authorize $1.8 billion in federal spending in fiscal 1990, which began Oct. 1, and "such sums as may be necessary" after that.
The tax and block-grant proposal, which wouldn't require annual appropriations, would cost about $15 billion over five years. 

The Senate's child-care bill would cost $1.75 billion. 

In yesterday's action, the House defeated, 285-140, a Republican substitute proposed by Rep. Mickey Edwards of Oklahoma that would have solely expanded the tax credit for working poor families.
It also rejected, 230-195, an amendment offered by Rep. Charles Stenholm (D., Texas) to strip from the bill a controversial provision requiring states to regulate child-care providers. 

The Stenholm plan would expand the earned-income tax credit and increase child-care block grant and Head Start services.
Echoing others who said the plan lacked quality assurances, Rep. George Miller (D., Calif.) argued against a child-care system "built on the model of Sam Pierce -- we can put the money out there and hope for the best." 

Samuel Pierce, who was head of the Department of Housing and Urban Affairs during the Reagan administration, has come under widespread criticism for a loose management style that critics say allowed extensive mismanagement, fraud and influence peddling. 

Critics argue that the Democratic-led child-care plan wouldn't give parents as many choices as tax credits favored by Republicans would.
They also said the Democratic proposals would disproportionately benefit families with working mothers, impose costly regulations and create a new bureaucracy to administer grant programs. 

Supporters of the Democratic approach contend it would make child-care more affordable, available and safe.
They say the Republican reliance on tax credits for families wouldn't provide enough overall assistance and wouldn't do anything to improve the quality, or increase the supply, of day care. 

A House-Senate conference committee will have to sort out the controversial issue of deciding under what circumstances public funds could go to religiously affiliated child-care centers. 

The White House already has labelled the Senate version of the child-care bill a veto candidate, and administration officials warned in a letter circulated last week that the House provisions, which are attached to the pending budget "reconciliation" tax and spending bill, are "incompatible with the president's child-care principles." After yesterday's vote, Rep. Newt Gingrich, the Republican whip from Georgia, warned that President Bush "is reluctantly prepared to veto" the reconciliation bill if it reaches his desk with child-care provisions he deems unacceptable. 

"I don't believe a kinder and gentler George Bush wants to veto child-care legislation," responded Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.), the chief sponsor of the Senate legislation.
He added that he was "very confident" child-care provisions would be part of the reconciliation bill when it is sent to the president. 

