.START 

In a sign of current troubles facing the market for highly leveraged takeovers, an investment group including Chicago's wealthy Pritzker family and Wall Street's First Boston Corp. withdrew its $3.35 billion offer for American Medical International Inc. 

The investment group, IMA Holdings Corp., yesterday offered to buy American Medical, a hospital company, for a lower price of $3 billion, including the assumption of about $1.31 billion in debt.
But officials involved in the negotiations declined to speculate on whether the new offer would be accepted. 

In a terse statement, First Boston, a unit of CS First Boston Group, said that IMA "does not expect to be able to satisfy the conditions for its financing {of the initial $3.35 billion offer} prior to Oct. 11," when the offer was to expire. 

IMA Holdings cut its tender offer price to $26.50 a share from the original bid of $28 a share, American Medical said. 

The unraveling of the American Medical deal comes amid turbulence in the $200 billion market for high-yield, high-risk junk bonds, which have provided much of the long-term financing for leveraged takeovers. 

First Boston, which already has almost $1 billion in temporary "bridge" loans outstanding to clients to help them complete takeovers, had agreed to lend more than $700 million to help finance the acquisition of American Medical.
Yesterday, First Boston withdrew that lending commitment and replaced it with a new offer, the details of which weren't disclosed. 

"Our offer hasn't been withdrawn; it's just a revision," a First Boston official said.
Separately, Michael Goldberg, co-head of First Boston's mergers and acquisitions department, said: "First Boston and its partners still like this company very much, want to conclude this transaction and are committed to doing it." 

Takeover speculators apparently expect the acquisition to be completed.
On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, American Medical's shares closed at $23.375, up 62.5 cents, on the news.
About 1.4 million shares changed hands, nearly double the stock's daily average trading volume. 

In addition to IMA Holdings lowering the price of its offer, the group also reduced the number of shares that would be tendered to 63 million shares from 68.8 million.
The hospital company said IMA boosted the amount of equity to be received by American Medical shareholders to 20% from 10% of IMA's common stock outstanding at the time of the merger. 

American Medical said a special committee of its board would meet in the next few days to review the offer, but a spokeswoman and officials of the company wouldn't comment further. 

IMA has four times extended its tender offer for American Medical, saying it is awaiting congressional action on a proposal that could eliminate the tax deductibility of certain interest payments on original-issue discounts of debt securities used to finance the offer.
But of greater concern has been recent price drops in the junk-bond market, which have fueled doubts among analysts that the transaction could be financed on its original terms. 

IMA began its tender offer in July, but had extended it to 12:01 a.m. EDT Oct. 12.
As of Sept. 26, the company said it had received offers for about 40.4 million shares, including shares issuable upon conversion of convertible debentures. 

Given the troubles with the transaction, a price cut was expected, but one analyst said that the actual cut was greater than anticipated.
Rae Alperstein of Bateman Eicher, Hill Richards Inc. said she valued the previous offer at $27 a share, and the revised offer at $24.50.
She anticipated only a $1.50 decline per share in the valuation, and expects American Medical to push for a higher price.
Still, she and others don't expect the transaction to crumble. "First Boston very much wants and needs to do this deal," she said. 

John Hindelong, a health-care analyst with Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, said: "The main thing is, this indicates there will be a deal, at a modest price cut.
Shareholders will still get a nice return." One takeover-stock speculator, or arbitrager, who declined to be identified, said that most arbs had expected a $2 to $3-a-share cut in price. 

IMA's bid, made last July, topped proposals made by at least two rival bidders for Beverly Hills, Calif.-based American Medical.
The initial bid was valued by IMA at $1.93 billion, and included the assumption of $1.42 billion in debt, giving the transaction a total indicated value of about $3.35 billion. 

IMA was a new company formed by First Boston and Harry Gray Melvyn Klein & Partners, a leveraged buy-out fund in which the Pritzkers are major investors. 

The initial bid was for about 94% of American Medical's fully diluted shares.
If all of the shares were tendered under that offer, each holder would receive about $26.50 a share in cash on a pro-rated basis, plus an equity "stub," which entitles holders to an equity participation.
The stubs collectively would have given holders a 10% stake in new shares of American Medical. 

