.START 

Time Warner Inc. 's Warner Communications Inc. is negotiating with Sony Corp. to gain control of the giant Burbank studio Warner jointly owns with Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., according to sources familiar with the talks. 

The negotiations are part of concessions Warner is seeking from Sony in exchange for an agreement to free Hollywood producers Peter Guber and Jon Peters from an exclusive agreement with Warner to run Columbia.
Sony last week agreed to acquire Columbia for $3.4 billion, and subsequently offered to acquire Guber Peters Entertainment Co. for $200 million. 

According to the sources, Warner wants to gain control of the sprawling 150 acre Burbank Studios, which is valued at more than $250 million.
Warner has a 65% share and Columbia holds 35% of the studio.
The sources said that the plan under discussion envisions Sony swapping Columbia's interest in the Burbank studio for the old Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer lot in Culver City, Calif., which Warner acquired two years ago with its purchase of Lorimar Telepictures Corp. Thus, Columbia would still have headquarters at one of Hollywood's five major studio facilities. 

Officials of Sony and Warner declined to comment.
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing yesterday regarding its proposed acquisition of Guber Peters, Sony said the parties involved are continuing to hold discussions to settle the Guber Peter contract with Warner.
The filings also revealed information about the Guber Peters contract with Warner that shows it to be one of the most attractive and lucrative arrangements between any Hollywood studio and a producer of movies. 

The filing also discloses details about Guber Peters's financial projections, and provides additional details of the employment agreements Sony has struck with the two producers. 

The filing says Guber Peters told Sony that over the next three years, it expects revenue of $50 million from its interests in the films "Batman," "Rainman," and "Gorillas in the Mist." But Sony is clearly paying a hefty price for a company with relatively tiny earnings; the filing says Guber Peters expects net income of $15.2 million for fiscal 1990, and operating profit of $18.9 million. 

Sony said it will establish a bonus pool for Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters and up to three other executives based on a percentage of the amount by which Columbia's profits exceed $200 million before interest, depreciation and taxes.
If those profits range between $200 million and $275 million, for example, the bonus pool would be 2.5% of that; if those profits exceed $425 million, management would be entitled to 10%. 

Profits before interest, taxes and depcreciation is generally referred to as cash flow in the motion-picture business.
Columbia has said it expects cash flow of about $300 million in 1990. 

The filing also says Sony has agreed to pay the management team $50 million on the fifth anniversary of the acquisition of Columbia; if they don't acquire control of Columbia, they would still pay the Guber Peters management team $25 million. 

As previously reported, Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters will start with salaries of $2.8 million annually, and they stand to get more than $50 million from Sony for their combined 28% stake in Guber Peters Entertainment. 

As for the Guber Peters pact with Warner, the Sony filing says it includes an agreement to establish a revolving $49 million fund to finance five to seven fulllength motion pictures.
The revolving fund appears to be designed to ensure that Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters can make the movies they want even if Warner rejects them; Warner would still release the movies through its distribution system for Guber Peters. 

Warner also agreed to provide the two producers with minimum annual payments, advances based on the gross revenues of movies they produce, and profit participation in films based on the gross revenues.
Few Hollywood deals enable participants to be paid from the gross receipts of movies. 

