.START 

There are more than 1,600 stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange, and it sometimes seems that publishers release at least that many new books each year devoted to different aspects of investing.
Both the publishers and the book-buying public are hoping for the same thing: adding untold riches to their bottom line.
The probability curve does not favor either. 

Nevertheless, readers can learn a lot from investment books and a good place to start is the new edition of "Graham and Dodd's Security Analysis," last published in 1962.
A lot has happened since in the investment world and this fifth edition by Sidney F. Cottle, Roger F. Murray and Frank E. Block (McGraw-Hill, 658 pages, $52.95) reflects some of those changes.
All the examples in this "bible" of the investment field have been updated.
Even more important, chapters have been added on economic and capital market analysis.
The new edition also reflects the pervasiveness of computers by offering brief sections on security data bases and security analysis software.
Of course, fuddy-duddy fundamentalists happy with their old editions will not want their lives complicated by sections, even short ones, on equity options and futures contracts. 

For those investors who don't want a seven-course dinner on how to pick stocks, Charles Brandes's new book "Value Investing Today" (Dow Jones-Irwin, 167 pages, $24.95) offers a taste of Graham and Dodd without all the numbers.
Value investing is built on the simple premise that the shares of any sound company -- even a boring, slow-growing business -- are a good investment if bought at a low enough price.
Such a strategy, admits the author, will be too unexciting and will require too much discipline for many readers.
So he also reveals for the impatient investor some shortcuts to doing Graham and Dodd-type analysis. 

Have you ever said to yourself on a day when the stock market is taking gas, why didn't I put my nest egg in Swiss government bonds 10 years ago and forget it? (Or Japanese stocks, or Italian lira or whatever?) Well, if you have, Gordon K. Williamson's book "The Longman Investment Companion: A Comparative Guide to Market Performance" (Longman Financial Services, 162 pages, $19.95) is just what you have been looking for.
This book provides historical track records on more than 70 investments including annual percentage changes for each of them.
By the way, Swiss government bonds would not have been such a hot investment -- they had an annual compound return of 6.7% from 1978 through 1988 and were paying only 2.2% at the beginning of 1989.
Compare that with a portfolio of international mutual funds -- they were up, on average, 17.6% a year over the same period. 

Do you like to worry yourself silly late into the night?
If your answer is yes, reading Jake Bernstein's recent book "The New Prosperity" (New York Institute of Finance, 359 pages, $19.95) is for you.
Mr. Bernstein, a tireless writer about various aspects of the futures markets, here turns his attention to the world economy.
As a longtime student of cycle analysis he concludes that several important long-term cycles are going to coincide in the 1990s.
That coincidence points toward a total collapse of the international and domestic economic structures, says the author. 

Moreover, he claims there is nothing any government, political leader or the public as a whole can do to avert this crisis.
The good news is that he tells you how he thinks you can survive the crash and even prosper during the recovery. 

Many investors consider options on stocks too complex to fool with.
In doing so, according to Carl Luft and Richard Sheiner, authors of "Understanding and Trading Listed Stock Options" (Probus, 235 pages, $21.95), investors foolishly miss investment opportunities that can be very rewarding.
The authors argue convincingly that options should be used by conservative and prudent investors.
The great thing about this book is that it provides detailed, worked-out examples and then offers work sheets for readers to practice setting up option trades to achieve various goals. 

Suppose you really don't want to invest -- you just want to have fun reading about people who make their living on Wall Street.
Then Kathleen Odean's "High Steppers, Fallen Angels and Lollipops" (Holt, 212 pages, $8.95) is guaranteed to bring you a few smiles.
This book provides the provenance for such terms as "punters," "Airedales" and "alley waddlers." But Ms. Odean goes further, giving analyses of a wide range of market metaphors -- from money as dirt to sex in the marketplace.
After reading this book you might want to check if the "teddy-bear pats" your company received required any "threshold deterrents" or was the suitor just looking for "sex without marriage." 

Mr. Angrist writes about the futures and options market for the Journal. 

