.START 

The dollar bounced back from a one-two punch by central banks, closing higher against the mark and yen. 

Coordinated interest-rate increases in Europe and continued dollar selling by central banks, which began on a big scale Sept. 25, would normally decrease the dollar's attraction in global markets.
But that happened only briefly yesterday. 

Now, the currency's stubborn resilience raises questions about the success of the Group of Seven major industrial nations' attempts to stabilize world-currency markets.
G-7 nations include the U.S., Japan, West Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada. 

"The ammunition has been fired; now there's a much higher chance of the dollar moving up than down," said Andrew Ruschkowski, a currency-options trader at Dresdner Bank in Frankfurt, West Germany. "If they want to keep the dollar down, they still need much more intervention; this market's psychology is sometimes a bit crazy." 

By late afternoon New York trading, the dollar had climbed to 1.8847 marks and 142.40 yen from 1.8813 marks and 141.60 yen late Wednesday.
It fell against the pound, which rose to $1.6125 from $1.6020 a day earlier. 

In Tokyo Friday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.95 yen, up from Thursday's Tokyo close of 141.05 yen. 

The level of the dollar is of vital concern to the G-7 countries because of its ultimate impact on international trade.
A strong dollar threatens to undermine G-7's efforts to reduce the large U.S. trade deficit and correspondingly high West German and Japanese surpluses.
That's because as the U.S. currency climbs, it raises the prices of U.S. exports while lowering the cost of imports to U.S. consumers. 

A strong dollar, however, also helps lower U.S. inflation by reducing import prices and those on domestic goods that compete with imports. 

Conversely, it adds to inflationary pressures in other countries with weakening currencies.
That was one of the motives behind the West German and British interest-rate increases.
The other Continental countries moved mostly to keep their currencies aligned with West Germany's. 

During European trading, the West German Bundesbank raised its key discount and Lombard rates by a full percentage point to 6% and 8%, respectively -- the highest levels in seven years.
It was soon followed by similar rate boosts in Britain, France, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Austria, Belgium and Denmark.
The discount rate is that which banks pay for loans from the Bundesbank; the Lombard rate is charged on borrowings using securities as collateral. 

The attack on the dollar began in Far Eastern markets, where the Bank of Japan, Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Bank of England reportedly intervened, selling dollars for yen.
During U.S. activity, the Fed several times sold dollars for marks and yen, according to traders. 

The dollar fell a little more than a pfennig and about one-third of a yen on the European interest-rate boosts and retreated briefly each time the Fed intervened.
But by late morning in U.S. trading, the dollar's recovery was well under way. 

The West German interest-rate moves "weren't a complete shock to the market, and that's one of the reasons the dollar's not going down significantly," said Geoffrey Dennis, an international economist with James Capel & Co. in London. 

"Here in Europe, everybody was expecting the Bundesbank to raise interest rates; a full point was a surprise, but that something had to be done was clear to everybody," said Aloys Bischofberger, chief economist for Credit Suisse in Zurich. "The dollar is basically strong.
We had these interventions and they brought it down, but there was no real panic in the market." 

Nonetheless, analysts said, judging the success of the G-7 efforts to push the dollar lower depends on what the central banks seek to achieve. 

To the extent that they have driven the U.S. currency down close to the upper levels of the 1.70-1.90 mark and 120-140 yen bands, which many dealers and economists believe are the ranges the G-7 has wanted to keep the dollar within since early 1987, the central banks have done well, so far. 

But "what hasn't been achieved yet is the perception that the dollar needs to weaken because of economic fundamentals," said David Kern, chief economist for National Westminster Bank in London.
He pointed out that in a communique issued on Sept. 23 in Washington, the G-7 countries stated that the dollar's strength conflicted with economic fundamentals, meaning the trade imbalances between the U.S. and its major trading partners. 

"The market has not swallowed this point.
What the market has swallowed is the view that central banks are actively going to hit the dollar and back up their views with money," said Mr. Kern. "The test now is whether the {exchange} rate will stay at current levels -- below 1.90 {marks} and around 140 {yen} -- without further intervention." Pointing to yesterday's activity, many traders are skeptical.
Even so, they expect central banks to keep up their dollar sales, if for no reason than their credibility depends on it.
Some analysts estimated that during the past nine trading days, central banks spent as much as $8 billion; a Japanese news report yesterday said bankers in Tokyo put the Bank of Japan's dollar sales alone at $3 billion during that period. 

Despite yesterday's rise in the dollar, central-bank intervention since mid-September "has been much more successful than people thought it should have been without being backed up by changes in monetary policy," said Mr. Dennis of James Capel.
He noted that the dollar is still well below the 2.0040-mark and 149-yen levels it traded at on Sept. 15. 

Mr. Dennis argued that the G-7's major motive in hammering the dollar down isn't to reach a specific level, but rather to prevent the currency from soaring to 2.20 marks and 170 yen or above, as it threatened to do three weeks ago. 

"In that, they've been successful," he said. "We could go back to 145 yen and 1.92 marks, but we've seen the highs for the dollar for the year." The highs were set on June 15, when the dollar rose in intraday trading to 2.0475 marks and 151.85 yen. 

Some analysts said the Bundesbank's relatively steep one-percentage point interest-rate boosts yesterday reflected its conclusion that the U.S. Federal Reserve wasn't in a position to assist by lowering U.S. rates. 

"The Fed has no room to ease monetary policy at the moment, so the Europeans had to do more than they otherwise might have," said Mr. Dennis.
Inflationary pressures in the U.S. remain high with the American economy growing at a 3.5% annual rate in third-quarter, he said. 

Mr. Dennis predicted that U.S. inflation data for September and October -- to be released in late October and November, respectively -- would be poor because of increases in oil imports and food and clothing prices. "The Fed will have to get through September's and October's inflation reports and look to see if there's any weakening of the real economy in the fourth quarter before considering easing again," he said. 

Similarly, many analysts say the Bank of Japan has little room to maneuver.
While Japan's central bank is willing to let market interest rates edge higher, they contend that the ruling Liberal Democratic Party's political status remains too delicate to risk upsetting either Japan's economic growth or its stock market with higher official interest rates. 

Nonetheless, Peter Stein, a trader at Commerzbank in Frankfurt, said: "The central banks can defend the 1.90 {mark} level; within the next two months, they'll get what they want: the 1.75-1.85 level." 

While agreeing that the dollar won't run away from the central banks, others were more cautious.
Mr. Kern of National Westminster said the dollar would trade at about 1.90 marks and 140 yen at year end, "just about where it is." Mr. Bischofberger of Credit Suisse sees the U.S. currency trading within a 1.85-2.00 mark band during the next three to four months. 

Supporting the dollar in the face of the central banks' efforts to tame it are a strong U.S. economy, still relatively high U.S. interest rates compared with those in Germany and Japan, and foreigners' notion that the U.S., as Mr. Dennis of James Capel put it, "appears very stable politically in a world that appears very unstable this year." 

On New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery dropped $3.60, to $363.40 an ounce, in moderate trading.
Estimated volume was 4.4 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Friday, gold was quoted at about $363.95 an ounce, down $2.95 from Thursday's close. 

With Disney cartoon characters in attendance, Euro Disneyland SCA made simultaneous announcements in Paris and London detailing its plans to raise 6.183 billion French francs (about $968 million) on European stock exchanges. 

The company, which is building Europe's biggest theme park in Marne-la-Vallee, outside Paris, said it will issue 85.9 million shares priced at 72 French francs apiece.
It said 50% of the shares will be sold to investors in France, 25% in Britain, and 10% in Belgium.
The remainder will be offered for sale in other countries of the European Community. 

Analysts said the price is roughly in line with previous estimates which had ranged from 60 francs to 80 francs. "It's no surprise, and we'll be making a buy recommendation to our clients," said Pierre Coiffet, an analyst at the Paris stockbrokerage of Dyna Bourse S.A. 

The Paris announcement, made on the steps of the Paris Bourse, was marred by a noisy demonstration of egg-throwing Young Communists protesting French government expenditures on developing the infrastructure around the park. 

Stiff measures to limit speculation in Switzerland's real-estate market were approved by the Swiss legislature.
The measures, which include a provision to reduce to 30% from 50% the maximum amount a pension fund or insurance company can invest in real estate, could free up as much as $20 billion for investment in the stock market, analysts said.
The new law also requires a minimum down payment of 20% for purchases of buildings that aren't for personal use. 

Koito Manufacturing Co. continued its war of words with T. Boone Pickens Jr.
The Japanese auto-parts maker denied Mr. Pickens's allegations that it was conspiring with Toyota Motor Corp. to orchestrate a special shareholders meeting to a predetermined conclusion. "It is untrue . . . that our company and Toyota Motor Corp. have conspired together," Koito said.
Mr. Pickens, who has invested more than $1 billion to acquire 26% of Koito, had indicated last month that he might call for a special meeting but this week said he wouldn't participate in such a meeting because it would be a "sham." Toyota is the major customer for the headlights that Koito manufactures. 

Defying pressure for a world-wide ban on the ivory trade, the Southern African nations of Zimbabwe and Botswana have drafted a proposal to sell their ivory jointly and channel the money into conservation.
The proposal will be announced at a meeting next week in Lausanne, Switzerland, of the International Convention on Trade in Endangered Species.
The two countries argue that the problem of declining elephant herds is limited largely to East Africa, where they say wildlife management has been poor.
They say the African elephant, half a million strong, is far from the brink of extinction. 

In another setback for the Philippines' privatization program, the government's auction of a 36% stake in Paper Industries Corp. of the Philippines -- the nation's largest paper mill -- drew no bids.
This marked the second time this week that a government auction ended without a sale.
On Monday, the government's Asset Privatization Trust received only one bid for the purchase of Associated Bank, a local commercial financial institution.
Government rules stipulate that two bids are necessary for an auction to be valid. 

Buoyed by such deals as Sony Corp. 's purchase of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. and Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. 's purchase of a 60% interest in CIT Group Holdings Inc., Japanese overseas acquisitions totaled $7.36 billion in September, up sharply from $2.92 billion a year earlier. 

It's true that the pace of Japanese acquisitions in the U.S. has slowed somewhat from last year's levels.
In the first nine months of this year, Japanese acquisitions of U.S. companies, counting only announced deals, totaled $10.96 billion, down from $11.43 billion a year earlier, according to New Jersey-based Securities Data Co. 

But Japanese bankers and analysts predict that Japanese acquisitions of American companies will remain at a high level.
One reason: Overseas acquisitions are becoming a popular way for aggressive Japanese entrepreneurs to expand their businesses.
Yoshio Ninomiya, a manager at Nomura Wasserstein Perella Co., says Japanese companies have no choice but to acquire companies in the U.S. if they want to grow, and because "many of their domestic competitors are doing it." 

Sotheby's confirmed that Australian tycoon Alan Bond has yet to take possession of Van Gogh's "Irises," which he bought for $49 million two years ago.
A spokeswoman for the auction house said Mr. Bond had taken out a loan of an unspecified amount from Sotheby's to help pay for the picture but wasn't behind on his payments. . . . Paris's Moulin Rouge nightclub is 100 years old today, prompting one Parisian to note: "As far as foreigners are concerned there are only two spots in the whole of Paris -- the Eiffel Tower and the Moulin Rouge.
Parisians wouldn't be seen dead there." 

