.START 

A state appeals court in California upheld an $800,000 malpractice award against an attorney whose client was wrongfully convicted of first-degree murder in what is believed to be the first case of its kind. 

The Court of Appeals in San Diego last week held Otis L. Jones responsible for emotional distress to Chester A. Holliday, a San Diego social worker and former Fulbright Scholar who was convicted of garroting his wife in 1981.
Mr. Holliday served 70 days in jail before being released on bond, but his conviction was overturned in 1984 on grounds of inadequate counsel. 

A jury acquitted Mr. Holliday after a second trial with a new defense lawyer, and Mr. Holliday sued his former attorney for legal malpractice.
Mr. Holliday successfully contended that Mr. Jones hadn't reviewed any of the physical evidence in the case, had never asked a criminologist to determine the exact time of the murder and had failed to call several key alibi witnesses.
Malpractice cases are more typically filed in civil cases, when lawyers improperly file pleadings or miss deadlines. 

The San Diego court found no California precedent for its ruling upholding the $800,000 damage award.
But it reasoned that lawyers should be liable for emotional distress when their clients have a substantial emotional interest at stake. 

"The concern I have is the potential impact could be a lot greater than this one kind of case," said Kent L. Richland in Los Angeles, who represented Mr. Jones.
The rule could be applied in almost any setting where a disgruntled client claims emotional distress because of inadequate representation, said Mr. Richland. 

But Mr. Holliday's lawyer, Richard H. Benes in San Diego, downplayed the significance of the ruling because the case is so unusual.
Persons convicted of murder sometimes succeed in winning new trials because of inadequate counsel, said Mr. Benes.
But until this case, he said, none has ever been acquitted. 

In this instance, said Mr. Benes, "a truly innocent man was convicted of murdering his wife." 

The crime remains unsolved. 

LARGEST INDIAN land claims suit will go to trial this month. 

A bitter and historic land dispute between the Hopi and Navajo tribes will be heard in federal district court in Arizona.
The suit, filed by the Hopi tribe against the Navajo tribe in 1974, is the largest Indian land claims suit in U.S. history and involves rights to more than seven million acres of land in northern Arizona. 

There has been a conflict between the Hopis and Navajos for more than two centuries.
Although the Hopis say they have occupied the land in dispute for more than a thousand years, the Navajos began moving in during the late 18th century and greatly outnumber them. 

In 1934, Congress created a reservation "for the benefit of the Navajo and such other Indians as may be already located thereon" out of the land in dispute.
The case hinges on which areas of the reservation the Hopis can prove they occupied and used as of 1934. 

"Part of what is so complex about this case is that you have to go back and take a snapshot of history," says one of the lawyers involved in the litigation. "We'll be arguing over what the picture looked like in 1934." 

In another courtroom skirmish during the 1960s, the Hopis lost a large portion of another reservation, created by Congress in 1882, to the Navajos.
The tribes have returned to court in the wake of that ruling, locked in battle over resettlement issues. 

Both tribes are relying on major corporate law firms for the trial.
The Navajos are using Brown & Bain, a large Phoenix law firm and the Hopis have turned to the Denver office of Washington's Arnold & Porter. 

ADMINISTRATION'S DAWDLING on judicial nominations has aggravated a severe vacancy problem. 

President Bush has nominated only 10 replacements to fill 56 openings on federal trial and appeals courts.
The chief judges of the appeals courts in Washington, D.C., and New York, have made unusual public complaints about being shorthanded. "This administration is worse off than others in memory," says a spokesman for the judiciary's administrative office.
One seat, on the trial court in Colorado, has remained open since July 1984, which the spokesman calls "a modern record." 

Explanations for the slowdown vary.
Democratic congressional staff members speculate that Attorney General Dick Thornburgh hasn't made judicial selections the top priority they were under his predecessor, Edwin Meese III.
Some Washington conservative activists agree and complain that Mr. Thornburgh lacks sufficient partisan zeal to continue the Reagan administration's push to fill the federal bench with diehard conservatives. 

Justice Department officials blame the delay in part on lengthy background checks by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and American Bar Association.
These officials deny suggestions on Capitol Hill that disagreements between the department and the White House have contributed to the problem.
About 20 nominations are "in the pipeline," says Thornburgh spokesman David Runkel. 

The pending nominee most likely to provoke partisan attacks in the Senate: Clarence Thomas, President Bush's choice to replace Robert Bork on the Washington, D.C., appeals court. 

Liberals accuse him of demonstrating a restrictive view of the rights of the elderly as chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 

DALLAS LAW FIRM beats starting salaries at most New York firms. 

Bickel & Brewer, a 40-lawyer commercial-litigation firm, is paying its six new associates $85,000 a year, topping the going rate of $83,000 set in New York by Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy.
William A. Brewer III, a founding partners of Bickel & Brewer, says this is the third year in a row that his firm has purposely topped the New York salary scale.
In recent years competition for top law school graduates has increased and big New York law firms have driven up first-year salaries. 

The higher salary costs may coincide with the loss of one of Bickel & Brewer's major clients.
Since its founding five years ago, the firm has handled tenant litigation for Trammell Crow Co., its landlord.
But the law firm intends to move into new space owned by another client, Prentiss Properties Ltd., and Trammell Crow, the nation's largest commercial builder, has a policy of sending legal work only to tenants. 

Mr. Brewer says the firm can handle the expected loss of business. "Fortunately, our firm is eyeball deep in clients and matters," he says. 

NEW YORK TALENT SWITCH: Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, founded in Philadelphia, is expanding its corporate-finance practice with the addition of three partners.
Catherine A. Ludden, 39 years old, William J. Lynch, 47, and Robert C. Mendelson, 38, joined the firm's 95-lawyer New York office from the New York branch of Gaston & Snow, a Boston law firm.
Morgan Lewis partner Samuel B. Fortenbaugh said the moves are part of a plan to expand the firm's business and finance capabilities in New York. 

