.START 

Beer and spirits companies last night narrowly escaped a congressional effort to ban their sponsorship of college campus events. 

An amendment to the Senate's anti-drug bill would have barred alcohol companies from sponsoring any sort of event at all on campus.
But the Senate approved late last night a watered-down version of the amendment -- a version that takes nearly all of the teeth out of the initial measure. 

Sen. Jeff Bingaman (D., N.M.) had quietly added the sweeping amendment at about 11:05 p.m. Tuesday night.
Under his proposed measure, alcohol companies wouldn't have been permitted to sponsor concerts, to buy athletic equipment for schools, or to sponsor football games or parties.
The measure would have wiped out the tens of millions of dollars that alcohol companies currently pour into various events on campuses nationwide. 

But late yesterday evening, the Senate passed a far weaker amendment introduced by Sen. Herbert Kohl (D., Wis.) and co-sponsored by Sen. Bingaman.
The new amendment places only relatively minor restrictions on alcohol companies on campus.
Sen. Kohl's home state is also home to one of the nation's largest breweries, Miller Brewing Co. 

The second amendment came as the advertising and liquor industries began joining together in loud protest, criticizing Sen. Bingaman's measure for being far too broad and possibly unconstitutional. "You couldn't have football games sponsored by an alcohol company.
It would stop some alcohol company from paying for all the musical programs on campus," said Dan Jaffe, executive vice president of the Association of National Advertisers. "It makes us wonder if {Sen.
Bingaman} was fully aware of the reach of this legislation." The initial amendment would have withheld federal funds -- including guaranteed student loans -- from any colleges that allowed alcoholic beverage companies to finance, sponsor or support any athletic, musical or cultural event or competition.
It also would have limited liquor advertising in school newspapers to listing price and product identification.
And it would have banned the distribution of pamphlets or promotional materials, which breweries such as Miller regularly do around spring break and other events. 

Sen. Kohl's second amendment, however, largely neutralizes almost all of those provisions.
First, it allows sponsorship of activities, though the companies can identify their sponsorship with no more than a logo.
It also allows newspapers to run liquor ads, though it suggests rejecting those "promoting irresponsible or illegal consumption." And rather than banning promotional material on campus, it "restricts" promotional material encouraging underage students to drink. 

In a statement, Sen. Kohl said he proposed the amendment because Sen. Bingaman's initial measure "does not focus on what I see as the real problem -- illegal and irresponsible use of alcohol." He added that the earlier measure "was too broadly drafted. . . . For example, the language of the amendment might prevent a beer company from placing an ad encouraging responsible drinking in a college newspaper." Sen. Kohl also said he believed the initial sweeping measure, by severely restricting commercial speech, raised "constitutional issues." 

A spokeswoman for Sen. Bingaman said of Sen. Kohl's amendment, "We're pleased with it, because it still accomplishes the same thing.
The goal was to encourage universities and colleges to curtail alcohol use on campuses." She noted that beer companies under Sen. Kohl's amendment could no longer set up kegs on campus or distribute beer for free, for example. 

Alcohol companies don't release figures regarding the college market, but Sen. Bingaman quoted various trade publications contending that college students spend $2 billion to $3 billion annually on beer.
According to the senator, 10% of brewery revenue comes from college students.
He also said that alcohol ads account for 35% of ad revenue at college papers. 

The Beer Institute, a trade group, said some of those figures are too high, but didn't have any estimates itself.
In any case, beer companies have cut back sharply on college marketing efforts since 1986, when federal rules raised the drinking age nationwide to 21.
Still, college students remain one of the most important markets for alcohol companies.
Alcohol drinkers form preferences early, and the fight is on to woo them from the start. 

Beefing Up Beef's Allure 

The Beef Industry Council will break a new ad campaign later this month focusing on "real" people to replace ads that featured celebrities munching on red meat. 

This campaign spotlights small towns that have famous names.
One ad, for example, opens with a shot of an expansive mountain range as an announcer says, "Recognize that skyline?
There's only one place in the world that looks like that: Manhattan.
Where the air's clean, the livin's easy and the food's great." The ad closes with a shot of country folks in a diner. "Manhattan's known for its famous restaurants," the announcer says. "So be sure to try all three of them.
Beef.
Real food in Manhattan . . . Montana." 

Additional executions on the same theme were made for Luck, Wisconsin; Yale, Washington; and Utopia, Texas.
The campaign was created by Ketchum Advertising/San Francisco, the agency which also developed the much-talked-about Cybill Shepherd and James Garner ads. 

The campaign marks the first time the Beef Industry Council has included calorie and nutrition information in its TV ads.
One ad, for instance, shows three ounces of sirloin has 172 calories. "We know there's a lot competing for consumer's attention," says Dianne Snedaker, the ad agency's president. "But our goal is to make them feel good about beef." 

Ad Notes. . . . 

FEDERAL EXPRESS: The Memphis, Tenn., company, incensed over a July news story on ABC's "20/20" that was critical of Federal Express, has canceled ad time on the network and its affiliates.
It further has suspended plans to advertise on the network indefinitely.
The news piece accused Federal Express of "ignoring safeguards" when shipping sensitive documents and explosives for the government.
Federal Express said the "20/20" piece "portrayed our services and employees in an irresponsible and inaccurate way," a spokesman said. 

HEUBLEIN: Heublein Inc., a unit of Grand Metropolitan PLC, awarded several creative assignments worth an estimated $8 million to Goodby, Berlin & Silverstein, San Francisco.
The assignments include new product development in the tequila category. 

NASDAQ: National Association of Securities Dealers, New York, awarded its ad account to Messner Vetere Berger Carey Schmetterer, New York.
Billings haven't been determined. 

VNR RECORD: The president of Colombia's televised statement on his nation's drug problem in August was seen by 76.2 million TV viewers, according to Medialink, a Video Broadcasting Corp. unit that transmits PR videos to TV stations.
According to Medialink, that made the speech the most-watched video news release of the year, attracting more than the 70.2 million viewers who watched Sears's announcement that it was shutting down its stores to reprice its merchandise earlier this year. 

