.START 

Donald Trump may have a good eye for companies that are about to become takeover targets.
But Wall Street takeover-stock speculators have yet to be convinced that he is a serious bidder for AMR Corp., parent of American Airlines. 

Even as AMR shares leaped 20% yesterday on news of Mr. Trump's $7.54 billion takeover proposal for AMR, many takeover-stock traders, or arbitragers, stayed on the sidelines, and a few sold borrowed AMR shares, betting that their price will fall. 

The arbs groused that Mr. Trump has a long record of disclosing relatively small stakes in companies that are potential takeover targets, then selling his stake -- almost always at a profit -- without making a bid for the company.
Often, the arbs have been burned by following Mr. Trump into a stock. 

In the past two years, Mr. Trump has disclosed in various ways that he owned stock in 12 publicly traded companies.
Although Mr. Trump never announced that he would seek control of 11 of those companies, he said in several filings that he might seek to buy stakes of as much as 15%, 25% or 50% in them, but never owned stakes that approached that size. 

In most cases, the stock prices of the companies rose briefly.
And in many cases, the companies eventually were sold or restructured with Mr. Trump's participation. 

"He has traded in and out of a lot of different situations," said the head of the arbitrage desk at a major Wall Street securities firm, who declined to be identified. 

"The question we have is: 'Is Trump selling the stock today? '" said an arbitrager at another major Wall Street firm.
Although Mr. Trump declined to comment yesterday, his aides were outraged by such speculation and any questioning of Mr. Trump's intent. 

"It rankles me," said Susan Heilbron, an executive vice president of Trump Organization. "I think he's made a very credible offer.
He's announced his intention to put $1 billion of his own money in.
This is a proposal that neither the arbs nor the company nor the press should knee-jerk react to," she said. 

Ms. Heilbron points out that until now, Mr. Trump has only said he would bid for two companies -- Resorts International Inc. and the Eastern Airlines Shuttle -- and followed through with bids for both.
He won control of the shuttle, but was outbid for Resorts by entertainer Merv Griffin. 

"I think his track record on doing what he says he's going to do is two for two, and hopefully three for three," Ms. Heilbron said. 

In the cases of two companies for which Mr. Trump didn't make offers -- Holiday Corp. and UAL Corp. -- Mr. Trump's purchases were nevertheless a bellwether of corporate overhauls.
After Mr. Trump bought and sold stakes of just under 5%, each company undertook a restructuring that raised its stock price.
Moreover, Holiday in August announced a second restructuring, in which most of its assets will be sold off to Britain's Bass PLC, and UAL last month agreed to a leveraged buy-out organized by its management and pilots union. 

And in the cases of Federated Department Stores Inc. and Pillsbury Co., Mr. Trump filed for federal antitrust clearance to increase his stake in each company to more than $15 million, shortly before the companies became the targets of successful hostile takeover bids from others. 

But in the case of MCA Inc., the major entertainment company, nothing in the way of a takeover bid or restructuring has come about since Mr. Trump sought antitrust clearance to increase his stake to as much as 25% from $15 million.
Nor has a bid or restructuring for Caesars World Inc. surfaced since Mr. Trump bought and sold a 2.4% stake in late 1988 and early 1989. 

And in the case of Bally Manufacturing Corp., Mr. Trump sold his 9.9% stake back to the company at an above-market price, accepting "greenmail." 

Some veteran Trump-watchers are skeptical about his real intent toward AMR. Daniel Lee, a gaming-industry analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., notes that Mr. Trump's most serious forays have come in fields that he knows well: real estate and casinos.
True, Mr. Trump now owns an airline, Trump Shuttle, but it's small, and he hasn't owned it very long. 

Mr. Trump "just hasn't been in it long enough to have the experience to run an airline," Mr. Lee said.
In addition, Mr. Lee notes that if Mr. Trump put $1 billion of his own money into a purchase of AMR, as he has proposed, "it would be very high-risk for him personally, and that would not be anything that Donald Trump would do easily," Mr. Lee said. 

Many takeover-stock traders suggest that Mr. Trump uses federal rules governing antitrust filings to his own advantage.
The rules require that any company, such as Trump Organization, that wants to buy more than $15 million of stock in another company must seek permission from federal antitrust regulators.
The target company is notified of the filing, and often discloses it, pushing up its stock price on takeover speculation. 

Ms. Heilbron said Mr. Trump makes the antitrust filings on the advice of his lawyers, and not with the intent of influencing stock prices. 

Pauline Yoshihashi in Las Vegas contributed to this article. 

Donald Trump's Investment Track Record 

September 1986: Trump tells Holiday Corp. he has a 2% to 5% stake.
In November, after Holiday unveiled a $2.8 billion recapitalization, Trump said he had sold his 4.9% stake for a $35 million dollar profit.
Later filings indicate his profit was only $18. 

November 1986: He buys a 20% stake in Alexander's Inc. from a group affiliated with Texas billionaire Robert M. Bass; he has increased his stake to about 21%. 

November 1986: Trump discloses he owns a 9.9% stake in Bally Manufacturing; Bally agreed to buy back the stock in Feb. 1987 at above-market prices; Trump's profit was about $20 million. 

March 1987: Trump reportedly buys a 4.9% stake in UAL Corp., selling it in April 1987 at about $73 a share for a $55 million profit; UAL agreed to management-union buy-out at $300-a-share in Sept. 1989. 

July 1987: He says he holds a 4.9% stake in Golden Nugget Inc.; company announced a plan to buy back 43% of its shares in Sept. 1987; Trump apparently sold his stake before stock-market crash. 

July 1987: Trump buys control of Resorts International Inc. through supervoting Class B stock; bid for Class A stock but was outbid by Merv Griffin, who acquired company last year.
The company defaulted in interest payments in Sept. 

January 1988: Federated Department Stores Inc. discloses that Trump sought antitrust clearnace to buy a stake of more than $15 million; stock was trading at $34 a share.
Campeau Corp. launched bid for Federated in January 1988 and bought it in June 1988 for $73.50 a share. 

February 1988: Trump filed for antitrust clearance to buy as much as 25% stake in MCA Inc.; stock price rises on news; no further filings by Trump. 

August 1988: He buys about $15 million of Pillsbury Co. stock and seeks antitrust clearance to buy as much as 25%; stock was trading at about $37 a share.
No further filings by Trump.
Grand Metropolitan launched bid for Pillsbury in Oct. 1988 and bought company in Jan. 1988 at $66 a share. 

December 1988: Trump buys a 2.4% stake in Caesars World Inc. and files for antitrust clearance to buy a stake of as much as 50%; sold stake in March and April 1989 at profit of $3.3 million. 

September 1989: He discloses that he received antitrust clearance to buy more than $15 million of Tiffany & Co. stock; on Sept. 21, Mitsukoshi Ltd. agreed to buy a 10% stake in Tiffany from a unit of General Electric Co. 

Oct. 5, 1989: Trump proposes to buy AMR Corp. for $120 a share, or $7.54 billion. 

