.START 

Honda Motor Co. ruled out a complete acquisition of Rover Group PLC, despite its planned purchase of a 20% stake in the British car maker. 

"We have no intention whatsoever of eventually taking over Rover," Honda President Tadashi Kume said at a news conference at the Japanese car producer's new engine plant here.
Rover, among the weakest of Europe's car makers, long has been seen as vulnerable to a takeover. 

Honda and Rover recently said they intend to expand their decadelong collaboration in British vehicle production by swapping minority stakes.
In exchange for Honda's 20% stake in Rover, the British Aerospace PLC unit will get 20% of Honda's United Kingdom subsidiary.
Mr. Kume said Honda will disclose details about the cost of the share swap when a formal agreement is executed -- probably around year end. 

In July, Honda announced plans to build its first major European car factory here, which will be capable of producing 100,000 cars a year by 1995.
With this additional capacity, "we hope to be able to sell something like 250,000 to 300,000 cars a year in Europe" by 1995, Mr. Kume said. 

Analysts say the car plant could enable Honda to advance to third place Europe-wide from fifth among Japanese car makers, behind Nissan Motor Co. and Toyota Motor Corp. Honda sells about 150,000 cars a year in the European Community, mostly imports from Japan, representing about 1.3% of the EC market. 

Honda said a new U.K. subsidiary, Honda Motor Europe Ltd., will coordinate its marketing, sales, service, manufacturing and related activities throughout Europe.
Individual units in each European country previously handled such roles, advised by Honda's Tokyo headquarters. 

Through Honda Motor Europe, the company hopes to boost its 1,500 European dealers to about 2,000.
At the same time, "the number of Japanese people {based in Europe} will gradually decrease and gradually the company will be left in the hands of local people," Mr. Kume said. 

The Honda president also raised the possibility of boosting European sales through imports of U.S.-made Hondas.
Such "American-made products are currently candidates for importation into Europe," Mr. Kume said, "but no decision has been made yet." 

