.START 

They held an "education summit" in Charlottesville, Va., the other day, and everyone left it pronouncing it a satisfactory, if not downright exhilarating, experience.
A joint venture of President Bush and the nation's governors, it was a political manifestation of an inescapable reality: America's public schools are not meeting their responsibility to their students, to the taxpayers or to the nation. 

But while some observers thought that the get-together was a "historic event," it was at best only the prelude to possibly historic reforms.
For the sake of a united front and a public image of success, most of the tough issues were ignored, fuzzed over or touched upon but lightly. 

So be it.
This was bipartisan political theater, staged to allow everyone to pose as educational statesmen.
William Bennett, yesterday's secretary of education and today's drug czar, labeled some of the verbiage "pap," and was promptly banished from the scene.
It was not a day for noting the emperor was unclothed or that the generalizations of high purpose masked fundamental differences of opinion. 

Nowhere are those differences more real than on the question of money.
At $5,000 a year, the average per-pupil expenditure for each public-school student in America is higher than in any other nation.
Since our average student performance in most measurable skills lags far behind that of students from other industrial nations, it seems obvious that money alone is no answer.
That little truism was echoed repeatedly at the summit, most notably by the president himself. 

"To those who say that money alone is the answer, I say that there is no one answer," he said. "If anything, hard experience teaches that we are not getting our money's worth in education.
Our focus must no longer be on resources.
It must be on results." 

That is what is known as the straw-man gambit.
Everyone is for results.
No one wants to pay more if you can get what you want without higher costs.
Unfortunately for the president's thesis, hard experience demonstrates that while money alone cannot produce results, it is almost, though not entirely, impossible to obtain across-the-board educational improvement without money.
To put it another way, the vast majority of school districts with the highest test scores and the highest public retention rates are those that spend the most money on their students. 

Beyond that, the school districts that have the most daunting educational problems and poorest records of achievements are those that must serve children from the most impoverished backgrounds. 

Their students come from homes where the parents are themselves uneducated or undereducated.
They are almost invariably districts that have low tax bases and therefore have less to spend on schools.
And the teachers willing to accept jobs in those districts are often the least qualified teachers available.
Not all of those realities can be directly solved with money.
But as the Texas Supreme Court underscored in a unanimous decision Monday, poor school districts are "trapped in a cycle of poverty from which there is no opportunity to free themselves." The court ruled that it was impermissible under the Texas Constitution to have a school-financing system that allowed "glaring disparities" between districts, as glaring as $12,000 per student in the Santa Getrudis district (which includes Kingsville, headquarters of the famous King Ranch) and less than $3,000 per student in the state's 100 poorest districts. 

There are also wide differences in average per-capita expenditures between the states, with the result that pupil expenditures in the highest spending district in one state can be less per student than the average expenditure for all districts in another.
Not surprisingly, test scores and retention levels tend to parallel, state by state, the relative expenditure levels, just as they do district by district within states. 

All of which suggests that money is important, so long as it is provided in tandem with major reforms.
It is in the area of outlining the shape of future change -- and standards -- that the education summit was the success it proclaimed itself to be. 

The final statement provided a useful agenda: There must be well-defined national educational goals.
There must be accountability to go with goals.
There must be an assault on an educational bureaucracy that is as rigid as it is overstaffed.
Decentralization and experimentation must be encouraged.
We have been promised a prompt follow-up, and if it is forthcoming, the Charlottesville extravaganza will have been a worthwhile endeavor.
But it will prove to be little more than a grabbag of good intentions if the question of adequate and equal financing is not given priority attention.
The U.S. Supreme Court refused, on a 5-4 vote in 1973, to reach the Texas Supreme Court's conclusion this week, holding instead that equal access to education is not a fundamental right under the Constitution. 

Thus there is no legal club at hand, and great inertial resistance in the more affluent school districts to the idea of equalization, additional evidence that virtually everyone knows that money does make a difference. (It is fascinating to note how often those who warn against "throwing money at problems" really mean throwing it at other people's problems.) 

That leaves it to state and federal governments.
As the report, "A Nation at Risk," put it in 1983, "Excellence costs.
But in the long run, mediocrity costs more." The federal government spends about $21 billion on education today, but most of it is for higher education. 

For Head Start, a preschool program everyone agrees has worked spectacularly, it spends $1.13 billion a year to serve 450,000 children.
The leaves about 81% of the eligible three-to-five-year-olds untouched.
It would cost an additional $4.75 billion a year to serve them, too much to spend in this budget, but not too much to phase in over a five-year period. 

Which brings us to the bottom line, politically as well as fiscally.
The Charlottesville summit was rhetoric -- useful rhetoric, but rhetoric nonetheless.
The test of political rhetoric's effectiveness should be action-results.
If the nation and its political leadership are serious about the need to improve the public schools for the sake of our economic well-being and civic health, then we have to prove it in the way this society proclaims its loyalties in every other field -- through the pocketbook. 

And what we spend for education has to be targeted to those areas and people who need it the most.
Ignoring or, even worse, reinforcing educational inequity is a surefire prescription for educational failure.
As Lyndon Johnson said years ago: "Progress in education won't solve all our problems.
But without progress in education, we can't solve any of our problems." 

Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. 

