.START 

Nearly three weeks ago, the wife of Maj. Moises Giroldi relayed a message to U.S. officials here: Her husband and several other Panamanian military officers wanted help in mounting a coup against Gen. Manuel Noriega. 

For two weeks, there was no face-to-face meeting between Maj. Giroldi and U.S. officials. 

But last Sunday, Maj. Giroldi's need became more pressing than ever.
He was attending a party to celebrate the christening of Gen. Noriega's new baby granddaughter in a section of the city called Old Panama.
Maj. Giroldi and several other officers watched in disgust as a drunken and boastful Gen. Noriega barked out orders -- including, at one point, telling his security guards, who were armed with rocket-propelled grenade launchers, to fire at any helicopter that happened overhead. 

Slipping into corners of the party room where they couldn't be overheard, the military men grumbled that Gen. Noriega had grown intolerably volatile and dangerous.
It was time to act, they decided.
Maj. Giroldi's wife, Adella Bonilla de Giroldi, arranged a post-midnight meeting between her husband and two officials of the Central Intelligence Agency. 

Two days later, believing they had the support of the U.S. government, Maj. Giroldi and his allies launched their coup.
Before long, Mrs. Giroldi was a widow.
After a face-off with Gen. Noriega, once his close friend, Maj. Giroldi was shot -- according to one account, by Gen. Noriega himself.
The failure of Gen. Giroldi's rebellion came, in part, because of confusion and doubt on the part of U.S. officials the major believed would support him.
Indeed, for a time U.S. troops did intervene in support of the insurrection; contrary to some official U.S. accounts, U.S. troops blocked two strategic routes in Panama City early in the coup attempt. 

But ultimately, U.S. military support went no further.
Because of poor communications, the scant Panamanian experience of some key U.S. military officials at the scene, lack of U.S. contingency plans -- and errors by instigators of the hastily mustered rebellion -- the uprising was doomed. 

This account, with its details of advanced U.S. knowledge and limited participation in the coup attempt, was provided primarily by sources who contradict, at least in part, official accounts from Washington distancing the U.S. from the failed coup attempt.
The sources include several U.S. officials and a Western diplomat. 

According to these sources, one reason U.S. assistance was restrained was the lack of a contingency plan.
The officials say they had been urging the Bush administration for weeks to devise such a plan. 

Then there was the inexperience factor.
Gen. Maxwell R. Thurman, the leader of the U.S. Southern Command here, had been sworn in here only during the weekend before the coup.
Some key players on his team were newly initiated to the region as well. 

In the midst of the coup attempt, for instance, Gen. Thurman turned to his senior advisers in a secure intelligence-briefing area known as "the tunnel" and asked the person who was the senior Latin American expert to identify himself.
Gen. Michael Schneider, the chief of the Southern Command's J-2 intelligence arm, spoke up.
Gen. Schneider, alas, had been in Panama for only two months. 

Another problem: Lack of intelligence about the Panamanian military led Gen. Thurman and some other senior U.S. officials to doubt the credibility of Maj. Giroldi at critical moments during the coup attempt.
The CIA officials who had met with Maj. Giroldi assured U.S. decision makers they had confidence in him.
But that assessment ran up against the uncertainties and fears of their superiors. 

As a result, U.S. officials hesitated to provide help at moments when it was most needed. "Thurman was afraid he was being taken for a ride by Noriega, and so did some of the Pentagon civilians," says one U.S. official.
The official adds that only after Maj. Giroldi was killed were American officials convinced "that Giroldi was the real thing." 

But the officials had their doubts when Maj. Giroldi's wife initially contacted them.
Rather than seeking out a meeting with a man that was unfamiliar with them, they awaited direct contact from him. "Nothing ever materialized," a U.S. official says. 

After the christening party last Sunday, when CIA officials finally met with the Maj. Giroldi, he said he was ready to act, either on Monday or Tuesday.
But first, he said, he wanted the CIA representative to make a request of the Bush administration: to have U.S. troops stationed here block roads leading to Gen. Noriega's headquarters, preventing the Fifth and Seventh Companies of the Panamanian Defense Forces from leaving their bases. 

After consulting with Washington, U.S. officials said they could grant Maj. Giroldi's request, according to the U.S. officials who were interviewed here.
U.S. officials reasoned that the U.S. assistance was technically allowed under Panama Canal Treaty rights, which allow the U.S. to take steps protecting its citizens and military operations. 

"We gave him everything he requested that night," says one U.S. official. 

Maj. Giroldi assured the CIA officials that with the U.S., he and his forces could stop or neutralize the remainder of Gen. Noriega's armed men.
Indeed, he said he wanted American participation to be as limited as possible; restricting Washington's involvement would help him win fellow officers to his coup after seizing Mr. Noriega.
Anti-American sentiment has grown considerably in the military here in the last two years. 

The CIA officials warned the rebels that U.S. law prevented them from participating in any assassination of Gen. Noriega. (Senior officials aren't sure this was the reason Maj. Giroldi ultimately didn't kill Mr. Noriega.
A Panamanian government official thinks Maj. Giroldi's long friendship with Gen. Noriega also might have played a role.) 

On Monday morning, the coup didn't occur.
Gen. Thurman began to have misgivings about Maj. Giroldi, U.S. officials say.
Some American officials worried about backing a man who had never been an intelligence "asset" for Washington -- an informer.
They knew little about him, except that he had been instrumental in putting down a coup against Gen. Noriega in March 1988.
Gen. Thurman relayed his misgivings to Gen. Colin Powell, the chairman of the joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington, who himself was brand-new in his position. 

Thus, U.S. officials were reluctant warriors by the time the shooting began at 8 a.m. Tuesday. 

Initially, U.S. participation came off like clockwork.
U.S. forces, which jointly use Fort Amador with Gen. Noriega's Fifth Company, blocked the movement of his troops.
And American forces stationed across the Bridge of Americas just outside Panama City blocked the approach of Gen. Noriega's Seventh Company -- just as Maj. Giroldi had requested. 

The first hint that things could go wrong occurred when Maj. Giroldi's wife, three children and feeble father -- under an arrangement made on Sunday night with the CIA officials -- showed up at the gate of a U.S. military base for refuge.
Initially, guards tried to turn them away, since they hadn't been informed of the arrangements. 

Communications would be even worse in the old downtown section of the city, where Gen. Noriega maintained his military headquarters complex.
CIA officials hadn't provided Maj. Giroldi or his allies with any means to communicate with the Southern Command, nor did they arrange to keep a telephone line open to Gen. Noriega's headquarters. 

So, after rebels apparently had seized the building, several U.S. officials attempted in vain to contact them by phone to determine what had become of Gen. Noriega.
Some of their outgoing calls were interrupted by their own switchboard operators, who chastised the officials for using lines they had been ordered to keep free. 

Maj. Giroldi, for his part, had been given a telephone number to call -- but he apparently never used it.
And after a short time, his troops had cut off all phone lines to the headquarters to prevent Noriega loyalists from surreptitiously calling out for assistance. 

But Maj. Giroldi thought he could accomplish his goal of overthrowing Gen. Noriega with minimal U.S. assistance.
By 11 a.m., his forces not only had secured the headquarters but were fanning out into the poor neighborhood surrounding the complex.
The Panamanian government official said they positioned themselves in apartments to combat what they assumed was their only threat -- Gen. Noriega's special forces and crack jungle force known as the "Machos del Monte." 

Still more communications snafus then occurred, as some unexpected intruders changed Maj. Giroldi's plans.
He noticed the sudden appearance of some members of Gen. Noriega's Batallion 2000 -- a well-trained combat team most of whose members, but not all, were on maneuvers in Darien Province.
They were assisted by troops known as pumas, who are responsible for airport security. 

At about 11:30 a.m., with the coup in jeopardy, three rebel officers appeared at the gate of Fort Clayton near here seeking a meeting with Brig.
Gen. Marc Cisneros, the chief of the U.S. Army contingent in Panama.
The guards, however -- on orders to be alert against intruders -- let them through only after some delay.
The rebel officers requested that the U.S. deploy a helicopter to the headquarters to take Gen. Noriega into U.S. custody. 

Maj. Giroldi, still sensitive to the anti-U.S. feelings within the military, had instructed his three emissaries to ask that the U.S. promise not to pack Gen. Noriega off to the U.S. to face trial on drug charges pending against him in Florida.
For by that time, the rebel officers feared they were being overpowered; by obtaining assurances that the U.S. wouldn't have him extradited, perhaps the rebels could convert some Noriega loyalists to their side.
The conditions were passed on to Washington. "We didn't have any contingency plan to deal with this," says a U.S. official. 

Apparently, neither did officials in Washington.
Before officials there had the time to convey a response, the coup had failed. 

According to the account of the Panamanian government official, the drama ended with an odd negotiation between Maj. Giroldi and his general in the headquarters of the dictator.
Gen. Noriega, observing a confused scene of soldiers in the same uniforms fighting one another, was suddenly encouraged when he saw the distinctive black T-shirts and beards of the "Macho del Monte", who had seized the courtyard while the Batallion-2000 provided fire support from the back. 

The Panamanian government official, whose account couldn't be confirmed with other officials, says that Gen. Noriega -- unarmed, a bodyguard at each elbow -- walked across a large room toward Maj. Giroldi, who was holding a machine gun. 

Gen. Noriega noted that his major's hands were sweating and trembling, according to the Panamanian official's account.
At that point, a Noriega loyalist walked into the room.
One of Maj. Giroldi's allies ordered the entering officer to drop to the floor.
Maj. Giroldi then ordered Gen. Noriega to do the same, according to the Panamanian government official, but Mr. Noriega refused to comply.
He was the general, the dictator reportedly said, and he would give them orders. 

"You are going to die," Gen. Noriega told Maj. Giroldi, according to the account. "Your men are being brought into custody outside.
You are a dead man." 

One government official says Maj. Giroldi, seeing his coup had failed, laid down his machine gun and surrendered to Gen. Noriega.
Though accounts of the location and method of Maj. Giroldi's execution differ, a U.S. official says that Maj. Giroldi was gunned down on the spot -- by Gen. Noriega. 

