.START 

Star money manager Mario Gabelli is finding out just how much brokers can help in peddling mutual funds. 

One of his new funds has managed to scrounge up only $16 million from investors.
Known as the Gabelli Convertible Securities Fund, it relies on a down-home marketing approach: mailing out postcards that urge fund shareholders to drum up referrals. 

But another new Gabelli fund, sold by Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. brokers, has raised $1 billion. 

The hot-selling Gabelli Value Fund, far from relying on polite postcards, has been aggressively pushed by the 11,000 brokers at Shearson, following an impressive road show by Mr. Gabelli. 

The contrast suggests that investors "have become numb to the fact that there's another fund out there, unless they are slapped in the face," says Tyler Jenks, research director for Kanon Bloch Carre & Co., a Boston fund-research firm. 

The Value Fund was an easy sell for other reasons, too, despite its up-front sales fee of 5.5%.
Mr. Gabelli has long been one of Wall Street's savviest value-oriented managers.
His approach: Buying "franchises" -- stocks in businesses that are difficult to enter -- and those that generate oodles of cash.
That's the Value Fund's strategy, which will allow Mr. Gabelli to be more aggressive by investing half the portfolio in as few as two issues. 

But the no-load Convertible Securities Fund crimps Mr. Gabelli's style, some fund specialists say, because it locks him into a narrower sector of the market. 

"Gabelli has been such a great, low-risk manager.
Why not give him a flexible charter?" says Kenneth Gregory of Litman/Gregory & Co., a San Francisco investment advisory firm.
Besides, adds Mr. Gregory, "If he sees convertible securities he likes, he can buy them for all his portfolios." 

In the meantime, Gabelli & Co. officials defend the convertible fund's quaint marketing approach and say they aren't disappointed by its meager growth. 

Bruce Alpert, the fund group's treasurer, says: "Word of mouth has always been an effective tool for us." 

