.START 

The Abraham Lincoln that America's indispensable president kept to himself was often a depressed, pessimistic figure.
Sometimes he despaired for himself, sometimes for the nation.
And in a letter written a decade before his death to Joshua Speed, his closest friend, he worried that America's "progress in degeneracy appears to me to be pretty rapid." 

The country, he said, began by declaring that "all men are created equal." The nation lived as if "all men are created equal, except negroes," and it often seemed to be on the verge of adding foreigners and Catholics to the exceptions. "When it comes to this," Lincoln said, "I should prefer emigrating to some country where they make no pretense of loving liberty -- to Russia, for instance, where despotism can be taken pure, and without the base alloy of hypocracy {sic}." 

That nugget is buried deep inside two volumes of the writings of Abraham Lincoln, the Library of America's latest distinguished contribution to the nation's bookshelves.
The two volumes, distributed by Penguin at $35 each and accounting for 795 letters, speeches, poems, proclamations and drafts, comprise perhaps the least forbidding 1,685 pages of manuscripts likely to be produced for a long time. 

Here is the young Abraham Lincoln complaining to a woman friend that living as a legislator in Springfield, the Illinois state capital, was "rather a dull business," and lonely, too. "I have been spoken to by but one woman since I've been here, and should not have been by her, if she could have avoided it." Here is the ambitious Abraham Lincoln trying to assure the voters of Sangamon County that he was not "an open scoffer at Christianity." Here is the mature Abraham Lincoln uttering a trim three paragraphs -- that eventually filled an entire wall of the Lincoln Memorial -- at the dedication of a military cemetery in Gettysburg. 

Throughout these two volumes are glimpses of the man who inspired the marble of the Memorial at the far end of Washington's grassy Mall.
As a young congressman, he gently asks his wife not to address him as the "Hon.
Abraham Lincoln," assuring her that letters would still be delivered to him free without the honorific. 

Later, as his lifelong rivalry with Stephen Douglas took form, he mused that with himself "the race of ambition has been a failure, a flat failure" while Douglas, who would defeat him in the fabled 1858 Illinois Senate race but would lose the 1860 presidential campaign, had enjoyed "splendid success." As president, in a tradition continued by George Bush, he was much given to the informal handwritten note, such as the one he sent thanking the 84-year-old woman who knitted 300 pairs of stockings for Union soldiers. 

These volumes, like the historical period they cover, are dominated by the debate on slavery, the central question not only of Lincoln's life but of the 19th century.
Slavery so overpowered the politics of the time, in fact, that in the entire course of seven Lincoln-Douglas debates -- still the classic event in the history of American political discourse -- there is hardly a word on foreign policy or economic matters. 

As a member of the Illinois Legislature, Lincoln argued that Congress had no power to interfere with slavery in the states.
As the 1858 Senate race began, he argued that as he would not be a slave, neither would he be a master. "This expressed my idea of democracy," he said. "Whatever differs from this, to the extent of the difference, is no democracy." 

Lincoln, who often mused about returning the slaves to Africa and even thought about establishing a black colony in Central America, didn't embrace full equality of the races. "I do not understand the Declaration to mean that all men were created equal in all respects," he said in 1858, adding that "they are equal to their right to 'life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness'" and pleading: "All I ask for the negro is that if you do not like him, leave him alone.
If God gave him but little, that little let him enjoy." 

His hatred of slavery was drawn in large measure from his belief that racial repression injured the repressers as well as the repressed.
In a campaign speech at Edwardsville, Ill., he warned: "Accustomed to trample on the rights of those around you, you have lost the genius of your own independence, and become the fit subjects of the first cunning tyrant who rises." 

The human spark that animated Lincoln and eventually accounted for his ascension into the memory and myths of the nation is discernible even in his presidential papers.
Amid the official proclamations, messages to Congress, war orders, dispatches to generals and inquiries about pardons, is a gentle reminder to Gen. George McClellan that "the Commander-in-Chief . . . may order what he pleases." 

The great frustration of Lincoln's war presidency, in fact, is illuminated in dozens of letters to McClellan, whose caution was legendary and infuriating. 

"Once more let me tell you, it is indispensable . . . that you strike a blow," Lincoln wrote in April 1862.
By late October he was writing, in exasperation, this letter: "I have just read your despatch about sore tongued and fatiegued {sic} horses.
Will you pardon me for asking what the horses of your army have done since the battle of Antietam that fatigue anything?" McClellan didn't last.
But Lincoln endured, and endures. 

Mr. Shribman covers politics in the Journal's Washington bureau. 

