.START 

The West German Bundesbank raised its official interest rates by a full percentage point each in a determined effort to boost the mark and cool off Europe's largest economy before inflationary pressures multiply. 

The Bundesbank's fourth set of rate increases this year led a concerted round of interest-rate boosts by seven other European central banks, many doing so to hold their currencies in alignment with the mark.
Britain, France, Switzerland, Austria, the Netherlands, Denmark and Belgium all joined West Germany in tightening credit rates. 

West Germany's discount rate was hauled up to 6% from 5% and its Lombard rate brought to 8% from 7% effective today.
A Bundesbank tightening was expected, but its policy-setting Central Bank Council surprised many by going for a full point at one stroke rather than the one-half-point rate increases widely expected by financial markets. 

"The Bundesbank has made a very aggressive statement that it wants to see the mark stronger and see domestic-inflation trends ease," said Nigel Rendell, an analyst at James Capel & Co. in London. 

"A full-point increase, since it wasn't fully expected, backs up recent G-7 statements and {currency market} intervention with something more tangible," he said, recalling that West German officials pressed for a stronger mark at a recent meeting in Washington of the Group of Seven major industrialized nations.
G-7 nations include the U.S., Japan, Britain, West Germany, France, Italy and Canada.
The burden of the rate boosts will fall unevenly.
The economies of continental Europe have been growing faster than expected, and economists generally view tighter credit there as a welcome restraint. 

But on the other side of the channel, British corporate balance sheets are weak and British consumers are reeling from 16 months of rising rates.
Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson's reluctant decision to boost base rates one percentage point to 15%, their highest level since November 1981 and twice May 1988's 7.5%, will almost certainly damp business profits, strain homeowners and eventually bring higher joblessness. 

"It could take us nearer a recession," warned Keith Skeoch, chief economist with James Capel & Co. 

Analysts asserted that rate increases of one-half-point each would only have prompted new speculation of a follow-up boost in the near future.
Moreover, the Bundesbank was seen eager to get higher rates in place before next year's round of state and federal elections raised potential for opposition from Bonn.
The central bank said its latest step should keep monetary expansion in check "for the rest of this year." 

Under the Bundesbank's discount facility, banks can borrow short-term from a limited pool of central-bank funds.
The more expensive Lombard facility is the Bundesbank's penalty-lending window for last-resort borrowing, thus serving as an upper reference point for West German money-market rates. 

The full-point increases lift West Germany's benchmark interest rates to their highest level since 1982, when its economy was still struggling to emerge from the last recession.
For most of this decade, Bonn's leading trading partners, particularly the U.S., have been pressing West Germany to create more domestic demand.
Now, after the criticism has died down, the Bundesbank is standing on the brakes to rein in demand. 

For the first half of 1989, West Germany's gross national product grew by an inflation-adjusted 4% from the year-earlier period.
Many West German factories are operating at capacity limits, creating production bottlenecks and upward pressure on producer prices. 

West Germany's export-driven economic expansion continued to barrel along in the third quarter.
Although the West German economy was only growing at a 3.1% annual rate in September, officials fear that the economy is hiding an inflationary build-up that could speed price increases next year.
Rising real-estate prices, militant trade-union demands for a shorter working week and higher wages next year and Bonn's plan to cut income taxes in January contribute to the Bundesbank's inflation worries. 

Bonn reported yesterday that foreign demand swelled orders to the nation's manufacturing industry in August, when total order inflow rose a fully adjusted 0.6% from July but eased 3.7% from the August 1988.
West Germany's August foreign-trade surplus expanded to 11.2 billion marks ($5.95 billion) from 10.6 billion marks in July and from 9.3 billion marks in August 1988.
The August trade result brings West Germany's trade surplus for the first-eight months of 1989 to a record 92.1 billion marks, up 16% from a 79.6 billion mark surplus for the year-ago period. 

The mark's weakness against key currencies, German officials say, artificially propels the West German economy by cutting prices foreigners pay for German goods.
At the same time, the weakened currency has swelled prices Germans pay for imports, effectively importing inflation into the nation's economy. 

Besides efforts to strengthen the mark against the dollar, the Bundesbank was pressing for an upward revaluation of the mark against other currencies of the European Monetary System, which would have the effect of reducing prices Germans pay for European goods.
Other EMS governments, particularly France, have blocked West Germany's realignment hopes. 

Said Ulrich Hombrecher, an economist for Westdeutsche Landesbank in Duesseldorf, "the fact that most other EMS countries followed suit with their own rate hikes today shows that they don't care to see their currencies slip any lower against the mark." 

Tim Carrington in London contributed to this article. 

