.START 

Intel Corp. said it is abandoning a joint venture with Siemens AG and will take a one-time charge of $35 million against third-quarter earnings to cover the costs of the move. 

Intel didn't project overall third-quarter results.
In the year-ago quarter the company had net income of $142.7 million, or 78 cents a share. 

The joint-venture company, called BiiN, represents Intel's entry into the large-computer business.
But after pouring more than $100 million into the project, the partners decided the cost of marketing, distributing and supporting the high-powered machines was too high, especially with current industry softness. 

"To build and support this would require sustaining losses for a longer period than we expected," an Intel spokeswoman said. "Building from the ground up" turned out to be more costly than the company anticipated. 

Intel wouldn't disclose the total amount it has invested in the venture, but a BiiN spokesman said the combined investment was more than $100 million.
Intel said it doesn't expect to take any further charges related to BiiN. 

Intel, a maker of semiconductors, said the companies would seek a buyer for BiiN.
However, if a buyer can't be found, the company will be liquidated.
The BiiN spokesman said the time frame for finding a buyer is "a few weeks rather than a few months." 

He wouldn't identify possible buyers, but said a company that already has a customer base and an established sales and marketing force in the large-computer business "could really bring this to market." The market for such machines is dominated by International Business Machines Corp., and others in BiiN's intended niche include Beaverton, Ore.-based Sequent Computer Systems Inc. and Cupertino, Calif.-based Tandem Computers. 

A small group of engineers from the two companies began working together in 1982, and BiiN was launched in June 1988.
The company makes "mission critical" computer technology, which it describes as computers that must run at all times.
Such computers provide backup systems in the event of breakdowns, and security systems making them difficult to penetrate. 

BiiN's machines, which it began shipping earlier this year, are aimed at government applications, including the Defense Department, as well as commercial users.
One of its two systems sells for between $40,000 and $65,000; the other sells for $400,000 to $1 million, depending on configurations. 

But breaking into the market was cost-prohibitive. "If you think developing them is expensive, try marketing them," said the BiiN spokesman. 

BiiN is headed by Joseph Kroger, former vice chairman of Unisys Corp. Mr. Kroger will oversee the sale or liquidation of the company, the spokesman said, but hasn't decided what he will do after that.
Based in Hillsboro, Ore., the company employs 450 people.
About 170 employees will stay on Intel's payroll until March.
Intel said it will try to place as many employees as possible.
About 15 employees who came from Siemens will return. 

Siemens, a West German electrical products giant, is the largest computer maker in Europe.
It also makes computer chips, including microprocessors. 

