.START 

Emily Tobin, 35 years old, has a nagging cough, recurring fever and a case of the blues.
Her mother has breast cancer, she's worried about her father, and there isn't enough money to send her kids to college. "My daughter says I'll quit coughing when I quit smoking," she says. 

About 25 doctors listen to her plight and then ponder a problem of their own: What should they say next? 

Mrs. Tobin isn't a real patient; she plays one on video.
But the doctors, at a workshop at Sacred Heart Hospital here, are grappling with an issue as real as their next appointment: how to talk and listen effectively to their patients. 

This is no idle exercise.
At a time when some physicians are quicker to use blood tests and imaging scans than a stethoscope, a growing body of research suggests that the art of medicine is as important as the science. "If you don't have the patient's cooperation, you might as well forget about {effective care}," says Otto F. Thaler, professor of psychiatry at the University of Rochester School of Medicine, Rochester, N.Y. 

Moreover, health insurers increasingly believe that good physician-patient relationships can help avert both malpractice suits and unnecessary surgery.
A few underwriters already reward doctors who try to learn to communicate better by reducing their malpractice premiums. 

But there are barriers and economic disincentives to good doctor-patient interaction.
Although the average doctor conducts 120,000 interviews in a career, according to the Society of General Internal Medicine, many medical schools pay only lip service to the subject.
And "physicians who generally earn more money spend less time with patients and probably listen less," says Ronald Adelman, director of geriatric medicine at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y.
An initial appointment with an older patient can take 90 minutes, for which a doctor might be paid $100, he says; a doctor who spends 10 minutes interpreting a nuclear magnetic resonance scan may get more than $400. 

Recent health-care research shows that what patients want most from a doctor's appointment is, first, a chance to tell their story and, second, information about their problem and how to solve it.
Though patients can also be a barrier to communication, doctors on average interrupt patients within the first 18 seconds of an interview, then spend less than two minutes of a 20-minute session imparting information. 

As a result, 60% of patients leave a doctor's office confused about instructions on medication, and more than half of new prescriptions are taken improperly or not at all, says Marshall Becker, associate dean of the School of Public Health at the University of Michigan. "There are billions of dollars being spent on prescription drugs, and people aren't benefiting from them," he says. "Then people are still sick and they come back for more care.
It's a tremendous problem." 

Poor communication between doctors and patients is the single most common cause of malpractice suits, according to an article last year in the Maryland Medical Journal.
Doctors who are arrogant or otherwise poor communicators are easy marks for malpractice lawyers, says Harvey Wachsman, a Great Neck, N.Y., attorney who has a big malpractice caseload.
Even when doctors perform competently, if they fail to establish a rapport or make sure a patient has realistic expectations, they can find themselves defendants in a malpractice case and vulnerable to a judgment, insurance executives say. 

The workshop in Eugene was developed by Miles Inc., a West Haven, Conn., subsidiary of Bayer AG, the West German pharmaceutical giant, and will be repeated with hundreds of physicians nationwide in coming weeks.
Swelling the audience in Eugene is Northwest Physicians Mutual Insurance Co. 's promise to attending policyholders of a 7.5% reduction in their malpractice premiums over two years -- a saving for some of several thousand dollars. 

At the beginning of the session, workshop director Greg Carroll asks the doctors to talk about patients who bug them, and arms shoot up throughout the room. "Patients with multiple problems who want one answer," says one. "A patient who calls at 5:45 p.m. and has had symptoms all day," says another.
Patients who lie, seek drugs they don't need, ramble or blame their problems on other doctors rank high as irritants as well. 

But the doctors are split over how to handle Mrs. Tobin from the video.
Some urge focusing quickly on her medical symptoms -- the cough and fever -- with both questions and lab tests.
Others propose drawing her out on her emotional concerns. "You want this woman to like you," one doctor says, because establishing emotional rapport will ensure that she'll return.
There will be time enough later in the visit, or at her next appointment, to address her physical condition, he says. 

But another doctor warns, "If you push the right button you could end up with a 30-minute conversation.
And you already might be three or four patients behind." Another video patient complains to his doctor of stomach pains.
When the patient indicates he spends an occasional evening at a bar, the doctor asks repeatedly if he drinks too much alcohol. "No," the patient insists. 

"How about coffee?" the doctor finally asks. 

"Yeah, maybe it's coffee," says the patient, who really suspects an ulcer and asks the doctor for an upper gastrointestinal test.
The doctor says to see first if drinking less coffee and alcohol alleviates his symptoms. 

In a critique, physicians in the workshop say the doctor lacked sensitivity. "I would introduce coffee as my first topic," one doctor says.
Another suggests: "Maybe he should have granted the patient's request for the upper GI," to show respect for the patient's viewpoint. 

The discussions don't lead to a consensus in either case, but they "do give physicians a chance to see other ways of approaching situations," Mr. Carroll says. "Their own technique might be habitual by now." 

Will the lessons stick?
Probably only if accompanied by follow-up training, says Mervyn Weerasinghe, medical director of Genesee Valley Group Health Association, a health maintenance organization in Rochester, N.Y., that served as a pilot site for the Miles workshop. "Just as most physicians continue {through courses} to improve their technical skills," he says, "they need to continue to improve on these skills." 

Other programs seek to improve doctor-patient communications from different perspectives.
The Society of General Internal Medicine's task force on doctor and patient has trained more than 300 medical school faculty members to teach communications skills.
Residents in primary care at New York University Medical Center, in New York City, get two months of intensive patient-interview training as soon as they arrive from medical school.
Programs too focused on high-tech inpatient care "neglect most of the universe of problems people normally come to the doctors' office with," says Sarah Williams, clinical assistant professor of medicine at NYU's medical school.
At Brown University, consultant Pamela Rowland-Morin begins working with students on interviewing skills during pre-med studies. "We hope to show that people who develop skills earlier will become better physicians," she says. 

Patients can also take some responsibility for the give-and-take with their doctors.
The New England Medical Center in Boston found that patients coached by researchers just before doctor appointments showed greater health improvement than did uncoached patients in a control group.
The coached patients read their charts rather than magazines in the waiting room, and they reviewed treatment options appropriate to their conditions.
Now researchers hope to teach doctors to assume the coaching role. 

"People with chronic illness face repeated visits to the doctor," says Sherrie Kaplan, a researcher on the project. "They've got to learn patienthood." 

