.START 

Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale of West Germany and Standard Chartered Bank PLC of Britain have agreed to set up a joint merchant bank and merge in it some of their respective investment activities, WestLB said. 

Also, the banks agreed that WestLB will take over Standard Chartered's European-branch network, including branches in Turkey and Ireland but excluding ones in Switzerland and Frankfurt. 

The two banks will set up the joint venture on a 50-50 basis.
Standard Chartered will bring in its investment subsidiary Standard Chartered Merchant Bank U.K. and its special financing activities. 

WestLB will in turn contribute to the joint venture its sectors of corporate finance, financing of acquisitions and projects, international-share placements, mergers and acquisitions as well as trading with sovereign debt paper. 

The agreement, yet to be signed, will permit WestLB to use the world-wide network of Standard Chartered's branches. 

Standard Chartered is the largest multinational bank in the United Kingdom with #23.7 billion ($38.03 billion) on the balance sheet at the end of 1988.
It showed a 1988 operating profit of #403 million. 

WestLB is West Germany's largest public sector bank.
It isn't publicly traded. 

The banks said their cooperation will enhance each other's business strategy.
Their geographic areas show little overlapping.
WestLB is strongly represented in West Germany; Standard Chartered's strength is the U.K., Africa and Asia. 

While both banks want to expand their corporate-finance activities in Europe, their product range differs: WestLB emphasizes long-term financial products, such as mark trading and swaps, while Standard Chartered stresses commercial foreign business, foreign-exchange trading and investment banking.
WestLB is getting an international investment-banking network with assets worth about #2.5 billion, for which it would provide services valued at around #150 million.
No cash will change hands, the banks' spokesmen said. 

The deal proves to be less sweet, however, when one looks on the liability side of the network: what the German bank ends up contributing, makes up the difference between the two.
The liabilities are customer loans, all in good standing, according to the British bank's spokesman. 

The divestment is important to Standard Chartered because it will improve its capital adequacy ratio, now at a dangerously low 8.1%, to a comfortable 9.3%.
The minimum rate is 8%. 

A spokesman for the German bank said the deal should be finalized by year end. 

