.START 

At age 42, Frederick DeLuca has fulfilled the franchising industry's wildest dreams.
Nearly 25 years after he opened his first Subway sandwich shop as a teen-ager, he controls a 3,750-unit chain that is opening 100 new stores a month.
According to a study by Technomic Inc., a food-service industry consulting firm, Subway is America's fastest-growing franchiser. 

Mr. DeLuca has become famous: National publications have praised his success in such rosy terms that he says he has "always worried" about "someone doing a balanced story." He also has gotten fabulously rich: Of the $52 million in royalties and other fees collected last year by Doctor's Associates Inc., as the franchiser is formally known, Mr. DeLuca received $10 million in bonuses.
Doctor's Associates' chief financial officer, Ralph Slivka, says he expects Mr. DeLuca to get nearly twice as much this year.
Boasts Mr. Slivka, "I can't find enough places to put all the money." 

But Subway is feeling growing pains.
Critics inside and outside Subway say Mr. DeLuca is glutting many markets with stores.
Franchisee complaints are growing.
According to state franchise examiners in Illinois and Maryland, companies Mr. DeLuca controls face more litigation than much larger fast-food chains, including McDonald's Corp.
In one dispute, a circuit court in Ingham County, Mich., has ordered Doctor's Associates to offer to rescind every franchise in Michigan for failing to make certain disclosures required by the state's franchise investment law. 

"They're adding stores much too fast," says John Larsen, owner of Port of Subs, a small chain of sandwich stores based in Reno, Nev. "How the hell can you put up 1,000 stores a year and control the growth?" 

Mr. DeLuca says he is controlling growth fine.
Despite the addition of 1,000 stores last year, average per-store sales grew 9% to 10%, he says.
Furthermore, half of the new franchises he sells are purchased by existing franchisees -- proof, he says, that franchisees are content with Subway's expansion. 

But some franchisees aren't so happy about expansion in their areas.
Mr. DeLuca says he has no firm policy concerning how far apart stores should be. "It winds up being a judgment call," he says. "My approach is: Put in as many as McDonald's has." 

Counters Bob Gilbertie, a Subway franchisee in Florida for 11 years: "He wants as many stores as McDonald's, but I don't.
The biggest concern of most franchisees is oversaturating an area with stores." 

Faced with this problem and others, Mr. Gilbertie has sold or closed four of his six stores.
Other franchisees, such as Carol McCrory, have quit the chain altogether. "It was doing quite well until they put three or four more around us within a two- to three-mile radius and took all our profits away," recalls Ms. McCrory, who bought a Subway franchise in Florida in the early 1980s. 

Ms. McCrory filed suit in a Pinellas County, Fla., circuit court, alleging Doctor's Associates misrepresented her chances of success.
Mr. DeLuca denies the charge, adding, "The new owners have brought the sales back up.
Success in business depends on the owner's attitude, and {Ms.
McCrory and her partner} just gave up." 

Ms. McCrory and Doctor's Associates settled the case in 1987.
But legal disputes pitting Mr. DeLuca against his franchisees have since proliferated. 

In a franchiser disclosure statement filed with certain states, Subway lists more than a dozen legal proceedings that franchisees, development agents and others have initiated against DeLuca companies since 1987 alone. (The list doesn't include some litigation against DeLuca companies, such as five suits pending in a Milford, Conn., state court, mainly filed by store landlords.) The plaintiffs in the listed suits charge misrepresentation of facts to sell franchises, breach of contract, fraud and violations of state franchise and federal racketeering laws.
The DeLuca companies deny the charges. 

Responding to the charges, Mr. DeLuca himself adds: "We are very scrupulous as to the way we present our company, and we anticipate those disputes will be resolved in our favor." Besides, he says, "I think it is a below-average amount of cases given our number of franchisees." 

But Mark Forseth, a Maryland state franchise examiner, commenting on the company's large number of lawsuits, says: "Companies that are expanding quickly have more litigation.
They're just selling, selling, selling, and that's trouble." 

The pace wasn't always so torrid.
After Mr. DeLuca opened his first Subway shop in 1965, he set a goal of 32 stores by 1975.
He missed the target by one year.
But he wouldn't miss another.
To accelerate Subway's growth, he turned not only to franchising but to selling franchises at a fraction of the cost charged by his fast-food competitors. 

Although Doctor's Associates collects an above-average royalty of 8% of franchisee sales, its initial franchise fee for a Subway store is only $7,500.
It drops to just $1,000 per additional franchise.
Throw in costs for construction, equipment and initial inventory, and a franchisee can be selling Subway's sandwiches and salads for $60,000 to $70,000.
Other small franchise outlets commonly cost up to $200,000, or more. 

Moreover, while the largest fast-food chains require individuals to buy entire regions and own all of the franchises in them, Mr. DeLuca, instead of selling an area, gave it to a so-called development agent for nothing.
And rather than requiring these agents to own franchises themselves, he permitted them to sell stores to others and share the royalty and initial franchise fee.
In effect, he has created a commission-driven national sales force that has helped Subway grow even faster. 

Mr. Forseth, the Maryland official, says the concept of Subway's commission-driven network of development agents may contribute to the high number of suits against the franchiser. "It's a lot faster and a lot looser," he says. 

Like Mr. DeLuca, development agents such as Joe Hart have reaped huge rewards from the system.
Once a $2-an-hour sandwich maker in Connecticut, Mr. Hart now runs a region including northern Georgia and Chattanooga, Tenn.
He has sold nearly 100 stores there in the past four years.
In 1989, his cut of the royalties and franchise fees will come close to $500,000. 

Aided by his low-cost franchises and hard-working development agents, Mr. DeLuca began in 1982 doubling the size of his chain every two years to fulfill a goal of 5,000 stores by 1994. "To everyone else," says Mr. DeLuca of the 5,000-store goal, "it seemed impossible.
To me it looked easy." Mr. DeLuca now vows to double the nearly 4,000 stores currently in his chain by 1995.
At the same time, he aims to nearly double per-store sales, from $4,500 a week to $8,000. 

"I take the pulse of the company weekly," Mr. DeLuca says, "and right now all the signs are very good." 

