.START 

Bob Hughes, the main character in "Drugstore Cowboy," isn't the usual movie drug addict.
He isn't especially hyper or depressed or tragic, though his life may seem tragic to non-junkies.
When he finally checks himself into a methadone treatment program, he tells the admissions person: "I'm a junkie.
I like drugs.
I like the life style.
It didn't work out." 

As played by the talented, sloe-eyed actor Matt Dillon ("Tex," "The Outsiders," "The Flamingo Kid"), Bob is an engaging doper and thief, the leader of a sleepy gang that steals narcotics from drugstores.
They don't seem to sell their bounty, just use it.
They continually drift -- even when they're sitting still.
The only thing any of them can concentrate on is getting high, except for Bob's wife, Diane, who can also concentrate on trying to distract Bob -- usually unsuccessfully -- with sex. 

The director, Gus Van Sant Jr., has set this film in the Portland, Ore., of 1971, and shot it on location there, where he lives, as an absurdist comedy.
Though the picture by no means endorses drugs, and paints the junkie life as almost intolerably dull as well as destructive, it is a welcome relief from the mostly heavy-handed Hollywood pictures that tackle the subject. 

This is Mr. Van Sant's second feature film; otherwise he occupies himself making shorts and playing in a Portland band called "Destroy All Blondes." Is it from this association that he has acquired a good feel for the slo-mo sensibility of full-time druggies?
Whether or not, his film doesn't benefit from his goofy forays into hallucinatory visualizations (itty-bitty animals floating through clouds, etc.). 

Officially, Mr. Van Sant based the movie on an unpublished novel by James Fogle, a former drugstore robber now serving a 22-year-term in Walla Walla (Wash.) prison.
Though his drug experience has now introduced Mr. Fogle to film, there's no glamour in it for him.
When he gets out of the slammer, he goes back to jail in Wisconsin, to serve another drug sentence, and he's 52 years old already. 

In the Van Sant film, Bob and his gang are comic desperadoes, in an anemic way.
His pal Rick is dumb, Rick's girlfriend Nadine is an insecure if zitless teen-ager, and Diane could pass as any pretty, self-involved suburban girl -- except for her extensive acquaintance with pharamaceuticals.
She lounges around in miniskirts and hair rollers, manicures her nails and loves drugs, more than she loves Bob. 

Bob and his pals seem like '50s characters, like Jack Kerouac's aimless pals, only not as smart and less energetic.
Elliot Goldenthal's nice, jazzy score contributes to this Beat feeling.
So does the appearance of Beat guru William Burroughs, in the part of an old priest and drug addict who introduced many an altar boy, including Bob, to drugs.
It's a sad joke, a little pathetic, having the author of "The Naked Lunch," the high priest of drugs, show up here as a drug-pushing man of the cloth spending his old age in a single-room-occupancy hotel.
But Mr. Burroughs has a definite presence, a dreamy otherworldliness that fits right into the strange, seedy landscape of "Drugstore Cowboy." 

From the other end of the planet, both geographically and spiritually, comes "Yaaba," an enchanting West African fable directed by Idrissa Ouedraogo of Burkina Faso.
Trained in the Soviet Union and Paris, he's made several short films about the problems of life back home.
For "Yaaba," his second full-length feature and winner of the International Critics Award at Cannes, he obtained European financing to translate stories he'd heard as a child into film. 

This film maker, however, hasn't been stricken by anthropological arthritis.
He has created a world, a timeless place, that could be any village anywhere.
The movie's village is a bucolic place, though it has its share of petty gossip and superstition, alcoholism and adultery.
At the center of this piece of folklore are a little boy and an old woman, the village outcast. 

Though men appear to be the nominal heads of households, clearly it's the women who rule.
Mr. Ouedraogo has done an especially fine job with the village children, who move through their paces with great wit and charm -- especially Noufou Ouedraogo as Bila, the boy who befriends the old woman.
Non-actors all, they have an uncanny ability to seem entirely natural onscreen, a talent given to few professionals and to only the rare amateur. 

Partly to accommodate this inexperienced cast, and partly because he didn't have sophisticated equipment, Mr. Ouedraogo had cameraman Matthias Kalin shoot the picture very simply. 

Fatimata Sanga, the elderly woman cast as Yaaba (which means grandmother), is stringy, bald and toothless, yet she carries herself with an ethereal gracefulness.
At a news conference, Mr. Ouedraogo said the script -- which is credited to him -- had to conform to Ms. Sanga's inability to remember lines, or much of anything else.
Whatever difficulties that may have caused in filming, they don't show up in the finished product.
Helped by Francis Bebey's light, lovely score -- those friendly flutes] -- the picture never loses its momentum, nor its wry generosity of spirit. 

VIDEO TIPS: Compare "Yaaba's" vision of Africa with the one most of us grew up with by watching those dozens of Tarzan movies.
Few of them are available on video, not even "Tarzan's Greatest Adventure," featuring a young Sean Connery.
Skip the 1981 Bo Derek version, "Tarzan, the Ape Man," and take a look at the original, the 1932 movie starring Johnny Weissmuller and Maureen O'Sullivan.
For many of us, definitively, he Tarzan, she Jane. 

