.START 

The Canadian government decided to cut by more than 50% the nationwide rail-passenger network operated by Via Rail Canada Inc., a government agency. 

The decision, which prompted protests from opposition politicians and many communities, is designed to cut the government's heavy costs of subsidizing rail-passenger travel.
The 1988 subsidy totaled 645 million Canadian dollars (US$548.8 million), or more than C$100 a passenger. 

Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said that if the services weren't cut, Via Rail would have needed a C$1 billion-a-year subsidy to maintain its network, which extends into some of Canada's sparsely populated northern regions. 

The reductions, which are to be made by Jan. 15, are expected to save taxpayers C$1 billion over the next five years, said Transport Minister Benoit Bouchard. "The government's decision is based on Canadian economic and demographic realities," he said. 

The cutback will trim the number of routes to 20 from 38 and involve a layoff of 2,761 Via Rail employees, or 38% of the total. 

Via Rail also is to boost its fares to "market levels" and to invite takeovers by others of any of its rail-passenger services. 

Opposition politicians demanded that the government abandon the cutback of services and, instead, try to emulate the performance of the U.S. National Railroad Passenger Corp., or Amtrak.
Amtrak's operating revenue covers 69% of its operating costs, compared with Via Rail's operating-cost recovery of only 30%.
Amtrak received US$581 million in federal funding in 1988. 

Mr. Mulroney said the U.S. approach wasn't acceptable to Canada because it involved eliminating 75% of U.S. passenger services when Amtrak was formed in 1970 and putting a heavy focus on operations in one region, the U.S. northeast. 

The Canadian leader said the Canadian plan will maintain rail services in all regions of Canada, including remote areas where operating subsidies per passenger currently amount to C$256. 

Via Rail officials, however, predicted that any future growth for rail-passenger service in Canada would likely be in the corridor between Quebec City, Quebec, and Windsor, Ontario, where more than 60% of Canadians live.
They said Via Rail would welcome proposals for a high-speed service between the two cities.
Rail currently accounts for only 3% of inter-city Canadian travel. 

Mr. Mulroney said he will establish a commission to investigate and make recommendations on Canada's national passenger-transportation needs for the coming century. 

Among the services to be cut will be one of Via Rail's trans-Canadian runs, known as the Canadian, that links Montreal and Vancouver.
Another transcontinental service, between Toronto and Vancouver, will be maintained with three departures a week. 

