.START 

After cooling down from a feverish pace a few years back, corporate cutbacks are heating up again, increasing the nervousness among employees already shell-shocked from the past years' cuts. 

Just in the last few days, for example, International Business Machines Corp., Unisys Corp. and Cray Research Inc. have initiated or augmented plans to trim workers from their staffs. 

In general, corporate cutbacks seem to be equally divided between hourly workers and white-collar personnel, including middle managers, supervisors and professional staffs, according to a survey of 1,084 companies and nonprofit institutions by the American Management Association. 

William J. Morin, chairman of Drake Beam Morin Inc., a big outplacement firm, sees increased cutback activity boosting the firm's business of easing executives and workers out of corporations.
He expects his firm's revenue to rise to $130 million in 1990, compared with a projected $102 million volume this year.
He cites increased cutback activity in the communications, chemical and petroleum industries and in commercial banking. 

"It has really picked up this fall much faster than we expected," he says. 

The American Management Association survey found that 39% of its surveyed companies had cut staff in the year ended this past June, compared with 35% in the previous 12 months.
What's more, says Eric Greenberg, an American Management researcher who headed the study, his data suggest that figure could rise to as much as 45% during the current 12-month period, equaling the big 1987 total. 

Much of the most recent activity is the result of a slowdown in the computer industry.
IBM, for example, told employees of a plan to use an early-retirement program to trim as many as 1,000 employees from its work force, just one day after announcing that its third-quarter and full-year earnings will fall well below analysts' expectations. 

But many other companies are feeling nervous about the overall economy as well. "There's some amount of caution around," says David Kearns, chairman of Xerox Corp. "We're all on the track, continuing to take down our non-direct employment," he says, referring to people not directly involved in producing or selling products.
In June, Xerox announced that 680 employees had accepted a voluntary separation package. 

Other cutback plans reflect the aftermath of big mergers, takeovers or buy-outs.
Two months ago, in the wake of its $25 billion leveraged buy-out by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., RJR Nabisco Inc. announced it would dismiss 1,640 employees, or about 12% of the work force at its tobacco company. 

More may be on the way: Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., newly formed through the merger of Bristol-Myers Co. and Squibb Corp., said company officials plan meetings on integrating the two concerns and that "efficiencies will be implemented as they are identified." 

What's more, many companies are feeling the psychological impact of the start of a new decade. "A lot of companies are going into not just five-year plans, but 10-year plans, and downsizing when they aren't necessarily in trouble," says Mr. Morin.
When Hughes Aircraft Corp., the aerospace unit of General Motors Corp., in June announced plans to slash its work force by 8%, or 6,000 jobs, Malcom Currie, Hughes's chairman and chief executive officer, said the cuts were "to respond to anticipated cuts in defense spending and to make (the company) more competitive for the 1990s." 

Employees' distress is likely to be compounded by the seeming relentlessness of these cutbacks.
The American Management survey found that the best predictor of future work-force cuts was past workforce cuts.
Of the companies that planned to shrink in the next 12 months, 72% had already cut in the past 12 months.
The IBM early-retirement program, for example, is its third such program in three years. 

"The taboo has been broken for many organizations," says Craig Schneier, a managing director specializing in human-resource issues at Sibson & Co., a consulting firm. "What was once clearly outside the realm of viable options is now not only viable, but preferred." 

If past experience holds, many of the managers and professionals cut from big corporations will end up working for smaller ones -- often much smaller ones.
Between half and two-thirds of the executives using the outplacement services of Lee Hecht Harrison Inc. wind up at companies less than 20% of the size of their former employer, says Robert Lee, co-chairman. 

Mr. Morin sees an increase in executives' urge to run their own shows. "There's a tremendous movement to having control," he says.
Today, he says, 25% of senior executives using his company's services want to do something on their own, up from 8% five years ago. "A lot of them want out of the frying pan." 

And a lot of them want to get out before they get kicked out. "The number of people calling us has increased dramatically," says George Rossi, partner and director in the Boston office of Chicago-based search firm Heidrick & Struggles.
He says the office is now getting "several hundred" phone calls a week from job-hunting executives, up 35% from the same time last year. 

He can't be too encouraging, though. "I tell them it's going to be a long process.
Many are going to have to move out of the area if they want to maintain their career objectives and their level of responsibilities." 

