.START 

First Constitution Financial Corp. said it agreed to be acquired by investor groups for $273.5 million. 

The savings institution also said it increased its provision for real-estate-related loan-loss reserves by $27 million, to $34.3 million, for the third quarter.
An $8 million charge in the period will cut the reserve to $26 million as of Sept. 30.
A spokesman said the sale wasn't related to the increased provision. 

The provision will result in a third-quarter loss of more than $10 million, or 90 cents a share, the company said.
A year ago, First Constitution had net income of $4.8 million, or 44 cents a share. 

In over-the-counter trading yesterday, First Constitution gained $4.125 to $20.125. 

Under the merger agreement, the buyers will pay $25 for each First Constitution share outstanding.
The savings institution said the transaction, which is subject to approval by First Constitution holders and state and federal regulators, would help "broaden its services." 

First Constitution will be acquired by two interrelated groups created for the purpose, WFRR Limited Partnership and GHKM Corp.
The principals include certain officers of Gregory & Hoenemeyer Inc., a merchant banking firm; R.T. McNamar, a former deputy secretary of the U.S. Treasury; and Donald H. Rundlett, chairman of Private Capital Partners Inc. of New York. 

First Constitution said the shareholder meeting to vote on the proposed transaction is expected to be held in January.
Walter R. Miller Jr., the company's president and chief executive officer, said he would continue in those positions after the acquisition. 

First Constitution said its nonperforming loans are expected to show an increase to $100 million at the end of the third quarter from $52 million at June 30.
The company said almost all of the nonperforming loans are real-estate-related, with slightly more than half in commercial real estate. 

Earlier this year, First Constitution established a credit administration department in anticipation of a deteriorating real-estate market in Connecticut.
First Constitution said it reviewed its loans in the third quarter and decided it was "prudent to increase the provision and allowance for losses." 

Mr. Miller said the bank is expected to return to profitability in the fourth quarter.
In the 1988 fourth quarter, First Constitution posted profit of $5.3 million, or 48 cents a share. 

