.START 

Senate Democratic leaders proposed to scale back the House's massive deficit-reduction measure in an attempt to minimize disruptions from impending forced cuts in spending. 

The surprise suggestion was made just hours after the House voted 333-91 to send to the Senate the huge, $10.9 billion tax-and-spending measure, laden with such contentious issues as the capital-gains tax cut and repeal of the catastrophic-illness insurance law. 

The outlook for the effort was uncertain.
Republican leaders agreed to begin talks to decide what elements of the bill could be stripped away.
But President Bush, who had rejected a similar offer earlier in the process, hadn't given his consent. 

Last evening, Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) suggested that the bill be trimmed drastically, arguing that the legislation had gotten out of hand and that its continued delay threatened to trigger spending cuts under the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law.
Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) agreed, but said tough negotiations were needed to decide which issues are extraneous and which aren't. 

The chief victim of such talks might well be President Bush's drive to reduce the capital-gains tax.
The Democrats said the capital-gains issue surely would need to be put off to another day.
Republicans weren't so sure.
The discussions were to begin today. 

Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas) of the Senate Finance Committee offered to remove from the Senate version of the bill some pet proposals that his panel approved early Wednesday morning.
These would expand the deduction for individual retirement accounts and allow Social Security recipients to earn more money before their benefits were reduced. 

Other Finance Committee members implied that likely candidates for removal included billions of dollars of narrow benefits tacked on to the bill for business interests and wealthy individuals. 

One Finance Committee member, Sen. David Pryor (D., Ark.), spoke on the Senate floor and struck the pose of a repentant sinner. "I come to this floor as one who ended up with a busload of extraneous matter," he said. "It was nothing less than a feeding frenzy." 

One question hanging over the Senate talks was how a far simpler version of the deficit-reduction bill could be reconciled with the House version. 

Even if the Senate reaches an agreement, the deficit-cutting legislation isn't expected to be enacted before the Oct. 15 deadline for avoiding the Gramm-Rudman automatic spending cuts.
Congressional leaders hope to get the bill through the Senate this weekend.
But a House-Senate conference committee probably couldn't meet to resolve the differences between the two measures until late next week, according to House Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta (D., Calif.). 

The Democratic leaders insisted their offer was in good faith, and wasn't an attempt to cheat the Republicans out of a capital-gains tax cut. "This is not a gimmick," Sen. Mitchell said. "This is not a mechanism for gaining tactical advantage." 

Proponents of the cut probably face a high hurdle even if it isn't stripped from the House bill.
The Finance Committee didn't send a proposal to cut capital-gains taxes to the Senate floor, and to add one there would probably require at least 60 votes rather than the usual 51 because of special Senate rules that govern the bill. 

The senators could get a good indication of the president's position today when he is to go to Capitol Hill to promote capital-gains tax cuts in a meeting with Senate Republicans. 

House GOP Leader Robert Michel of Illinois had earlier welcomed a similar proposal to strip down the bill from House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.), only to have it dashed by the White House. "The speaker and I would have agreed," Mr. Michel told reporters yesterday. "It's my Republican administration and my president who felt so strongly about capital gains. . . . I have to try to do whatever I can for my president." 

Mr. Foley, meanwhile, emphasized that the offer still stood. "We remain willing, if the Senate wishes to do so, to consider these items on a separate track," he said of capital gains, child care and catastrophic-illness insurance. 

Rep. Panetta estimated that only about $9 billion of the savings in the House-passed measure were "hard"; other budget analysts suggested even lower figures. "I wish I could tell you that the savings alone are enough to drive this bill," he said. "But these other issues become part of the engine." 

The Senate Finance Committee bill's revenue-raising provisions would bring in about $37 billion over five years.
But the bill was loaded with tax giveaways, benefits and other provisions so that it would raise a net of $9 billion over the period. 

The House measure is filled with items that both reduce and expand the budget deficit.
The capital-gains tax, for example, would increase revenue for the first few years but lose revenue in the long run.
The bill also includes several money-losing extensions of soon-to-expire tax credits, but it increases or creates a number of federal user fees. 

The House bill's capital-gains tax equals 19.6% for assets held one year or more and sold from Sept. 14, 1989, through Dec. 31, 1991.
Starting in 1992, the maximum effective rate would jump to 28%.
But for assets acquired after Dec. 31, 1991, and held for more than a year, individuals could exclude from taxation any gain attributable to inflation. 

The measure includes various changes in Medicare that are extremely controversial with doctors.
The most hotly debated provision would impose a limit on the total amount Medicare will pay physicians. 

The bill also would make the Social Security Administration an independent agency, a provision that is pending in the Senate as well and is opposed by the Bush administration.
In addition, it would remove the U.S. Postal Service's operating budget from the federal budget, reducing the deficit by $1.77 billion. 

In the Senate, Democrats began work on a plan for a capital-gains tax cut.
Sen. Bob Graham of Florida said he and about 10 fellow Democrats were working on a capital-gains proposal that, he hopes, would give the break to both corporations and individuals.
Though the details weren't yet worked out, he said the plan would give sales of newly acquired assets, other than collectibles, preferential treatment after they were held for two years.
The exclusion would then be 10%, he said and would go up 10 percentage points each year until the exclusion reached 50% after the asset was held for six years. 

Corporations would get similar, though less generous treatment, he said.
And currently held assets by individuals would be given an exclusion of about half the amount of newly acquired assets, depending on how long they have been held. 

