.START 

American Airlines chief executive Robert L. Crandall is no soft-hearted corpocrat sitting atop a bloated, underperforming enterprise.
In his often ruthless pursuit of profits, the profane, chain-smoking Mr. Crandall was once sanctioned by the federal government for allegedly attempting to fix prices.
In an industry full of woes, American's parent, AMR Corp., has made more than $1.5 billion in the past five years. 

This would seem to make Mr. Crandall's company an unlikely target for a corporate raider, but yesterday real estate magnate and sometime raider Donald Trump bid $120 a share, or $7.54 billion, for AMR. 

The way Mr. Trump explains it, American, the nation's No. 1 air carrier, could benefit from the "substantial insight" he has already gained since becoming an airline executive more than three months ago when he acquired Eastern Airlines' East Coast shuttle. 

The takeover proposal from Mr. Trump, whose name is already attached to everything from casinos to game shows, was long rumored on Wall Street, but it still left many familiar with the airline business gasping. "What?
That's hard to believe.
Why doesn't he just try to buy the New York Yankees from George Steinbrenner?" asks Alfred E. Kahn, the former airline regulator who helped usher in the era of deregulation. 

A Yankees' acquisition might be easier.
For this time, Mr. Trump, who likes to portray himself as the ultimate tough guy, is up against Mr. Crandall, who one former colleague says "eats nails for breakfast," and who another former colleague says is "the only person I know who can smoke two packs of cigarettes a day and still jog several miles every day: He's lean and mean." He's also unlikely to want to work for Mr. Trump, many who know him say. 

Under Mr. Crandall's shrewd hand, AMR has more than doubled revenues to nearly $10 billion, created the frequent flier concept, turned its computer reservation system into an awesome marketing tool and built one of the nation's most modern aircraft fleets.
Indeed, Mr. Trump yesterday called AMR top managers "outstanding" and, in a gesture that some Crandall allies felt was presumptuous in the extreme, offered them jobs. 

So far, AMR hasn't said much about what many consider a brash bid by Mr. Trump.
It promised to consider the offer but said for now it prefers independence. 

The company certainly has a number of options -- it can simply say "no" and gird for a fight.
It can try an acquisition of its own, sell a significant block of stock to someone else, recapitalize or entertain a leveraged buy-out.
In any event, AMR should be well prepared.
In August it retained Goldman, Sachs & Co. and Salomon Brothers Inc. as defense advisors.
And it has plenty of financial power. 

AMR had $1.29 billion of cash and short-term investments at the start of the year, and only $1.2 billion of long-term debt on its books then, making it one of the least leveraged of major carriers.
And it has some $14.5 billion in new aircraft orders and options to order-delivery positions that are exceedingly valuable given the industry's current shortage of new planes.
Through various methods, these planes could be used to help generate a large cash war chest. 

While Mr. Trump's takeover proposal caused AMR's stock price to climb 20% to $99.875, many takeover speculators said yesterday they were unconvinced that Mr. Trump's bid is in fact a serious one.
In one sign of market skepticism, the stock's closing price was well below Mr. Trump's $120 bid. 

But Mr. Trump is clearly pleased with his first foray into airlines.
Since acquiring his east coast shuttle from ailing Eastern, Mr. Trump has recovered much of the market share Eastern lost after it filed for bankruptcy.
Some analysts say he has recaptured nearly 50% of the market; Pan Am, his only competitor, says it is just 40%. 

And others in the financial world believe Mr. Trump could prove a serious bidder this time. "He likes to own prime properties in the industries he's involved in, and American is certainly that," says Thomas Longman, airline analyst at Bear Stearns & Co. Adds Owen Dowd, a vice president at Oppenheimer & Co. in New York: "American can just say no, but Trump is an expert at turning up the heat." 

Some investors may agree AMR has undervalued assets, says one airline analyst.
Foremost among those assets are the planes AMR has on order that could be worth more if sold to leasing companies and then leased back. 

Long-term shareholders do have something to gripe about.
AMR hasn't paid a cash dividend since February of 1980.
Mr. Trump cited the absense of dividends in his takeover offer.
Mr. Longman also predicts Mr. Trump will be cheered on by "some institutional investors and short-term traders who've been saying the company hasn't provided enough value up to now." 

Still, Mr. Crandall can claim he engineered a major turnaround for AMR.
A 16-year AMR executive, with previous experience in everything from greeting cards to department stores, he took over as AMR president in 1980 as the company was rolling to an $75.8 million net loss.
He promptly grounded 18% of American's fuel-guzzling aircraft and shut down routes.
He once bragged he saved $40,000 a year by taking one olive out of the salads served passengers. 

An outspoken critic of deregulation, he quickly adapted, taking major risks that paid off.
He began ordering new fuel-efficient planes when it appeared he couldn't afford them.
He built up a fortress-like operations hub at Dallas-Fort Worth airport. "Nobody can testify more eloquently than I to the brilliance of these techniques," says Mr. Kahn, the former government regulator. 

C.J. David Davies, senior vice president of Pan American World Airways, recalls the way American battled low-cost carrier People Express a few years back through selective fare wars. "If People had a 3 o'clock flight to somewhere, American would only cut the price of its fares on its midafternoon flights, and on that one destination.
If People was offering the fares on just a limited number of seats, American would do the same," Mr. Davies recalls. 

Later, when People neared bankruptcy, its chairman, Donald Burr, claimed American's pricing strategies contributed to People's demise. 

Two of AMR's biggest coups under Mr. Crandall, however, may be the development of the frequent flier program and of a powerful computer reservation system.
Those two tools now dominate industry marketing practices.
American began a frequent flier program in 1981 after struggling for some method of developing brand loyalty in the face of fare warfare under deregulation.
Mr. Crandall "doesn't like to concede a single customer to any competitor," says Richard Vietor, a Harvard management professor. 

Mr. Crandall, once a data-processing manager, invested in a large computerized reservations system when other carriers either weren't willing to spend the money or didn't see the need. "I don't think anybody perceived the crucial strength (these systems) would bring to the party when American was building theirs," says one industry executive.
Indeed, as the airline slipped slightly into the red in the fourth quarter of 1987, AMR's computer reservation system made so much money that Mr. Crandall later quipped that if forced to choose, he'd sell the airline and keep the computers. 

The one major blotch on Mr. Crandall's record came in 1985, when he signed a much-publicized consent decree with the Justice Department to settle -- without admitting or denying guilt -- charges that he had three years earlier tried to fix prices with Braniff Airlines.
In a taped phone conversation, Mr. Crandall could be heard suggesting to Braniff's president, "Raise your goddamn fares 20%.
I'll raise mine in the morning." In the decree, Mr. Crandall promised not to engage in such activity in the future and to take notes on his conversations with other airline industry executives for two years. 

Several people familiar with American say that shortly after the consent decree, the combative boss tried to tone down his act, had his teeth capped to improve his smile and hired speechwriters to aid him.
AMR spokesmen were declining comment yesterday on almost everything and said Mr. Crandall wasn't available for comment. 

Despite his hard-nosed style, Mr. Crandall has established surprising rapport with labor, avoiding many of the fights and strikes that have hampered his competition.
When President Bush made a campaign stop last year at American's Tulsa maintenance base, Mr. Crandall received louder applause when introduced than Mr. Bush did, recalls Ed Wilson, president of the Transport Workers Union local representing American mechanics.
Mr. Crandall has given employees "a sense of mission," says union financial adviser Brian M. Freeman, who is normally confrontational with airline managements. "He's not afraid to deal with the troops." 

Not that Mr. Crandall is given to largesse.
His most notable contribution to labor relations has been lower pay for new hires, or the so-called "B-scale system" now embraced by several carriers.
Under the scheme adopted in 1983, existing employees continued on one pay scale, but new employees started on a much lower scale. 

The system allowed AMR to concentrate on internal expansion while competitors were dabbling in non-airline business instead of buying planes and hiring pilots and crews in an increasingly grow-or-die environment.
And the more Mr. Crandall expanded by hiring new people under this plan, the lower his overall labor costs became. 

But some starting flight attendants once complained they qualified for food stamps. 

The system is "the most humanistic approach," Mr. Crandall argues, though he has conceded "I don't feel any special pride" in putting beginning wages for reservations agents and ticket agents so low that "I doubt many young people can support a family or even maintain a reasonable single life style." 

