.START 

The pound's relentless slide stirred the Bank of England to mount a global-market intervention and may soon force British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson to push through another increase in British interest rates -- the 11th since June 1988. 

Behind the turmoil is an expected decision today by the West German Bundesbank to boost key interest rates.
The expected increases from Frankfurt -- already reflected in money markets -- threaten to weaken the relative value of the pound, which slid to just more than three marks.
That is the lowest level in 18 months, as well as a perceived threshold above which the British government seems determined to keep the pound. 

The pressures to protect the currency come at an awkward moment for the Thatcher government politically: The Labor Party, gaining confidence from recent favorable polls, is now holding its party conference here. "It would be a terrific gift to {Labor Party leader} Neil Kinnock," if the Thatcher government is forced to raise base rates from the already lofty 14%, said John Calverley, senior economist with American Express Bank in London. 

Nevertheless, economists have begun to consider another increase highly likely, however much Mr. Lawson hopes to avoid one.
If the Bank of England's market interventions don't shore up the relative value of sterling, "the only thing he's got left is interest rates," said Shearson Lehman Hutton analyst Adam Bennett. 

It isn't only currency markets and West German central bankers that are pressing Mr. Lawson toward another increase in base rates.
The chancellor has been hit by a string of disappointing economic indicators at home.
Lumped together, they point to a continuing inflation problem in Britain -- despite 16 months of rate increases. 

Recent government figures showed consumer spending rose in the second quarter from the previous three-month period.
Consumer borrowing is also rising.
Other figures revealed inflationary growth in the money supply.
Wage settlements have been running at levels of 9% and higher. 

Perhaps most worrisome, Britain's current-account deficit is worsening, and could end the year at about #20 billion ($32.09 billion).
Mr. Lawson has attacked this problem by raising interest rates so consumers buy fewer goods from abroad. 

Another rationale for lifting rates now is the long-term political calendar.
With national elections expected in the fall of 1991, the Thatcher government has reason to try to wring inflation out the economy and spur a rebound by that time.
The peril is that continuous ratcheting up of interest rates will produce a more punishing downturn than the government wants. 

