.START 

In the first use of the federal racketeering law against a penny stock brokerage firm, three New York traders were named in a six-count indictment in Newark.
They were charged with using Monarch Funding Corp., a Manhattan brokerage firm, as a racketeering enterprise from 1982 to 1989 and manipulating stocks through bribery and inside information. 

U.S. Attorney Samuel A. Alito Jr. said yesterday that a grand jury had handed up the indictment of Leo M. Eisenberg, 68 years old; Richard Cannistraro, 36, and Richard O. Bertoli, 56. 

Mr. Alito said he believed his office is the first to use the 1970 Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law, or RICO, to charge a brokerage firm with being the focal point of a racketeering scheme.
The defendants face a combined 150 years in jail and the forfeiture of $7 million in assets, Mr. Alito said. 

The defendants also were indicted on criminal conspiracy and obstruction of justice charges for alleged fraudulent trading in six penny stocks and the use of offshore brokerage accounts in the Cayman Islands.
Mr. Alito said the brokers all had significant ties to New Jersey, but he declined to elaborate. 

Mr. Eisenberg is the owner and president of Monarch.
Barry Fallick, his attorney, said his client will plead not guilty and "vigorously contest the allegations." 

Mr. Cannistraro, a former Wood Gundy Corp. securities analyst, is currently serving a prison sentence for securities fraud.
He was the principal shareholder of Liquidation Control Inc., a Washington, D.C., consulting firm that allegedly benefited from the scheme. 

Mr. Bertoli is a former president of the defunct Executive Securities Corp.
He and Mr. Eisenberg allegedly concealed their ownership in High Technology Capital Corp. High Tech was formerly located in Paterson, N.J., and is now in bankruptcy-law proceedings, according to Mr. Alito.
Monarch bought High Tech but failed to disclose its ownership while continuing to induce customers to buy High Tech stock, the indictment states.
Mr. Bertoli could not be reached for comment. 

The defendants allegedly manipulated the stock prices of six companies by preparing false research reports.
They traded in the six securities using their advanced knowledge of those reports. 

The indictment also alleges that the defendants bribed two portfolio managers and a New York securities analyst to get their companies to buy large blocks of the six companies' stock. 

A Securities Exchange Commission complaint filed in 1985 charging securities fraud against the three defendants is also pending. 

EX-OFFICIALS charge Johnson & Johnson with concealing drug's side effects. 

In a suit filed in federal court in Newark, N.J., and in state court in New Brunswick, N.J, two former Johnson & Johnson executives said they were pressured to leave the company when they criticized the handling of Zomax, a painkiller, and tried to release information about its problems.
The executives also named Johnson & Johnson's New York law firm, Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, as a defendant, charging that the firm kept evidence and witnesses from plaintiffs who filed product liability suits against the company.
Calls to Patterson, Belknap weren't returned. 

The 80-page suit alleged that officials at McNeil Pharmaceutical, the Johnson & Johnson unit that developed and marketed Zomax, allowed the drug to be used without properly warning about hazards known to the company and that the company failed to properly report these problems to the Food and Drug Administration. 

The executives, both of whom worked at McNeil, are James A. Dale, a former assistant director in medical research, and Edward F. Lemanowicz, a former assistant in regulatory affairs.
The two men sought an unspecified amount of damages from Johnson & Johnson.
The suit was filed by Allan Kanner, a Philadelphia lawyer. 

Zomax was first approved for sale in 1980, but was pulled from the market by McNeil in 1983 after reports surfaced that the drug caused a number of serious allergic reactions, as well as several deaths. 

In a statement released from Johnson & Johnson's headquarters in New Brunswick, N.J., a spokesman said there was "no basis" for the charges.
The company didn't falsify or delay reporting any data, as charged by the former employees, and its lawyers "handled the Zomax lawsuits in a totally professional and ethical manner," the spokesman said. 

The former employees weren't asked to do anything "inconsistent with the highest professional standards" and "their leaving. . . had nothing to do with the charges made in the suit," the spokesman said. 

CHICAGO SUES artists in test of flag desecration ordinance. 

The city's corporation counsel sued 10 artists this week in an effort to test an ordinance adopted by the city council earlier this year. 

One of the artists, "Dread" Scott Tyler, last March presented a work at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago called "What Is the Proper Way To Display the American Flag?" Viewers were invited to walk across the flag and as a result thousands of veterans protested. 

After a state court judge found that exhibit to be protected by the First Amendment, Chicago aldermen rushed through an ordinance that specifically outlawed laying the flag on the floor.
The U.S. Supreme Court subsequently ruled in a Texas case that flag burning was protected speech, but Chicago's lawyers claim the city's ordinance is designed to prevent public disorder. 

Now Mr. Tyler and nine other artists hope to exhibit art work featuring flags and pieces of flags as part of a program on censorship.
The American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois asked the city's lawyer and police chief last month to issue a letter assuring the artists that they could go forward with their plans.
Instead the city sued the artists to test the legality of the ordinance. 

The suit was initially filed in state court but was removed to federal court at the request of the ACLU. 

A federal judge initially dismissed the suit but said he will reconsider. 

PARTNERS DEFECT from Philadelphia law firm. 

The chairman of the environmental department at Wolf, Block, Schorr and Solis-Cohen quit with two partners to form a boutique specializing in environmental legal and consulting work.
Joseph M. Manko, the former chairman, and Marc E. Gold and Bruce S. Katcher, left the eight-partner department.
Barry F. Schwartz, a former partner in the litigation section, was named vice president and chief counsel in charge of litigation for MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings Inc., the parent company of the Revlon Group Inc.
At MacAndrews & Forbes, he joins former Philadelphia mayor and Wolf, Block partner William J. Green who joined the company as vice president for government relations in August. 

