.START 

Graduate business schools are starting to spring up in the Soviet Union, one of the many once-unthinkable institutions that perestroika has made possible. 

Officials of one of them, Moscow International Business School, currently are visiting the U.S. to line up guest lecturers and professors for the school and establish contacts with U.S. companies interested in using the school's consulting service.
School officials give U.S. businessmen insights into Soviet law and put them in touch with Soviet businesses. 

The Moscow International Business School is itself a state-owned joint venture between the Plekhanov Institute of the National Economy -- Moscow's most-prestigious undergraduate management school -- and the University of Bologna in Italy. 

Start-up financing came from the Soviet state and from Nomisma, a research arm of Institutio Ricostruzioni Industriali, or IRI, the giant Italian state-owned holding company.
But the school is now self-financed, through tuition and consulting services. 

The business school, which began conducting seminars last April, is poised to start a 10-month program for young Soviet managers that will begin in December. 

"Our main goal is to create joint knowhow in the business community," Valeri Kazikaev, director of the school, told a group of reporters here.
Mr. Kazikaev, who holds a doctorate in economics and business management, stressed that the school hopes to attract U.S. business people to seminars addressing the difficulties faced by U.S. companies that want to conduct business in the Soviet Union.
Frequent changes in trade regulations, as well as difficulties foreign companies have in repatriating profits are among some of the issues.
The school also is planning a language school.
George M.J. Meller, U.S. representative of the Moscow business school and himself a consultant in international trade and finance, said perestroika -- the system of economic restructuring initiated by Soviet premier Mikhail Gorbachev -- has created some difficulties for foreign companies doing business in the Soviet Union. "Before you had to go to one office," he said.
Now, although there are more possibilities for business, there's also more confusion, he said. 

There are about 50 students at any given time in the school.
The 10-month graduate program for managers will include about 40 students whose companies will pay their tuition, which Mr. Kazikaev estimates won't exceed $20,000. 

Mr. Kazikaev acknowledged the difficulties in teaching Soviet managers who are used to relying heavily on the state. "We try to teach simple approaches" to areas such as marketing, said Mr. Kazikaev. "There was no market at all before," he said, so marketing and international finance are two of the most popular courses. 

"We can't change the theoretical mind, but we can give them understanding" of how market forces and other economies work, Mr. Kazikaev said.
Asked whether it was difficult to try to separate the political from economic practices, Mr. Kazikaev said flatly, "we can't teach politics." 

Mr. Kazikaev doesn't advocate training Soviet managers solely in the U.S. or Europe, because the Soviet economy is so different that when the managers return, they have to figure out how to apply the knowledge they've gained to their specific situation. 

But Mr. Kazikaev said he noticed one practice that was applauded by some of the managers who have participated in seminars that include spending time at European companies.
He said the students particularly liked the autocratic style of one manager at an Italian company, and that they planned to use it when they returned home. 

