.START 

U.S. FORCES PARTICIPATED in Tuesday's attempt to oust Panama's Noriega. 

Contrary to some official U.S. accounts, Bush administration officials said American forces intervened in support of the insurrection against the Panamanian military chief, blocking two strategic routes early in the coup attempt to hamper Noriega's troops.
But the officials said poor communications, the inexperience of U.S. military officials in Panama, lack of U.S. contingency plans and crucial errors by the rebels led to the failure to topple Noriega. 

Panamanian soldiers firing tear gas broke into the office of opposition leader Guillermo Endara, but a colleague said he had already left for a "safe place." 

EAST GERMANS ARRIVED in West Germany aboard trains from Prague. 

About 7,600 refugees reached the city of Hof after a trip aboard "freedom trains" through their homeland from Czechoslovakia.
The journey was disrupted when thousands of those left behind clashed with East German riot police in Dresden in an attempt to flee.
As East Berlin prepared to mark the 40th anniversary of the Communist state this weekend, more than 600 other East German emigres began heading for the West from Poland. 

The Bush administration cautioned East Germans that the U.S. Embassy in East Berlin can't grant waves of would-be emigres extended shelter. st 

The Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to the Dalai Lama, the exiled spiritual and political leader of Tibet.
In announcing the 1989 selection, the Norwegian Nobel Committee in Oslo cited his non-violent struggle to free the Himalayan nation from Chinese rule.
Beijing denounced the choice as interference in China's internal affairs. 

TV evangelist Jim Bakker was convicted by a federal jury in Charlotte, N.C., of diverting $3.7 million in funds from followers of his PTL ministry for personal use.
The 49-year-old Bakker, who was found guilty on all 24 counts of fraud and conspiracy, faces a maximum sentence of 120 years in prison and as much as $5 million in fines. 

The House approved legislation expanding federal assistance for child care after it rejected two narrower proposals supported by the Bush administration.
The action put Congress closer to enacting federal childcare legislation.
The Senate passed a $1.75 billion child-care subsidy and tax-credit bill last June. 

Bush will undergo minor surgery today at Walter Reed Army Hospital to remove a cyst from the middle finger of his right hand, a White House spokesman said.
The president said he would continue working despite the "silly" inconvenience. 

Florida's Supreme Court struck down a law requiring pregnant girls to get parental consent before having an abortion.
The ruling, which found that the state's guarantee of privacy outweighed the 1988 statute, came five days before lawmakers were to consider restricting access to abortions. 

Israel's inner cabinet debated an Egyptian proposal for peace talks with Palestinians, and reportedly edged toward acceptance of Secretary of State Baker's call for U.S.-Israel-Egyptian negotiations on the composition of the Arab delegation.
Israel's leaders adjourned without a decision, but are to resume discussions today. 

Human-rights activists stormed Costa Rica's Embassy in San Salvador and seized about 40 hostages to protest what they called the repressive policies of Salvadoran President Cristiani's government.
There were conflicting reports about whether the activists, said to be Salvadorans, were armed. 

Soviet troops have begun restoring rail shipments to Armenia of food, fuel and other basic goods that were cut off for two months by striking rail workers in neighboring Azerbaijan.
The soldiers were sent to the Armenian capital after Soviet lawmakers ordered emergency steps to resume rail traffic between the Transcaucasian republics. 

The Senate approved a statutory ban on flag desecration.
The chamber, however, added language that could make the measure vulnerable to a constitutional challenge.
The bill, passed 91-9, is aimed at skirting a decision by the Supreme Court in June that barred the punishment of those who burn the U.S. flag as political protest. 

The Treasury Department plans to propose that banks be required to keep data on international wire transfers in an effort to combat money laundering by global drugtrafficking networks.
While reports on cash deposits of more than $10,000 currently are required, wire transfers aren't reported. 

