.START 

A mistake by lawyers for Electronic Data Systems Corp. has dealt the General Motors Corp. unit a serious setback in its court battle with estranged founder H. Ross Perot, and could mean more embarrassment for GM Chairman Roger B. Smith. 

A law firm representing EDS mistakenly gave a writer a copy of a deposition by Mr. Smith that had been kept confidential by a Virginia court, largely at the request of EDS. Yesterday, after the judge learned of EDS's error, he abruptly dismissed EDS's petition for a contempt ruling against the Dallas billionaire. 

The development appears to leave EDS without recourse in its lengthy legal battle to block Mr. Perot's efforts to take employees and customers from his old company.
And it's only the latest twist in the long-running feud involving EDS, GM and Mr. Perot. 

"Quite frankly, we're flabbergasted," an EDS spokesman said yesterday. "We can't understand what the judge was thinking." 

Employees at the Dallas offices of Baker & Botts, which represents EDS in litigation against Mr. Perot, gave a lengthy deposition taken from the GM chairman last spring to a writer preparing a book about Mr. Perot.
Both EDS and Mr. Perot, however, had agreed that Mr. Smith's deposition would remain confidential.
The document had been filed in a Virginia court in a sealed envelope that only the judge overseeing the Perot-EDS litigation was authorized to open, said lawyers involved in the case. 

The disclosure of Mr. Smith's deposition surprised Mr. Perot and his lawyers. "It's bizarre," said Mr. Perot yesterday. "Because they {EDS lawyers} were most insistent that Roger's deposition would be kept in confidence -- for reasons that would be obvious if you read it." 

But Mr. Perot's lawyers wasted no time seizing on their rival's blunder.
Yesterday, they argued before Virginia state court Judge William G. Plummer that EDS's breach of confidentiality disqualified the company from pursuing its claim that Mr. Perot and his new data-processing concern, Perot Systems Corp., violated a court order. 

That order had limited his freedom to compete against EDS and hire EDS employees.
Judge Plummer agreed with Mr. Perot's attorneys, and threw out EDS's request that Mr. Perot be held in contempt of court. 

Mr. Perot founded EDS in 1962, sold it to GM for $2.5 billion in 1984, and left it in December 1986 when GM bought out his stock for $700 million.
That buy-out, which included a non-compete agreement between GM and Mr. Perot, was supposed to end a bitter, public feud between Mr. Perot and Mr. Smith.
But in June 1988, Mr. Perot announced he was forming Perot Systems along with eight former EDS managers. 

Mr. Perot contended he had unlimited rights to compete against EDS for business and to hire EDS talent to do so.
EDS officials argued that Mr. Perot had no such rights, and was twisting the language of the agreement that accompanied his 1986 buy-out. 

The dispute landed in Judge Plummer's court, and last April the judge tried to forge a compromise.
He restricted Perot Systems to working on a strictly not-for-profit basis before Dec. 1, 1989.
The order allowed Mr. Perot to hire away certain EDS personnel, but only until Dec. 1, 1991.
After that date, EDS would be allowed to enforce non-compete agreements signed by its employees. 

But Mr. Perot is now charging that EDS is violating the court order by asking employees to sign away their right to join his firm.
Judge Plummer has agreed to hear arguments on that complaint on December 11, the same day EDS had planned to argue its now-scuttled contempt case against Mr. Perot. 

