.START 

As the capital gains tsunami rolled over the Democratic House leadership last week, Ron Wyden, liberal Oregon Democrat, turned to Newt Gingrich, conservative Georgia Republican, on the House floor. "This is a victory for the new politics," Mr. Wyden said, having just cast the same vote as the GOP whip. 

Skepticism is in order any time someone puts "new" and "politics" together in the same sentence, but Mr. Wyden wasn't kidding. "The new politics is going to be about intertwining economic growth and fairness," Mr. Wyden explained in an interview. "The old politics was just about fairness." 

To be more precise, the old Democratic politics was just about fairness, the polite term for redistribution.
Republicans were allowed to run off and make hay with the growth issue.
Mr. Wyden is one of a growing number of Democrats, liberals as much as boll weevils, who want to change that.
The "disarray" so widely reported among Democrats is, as much as anything else, a debate about what the party's economic message should be.
If not class warfare, what? 

It's striking to talk to two thoughtful Democrats, liberals by any standard, who have nonetheless joined Mr. Wyden among the free-thinkers.
Les AuCoin, another Oregonian, is a member of the liberal Watergate class of 1974.
He's a dove, in extremis, on defense issues.
Joe Lieberman, a brainy Connecticut senator, is a leader in urging federal subsidy for education and child care.
But both have had it with economic populism. 

Mr. AuCoin, a smooth former newspaperman, admits to being "embarrassed" by the House leadership's tactics on capital gains. "They missed an opportunity," he says.
The White House had signed onto a yo-yo capital-gains cut for only two years; the Democrats could have endorsed a permanent cut and taken credit for improving investment and growth.
This week, Oregon Republican Bob Packwood introduced a Senate capital gains plan close to what Mr. AuCoin wanted. 

"What you're seeing within much of the Democratic Party are some members, increasing in number but still a minority, who understand that you can't have a strong society, and a just society, by exclusively focusing on redistribution," he says.
A rising tide lifts both skiffs and yachts.
The economy isn't a "zero-sum game." Democrats can't address social inequities if they can't persuade the majority of voters who pay taxes that they also care about growth. 

Doesn't this sound like, say, Jack Kemp? "There's something to that," concedes Mr. AuCoin. "We'd disagree over ways and means. . . . But I want to see both parties competing over who has the better idea for how to promote growth." Hard in his memory is the fate of the British Labor Party, which has stuck to its class warfare principles long enough to become irrelevant. 

Joe Lieberman comes to heresy through a different route: state government.
He voted for a Connecticut income tax in 1971. "It lasted about a month," he says ruefully. "I learned a lesson: Most Americans think they're middle-class. . . . If people aren't wealthy, they have this hope of becoming wealthy." 

Both men think class warfare doesn't work, except perhaps in a recession -- which leaves Democrats pinning their election hopes on national misfortune. "That's a sad foundation for a program," says Sen. Lieberman. 

Liberal class orthodoxy also keeps Democrats from noticing good ideas.
The earned-income tax credit, which assists poor families, should have been a Democratic proposal.
But pro-labor theologians insisted on raising the minimum wage instead, while House Republicans first adopted the EITC. 

Indexing capital gains for inflation should also be a Democratic, middle-class issue -- why should the government tax illusory income? -- but House liberals wouldn't have it.
Mr. Lieberman is one of 10 or more Senate Democrats now trying to end run the leadership by putting together their own capital-gains cut, though as many as 20 would support indexing alone. 

Such thinkers, to be sure, still represent a rump group among Democrats.
They must still battle with the populist liberals who dominate the Congressional party, epitomized by that sanctuary of House liberals, the Democratic Study Group.
DSG members and staff make regular policy pronouncements ex cathedra. "I cringe with every mailing I receive," says Mr. AuCoin.
Any doubter is said to be "imitating Republicans" and is driven from the temple.
The DSG urged a purge of party heretics on capital gains, and helped craft the leadership option to preserve part of the catastrophic health care program.
Another tsunami washed that option away this week, 

Democratic free-thinkers also have to break with a doughty band of outside theologians.
One of the most talented, columnist Michael Kinsley, says that, even after the capital gains vote, class warfare will work if it's "waged intelligently." Having urged House Democrats to dive off the cliff by fighting the capital gains cut, he now wants to deduct style points.
Democrats may recall the quality of Mr. Kinsley's other political advice.
He urged Gov. Dukakis to defend on constitutional grounds his veto of a bill requiring teachers to lead the Pledge of Allegiance. 

