.START 

Efforts to prevent the transfusion of blood infected with the AIDS virus are proving more than 99.9% effective, a new study found. 

As a result, the number of persons developing AIDS from blood transfusions should drop to less than 100 in 1991 from more than 800 in the year ended April 30, researchers for the American Red Cross and the State University of New York predicted. 

For the 3.7 million patients who receive blood transfusions each year, the odds of receiving a contaminated unit of blood stand at about one in 153,000, the researchers estimated in the current New England Journal of Medicine.
Since the average transfused patient receives 5.4 units of blood, the odds of such a patient being infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, that causes AIDS are less than one in 28,000, they calculated. 

The researchers estimated that of 20 million units of blood donated by Americans in 1987, somewhere between 67 and 227 units contaminated with the AIDS virus might have slipped past screening tests for the virus.
The number of contaminated units of blood undetected appears to be dropping about 30% a year. 

The new estimates were based on the realization that it takes from six to 14 weeks after a person is infected with the AIDS virus for antibodies to the virus to begin showing up in detectable amounts in the person's blood. 

The researchers said careful samplings of donated blood indicate that 49 of every 50 HIV-infected persons who are potential blood donors actually aren't offering to donate blood, thanks to education, donor recruitment and self-screening programs.
Since the test used to screen donated blood for HIV antibodies is 92% to 97% effective, the overall effort to keep HIV-infected blood out of the blood supply is proving 99.9% effective, they estimated. 

A second study of patients who received blood from donors who later developed AIDS was reported by a team of federal and West Coast AIDS researchers.
They found that about half of the patients who were infected with HIV by the transfusions developed AIDS within seven years. 

A third study reported in the medical journal, based on a sampling of blood donors in Washington, D.C., confirmed that it requires two different tests to be sure that a blood donor is infected with HIV.
The report described 80 donors who were positive for HIV on the antibody screening test but had a negative result on a second, more definitive test called a Western blot.
None of these donors developed AIDS during the 42 months of the study, whereas 11% of donors who were positive on both tests did develop the disease. 

