.START 

It's an unlikely location for what will soon become the world's biggest zinc mine: 100 miles north of the Arctic Circle, on a treeless expanse of tundra populated mainly by Eskimos and caribou. 

But Cominco Ltd., owner of the Red Dog mine in northwestern Alaska, has a habit of doing things the hard way.
Its Polaris lead and zinc mine, located on icebound Little Cornwallis Island in Canada's Arctic, is further north than any base-metals mine in the Western world, Red Dog included. 

"Cominco is an old hand" when it comes to developing remote projects, says Lee Billheimer, who has overseen the three-year development of Red Dog, which is scheduled to begin producing zinc and lead from its open pit mine early next month.
Besides, he says with a grin, "a guy from Polaris I worked with on this project thinks we have a much milder climate" at Red Dog, where winter temperatures often reach a balmy minus 50 degrees Fahrenheit. 

The start-up of Red Dog (named after the furry flying companion of a now-deceased bush pilot and prospector, who was among the first to survey the site in the foothills of Alaska's Brooks mountain range) caps a remarkable turnaround for Vancouver-based Cominco. 

Like other base-metals producers, Cominco's earnings have soared and its debt has shrunk since an industry-wide recession ended in 1987.
Current long-term debt of 340 million Canadian dollars (US$289.3 million) is about half the 1985 level, despite big spending at Red Dog and elsewhere. 

Higher prices for its key metals, copper and zinc, helped Cominco post record earnings of C$242 million, or C$2.92 a share, last year.
It was well on its way to bettering those results this year, when a strike halted output in July at its 50%-owned Highland Valley copper mine.
Some analysts still expect Cominco to earn about C$3.25 a share this year, provided the strike ends soon.
But the real excitement is reserved for Red Dog and its longer-term impact on Cominco, a onetime ugly duckling that had losses every year but one between 1982 and 1986, when Canadian Pacific Ltd. threw in the towel and sold a controlling stake in the company to a group led by Vancouver's Teck Corp. 

"Of the large base-metal mining companies, Cominco is unique in North America.
It's the only one you could characterize as a growth stock," largely owing to the impact of Red Dog, says Alan Ferry, analyst with Toronto's Prudential-Bache Securities Canada Ltd. 

Analyst Julian Baldry, of Toronto's Nesbitt Thomson Deacon Inc., says Red Dog will raise Cominco's share of non-communist world zinc output to about 13% from about 10%, putting it among the world leaders.
At an estimated cash operating cost of just 26 cents a pound, he counts Red Dog among the lowest-cost zinc mines in the world. "The net effect is one of significant growth" in production and, potentially, earnings, says Mr. Baldry, who rates Cominco as his top recommendation in the mining sector. 

Says metals analyst Fred Demler, of New York's Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., "Red Dog is going to be bad for the rest of the industry," which will have to compete with its low production costs, "but it will be very good for Cominco.
It's a very impressive project." He figures Red Dog will double U.S. zinc output when it reaches peak production of about 335,000 tons annually, in 1991. 

Red Dog's location presented a few hurdles.
To circumvent Alaska's short summer and capitalize on cheap labor, Cominco built Red Dog's mill in modular form in the Phillipines.
From there, it shipped the modules -- each of them six to seven stories high -- across the Pacific to a newly built port on Alaska's windswept Chukchi Sea, where they were unloaded and trucked 52 miles on a new gravel road to the mine site. 

Transporting the lead and zinc concentrate from Red Dog's mill to distant markets won't be much easier.
It will be hauled by 75-ton trucks back down the same road to a port-side warehouse, more than four football fields long, where the concentrate will pile up until the ice melts and the 90-day shipping season starts.
Barges will then carry the concentrate through shallow waters to ocean-going vessels several miles offshore, about 15 of which are expected to arrive each year. 

At the mine site itself, Cominco built a three-story housing and recreational complex for Red Dog's 240 workers, and an airstrip that accommodates Boeing 737s as well as the occasional baseball game.
Red Dog's open pit will be only modest in size, says Mr. Billheimer, perhaps 700 feet deep and 2,000 feet long when fully mined.
That's because Red Dog's rich ore grade and low stripping ratio -- the amount of waste rock that must be removed to get at the mineralized ore -- will require only 6,000 tons of ore to be processed each day. 

Even the most optimistic of analysts say Cominco is likely to see its earnings slip before it reaps the full benefits of Red Dog, though.
After copper peaked last year at $1.68 a pound, and zinc reached 95 cents last spring, prices for both metals have softened. 

Analysts say weaker demand for zinc-consuming products, like the corrosion-resistant galvanized steel used in cars, is expected to increase producers' stocks and push the price of zinc lower next year.
Drexel's Mr. Demler says he expects prices to average about 65 cents a pound in 1990; Nesbitt's Mr. Baldry forecasts 55 cents. 

Copper, whose price has been propped up by disruptions in Peru and strikes like the one at Highland Valley's mine near Kamloops, British Columbia, is also expected to weaken further.
Mr. Baldry sees copper averaging 75 cents a pound next year; John Lydall, analyst with Toronto's First Marathon Securities Ltd., forecasts $1. 

As for Red Dog's other metal, lead, Mr. Demler says the outlook is rosier.
The lead price is already up sharply from the first quarter, and Mr. Demler says a cold winter and accompanying demand for vehicle replacement batteries could force lead up to as high as 55 cents a pound. 

But those are short-term factors, analysts say.
Longer-term, most say Cominco will benefit not only from the jump in output accruing from Red Dog, but also the relationship between the three big base metal producers that jointly control it, comprising Teck, Australia's M.I.M. Holdings Ltd. and West Germany's Metallgesellschaft AG. "The control of the industry is now in the hands of a few major producers, and that's another reason why I don't see zinc prices returning to their 1985-1986 lows," says Mr. Demler. "I'd expect them to act more rationally to cut production if the market is oversupplied." 

Analysts also speculate that Teck, now virtually debt-free, may want to take Cominco private, alone or with its partners. "I suppose it's an alternative," says David Thompson, Teck's senior vice president. 

"I can't tell you anything about it.
That's a Teck decision, with Metall and M.I.M.," says Cominco's president and chief executive officer, Robert Hallbauer, himself a former Teck executive.
Asked whether he is aware of any such plans, he says, "I might be, but I've got my Cominco hat on now." 

