.START 

The airline takeover frenzy reached the nation's largest carrier, American Airlines, as New York real-estate developer Donald Trump made a $7.54 billion proposal for AMR Corp. 

But unlike Northwest Airlines and United Airlines, which made scant effort to remain independent following bids earlier this year, AMR and its Chairman Robert Crandall are expected to put up a tough fight. 

Dallas-based AMR indicated yesterday that it intends to remain independent, and, signaling that it may seek help from Congress on public-policy grounds, warned that "excess levels of debt in the airline industry are not in the public interest." Both the Northwest and United buy-outs feature massive borrowing. 

Mr. Trump, a billionaire with a towering ego who made his fortune with glitzy skyscrapers and casinos, entered the airline business last spring by buying Texas Air Corp. 's Eastern shuttle for $365 million and renaming it the Trump shuttle.
He owns New York City's famed Plaza Hotel, plus buildings named Trump Tower, Trump Parc, and Trump Palace. 

However, AMR stock advanced less than half the distance between his bid of $120 a share and Wednesday's closing price of $83, reflecting questions about whether his effort will succeed.
AMR shares surged $16.875 to $99.875 on volume of 8.4 million shares in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

Many takeover-stock traders were skeptical, citing Mr. Trump's track record of buying stock in companies and then selling the shares when the price rose after his buying became known.
Also, he didn't disclose financing for the offer. 

But aides noted that Mr. Trump did gain control of the two companies he has bid for: Resorts International Inc. and the Eastern shuttle.
Eventually, Mr. Trump ceded Resorts to entertainer Merv Griffin.
One source close to Mr. Trump indicated that he owns 4.9% of AMR, and another said he obtained federal antitrust clearance to buy more than $15 million of the stock on Sept. 20. 

The move on the leading U.S. airline, which reported 1988 profit of $476.8 million on revenue of $8.8 billion, could spark a congressional crackdown now that three of the four largest U.S. carriers have received bids.
The only airline larger than American is Aeroflot, owned by the Soviet government. 

"This is a crisis," Rep. Peter DeFazio, an Oregon Democrat, said yesterday. "We have to act now." Rep. Byron Dorgan, a North Dakota Democrat, agreed. "I'm not so alarmed if they load up a lipstick company with debt and it fails," he says. "But if you do that to an airline, it's a real blow to the public interest." 

Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, a Democrat from AMR's home state of Texas, yesterday got AMR included in a pending bill strengthening the authority of the Transportation Department to block airline takeovers. 

Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner, who has voiced concerns about both debt leverage and foreign ownership in airline takeovers, recently forced Northwest to reduce an investment by KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, and is about to review the role of British Airways PLC in the United buy-out. 

Mr. Trump's personal net worth, or assets minus liabilities, has been estimated by Forbes magazine at $1 billion, despite Mr. Trump's claim to $3.74 billion.
In a letter to Mr. Crandall transmitted late Wednesday, Mr. Trump said he was prepared to commit $1 billion in equity to a purchase.
Without other partners, that would require debt of more than $6.5 billion.
AMR has 58.9 million shares outstanding, and 62.8 million shares, fully diluted. 

The bid for AMR prompted moves in the stock of Delta Air Lines Inc., which rose $3.50 to $78.25 a share, and in US Air Group Inc., which rose $1 to $48.75 a share.
Both airlines have taken steps to protect themselves from a takeover.
But some analysts thought they might benefit if AMR took on so much debt that its American Air unit couldn't slash fares aggressively. 

The takeover of Northwest parent NWA Inc. and the pending bid for UAL have both featured massive doses of bank debt that leave both airlines highly leveraged and thus vulnerable to the possible need for financial restructuring in the event of a revenue downturn. 

Mr. Crandall, 53 years old, who became president of AMR in 1980 and its chairman and chief executive officer in 1985, is an aggressive competitor; he guided American past United to the No. 1 spot among U.S. airlines just this year. 

And he has vowed to resist leverage, saying it would give him greater financial flexibility to compete for market share against leveraged competitors who mightn't have the same financial flexibility to match fare cuts or other competitive thrusts. 

At the same time, he has been warning analysts in recent weeks that AMR's results have been weakening, citing that as evidence that the airline business remains cyclical and subject to volatility that could wreak havoc on a fragile balance sheet.
Ironically, those warnings may have helped Mr. Trump acquire his stock more cheaply. 

But AMR has one main vulnerability: Its board can be removed by a majority vote of shareholders in a procedure known as a consent solicitation.
Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis used the same threat in his bids that triggered the sale of Northwest and the pending purchase of United. 

Analysts said Mr. Trump's bid equals the levels of the successful bids for Northwest and United, namely more than six times earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation.
Helane Becker of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. called Mr. Trump's bid "almost pre-emptive." 

Paul Karos, an airline analyst at First Boston Corp., said of Mr. Trump: "He could be more real than people think.
Because he already owns an airline, I don't think he would throw a totally false bid around.
On the other hand, his past takeover record is spotty." 

In his letter, Mr. Trump said his offer expires Oct. 20 unless extended, and depends on negotiation of a definitive agreement.
He praised AMR management for doing an "outstanding job," and asked them to "work with me to build on the company's reputation as the premier airline in the industry." But he warned that "immediate rejection and vilification" of him mightn't be in the interests of shareholders, noting that AMR doesn't pay a stock dividend. 

In response, AMR described the overture as "a unilateral, unsolicited letter," and noted that the developer "provided no particulars" on financing.
It said the AMR board would consider the offer "in due course." 

The company added that AMR "continues to believe that excess levels of debt in the airline industry are not in the public interest." AMR is being advised by Goldman, Sachs & Co. and Salomon Brothers Inc. Mr. Trump hasn't disclosed any advisers, but is believed to be working with Alan Greenberg, chairman of Bear, Stearns & Co. 

Mr. Crandall's options range from a "just-say-no" defense, to a recapitalization, such as a special dividend and share repurchase, that could block a bid yet encumber the airline with a smaller amount of debt than would a leveraged takeover.
He could help finance that with sale of a stake in AMR's Sabre computerized reservation system. 

He also could make a defensive acquisition, sell a block of stock to a friendly holder or an employee stock ownership plan, or seek a bid from a more compatible buyer, such as a leveraged buy-out firm.
Antitrust considerations probably would rule out a friendly merger with another U.S. airline; foreign ownership limits could bar a merger with a foreign carrier. 

Another factor that could affect the chances of a takeover is that Mr. Crandall wouldn't reap the same magnitude of riches as would Stephen Wolf, chairman of United Airlines parent UAL Corp. Mr. Wolf stands to gain more than $75 million on his UAL stock and options. 

AMR's current proxy statement says Mr. Crandall received cash compensation of $1 million in 1988, owns 38,500 shares and has options on another 26,000 shares.
The proxy material says the exercise price on 12,500 of those options is $52.875 a share.
So he would receive $4.6 million for his stock at $120 a share, plus a smaller amount for his options. 

Laurie McGinley in Washington contributed to this article. 

Airlines Restructure 

Recent major merges and acquisitions in the airline industry 

Date 

Acquirer 

Value 

Completed 

(Acquired) 

(In millions) 

Aug. 86 

NWA (Republic) 

$884 

Sept. 86 

TWA (Ozark) 

Sept. 86 

Texas Air (Eastern) 

Dec. 86 

Texas Air (People Express) 

March 87 

AMR (AirCal) 

April 87 

Delta (Western) 

May 87 

USAir (Pacific Southwest) 

Oct. 87 

USAir (Piedmont) 

Nov. 88 

Carl Icahn (TWA) 

privatization 

May 89 

Trump (Eastern Shuttle) 

July 89 

Checci Group (NWA) buy-out 

Pending 

Management/Labor 

(UAL) buy-out 

Pending 

Trump (AMR) 

N.A.=Not applicable 

