.START 

It's a simple truth: Salt flats just aren't as good if they are neither. 

To the consternation of speed demons, geologists and state film commissions alike, the salt that forms the asphalt-hard surface of the Bonneville Salt Flats stretching over Nevada and Utah is disappearing -- at the rate of more than one million tons a year.
If unchecked, the erosion means cracks, bumps and muddy potholes may eventually dot what some consider the world's smoothest road, rendering the area less level, less awesome and less commercially viable. 

The salt "is just vanishing," laments Howard Hedrick, area manager for the Bureau of Land Management, the federal agency overseeing the 38,000-acre flats, which start 100 miles west of Salt Lake City.
In the 1950s, there was as much as two feet of the crusty layer, which covers a briny mud flat.
Now the top is as thin as an inch or two in places. 

The Interior Department has commissioned a three-year, $330,000 study to find out what's happening.
Meanwhile, car drivers -- about the only life form the flats support -- are threatened with extinction in the area.
Rocket-powered automobiles have set records on the flats, roaring along at speeds of more than 600-miles-an-hour.
But should the ground's uniformity vanish, so would hot rodders. 

Filming of commercials could also dry up, a fact that worries the two states' film commissions, which say the flats attract millions of dollars in advertising projects every year.
Car makers, such as Porsche of West Germany, have used the stark, Dali-esque landscape as a backdrop in television commercials for years. 

Geologists have two theories for the salt's disappearance.
One points to the local potash industry.
They think the nearby canals used as part of the potash mining process may increase the flow of water through a shallow aquifer just beneath the flats' surface, promoting a kind of under-the-table erosion. 

Scientists also say the fragile balance of geology and weather that formed the flats in the first place may have been tipped by changing rainfall cycles, as well as construction of freeways and railway lines, which altered natural drainage. 

"It's the only place of its kind in North America," says Mr. Hedrick. "It would be a real shame to see it disappear." 

