.START 

Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Chiron Corp. said they don't plan to raise their offer for Canadian vaccine maker Connaught BioSciences Inc., clearing the way for a competing bid by Institut Merieux S.A. of France. 

Institut Merieux last week offered 37 Canadian dollars (US$31.47) a share, or C$942 million, for Connaught, topping Ciba-Geigy's and Chiron's joint bid of C$30 a share, or C$866 million. 

"We decided that we aren't prepared to get involved in a bidding war at this sort of price level," said Richard Williams, head of business development for Ciba-Geigy, a major pharmaceutical concern based in Basel, Switzerland. "At the price level we would have reached, {Connaught} is just totally overvalued," he said. 

Investors who expected Ciba-Geigy and California-based Chiron to respond to Merieux's bid with a higher offer, pushed up the price of Connaught's stock last week to a 52-week high of C$37.875 a share.
In Toronto Stock Exchange trading yesterday, Connaught closed at C$35.75, down $2.25. 

"No one believed they'd walk away at C$30," said one analyst, who requested anonymity. 

Samuel Isaly, an analyst and partner in Mehta & Isaly, a New York-based pharmaceutical industry research firm, said Ciba-Geigy and Chiron's $30-a-share offer -- which the two didn't withdraw -- still could succeed if the Merieux bid ran into insurmountable regulatory problems, although no such problems have surfaced so far.
He also said the decision by Ciba-Geigy and Chiron makes it easier for any new bidders, who might have been reluctant to participate in a three-way bidding war, to emerge. 

A Connaught official said the company hasn't been contacted by any other possible bidders.
He declined further comment. 

Ciba-Geigy's Mr. Williams wouldn't say whether the partners plan to extend their offer, to expire Oct. 17.
The bid by Merieux, which is 50.1% -- owned by Rhone-Poulenc S.A., expires Oct. 26.
Mr. Williams said the partners will begin examining other ways to get involved in the vaccine industry, including other, smaller acquisitions, joint ventures or marketing and licensing agreements. 

