.START 

Hershey Foods Corp., trying to zap its competitors in the pasta business, plans to start test-marketing four types of microwave macaroni next month. 

Hershey is hoping that the product, the culmination of a five-year effort to develop microwave pasta with the right texture and taste, can fatten up its 18% share of the $2.1 billion dry pasta market. 

The company, better known for its chocolate bars, ranks second in dry pasta sales behind Borden Inc., which has 32% of the market.
CPC International Inc. is close behind with a 15% share.
A major Borden brand is Prince; CPC's big name is Mueller's; and Hershey's is San Giorgio. 

Hershey figures a successful introduction of microwave pasta, under the "Perfection" brand, could boost its share by four percentage points in five years. 

Market share growth, however, is slow and costly where brand loyalty is strong.
Price and advertising have been the traditional weapons in past pasta wars, but Hershey plans to change all that with its microwave innovation. "For a new product to be truly important, it has to be technology-based," says Clifford Larsen, head of marketing for Hershey's pasta division. 

With growth in dry pasta sales lagging that of the refrigerated and frozen forms, pasta makers have to face the hard facts: U.S. consumers want faster and more convenient cooking.
To Hershey, that means microwave.
With about 70% of U.S. households owning microwave ovens, the microwave "will change the structure of the pasta industry," Mr. Larsen says. 

Some buyers for supermarkets aren't so sure Hershey's new elbows, spirals, rigatoni and mostaccioli will make such a splash. "The fact of the matter is you can boil pasta pretty quickly," says one Midwest wholesaler.
A single serving of the macaroni takes about four minutes to zap in the microwave. 

Moreover, Hershey won't be alone in the new niche for long.
Borden is test-marketing a microwave macaroni-and-cheese dinner under the Creamette brand name. "We think ours is awfully good," says Jon Hettinger, president of Borden's grocery and specialty products division.
But nobody buys a new product until "you've promoted the hell out of it," he says. 

In its five-year effort, Hershey has learned that transforming a traditional dish like pasta isn't easy.
The company's experiences in developing its Perfection line illustrate the difficulties inherent in creating a new food item. 

First, the company had to find a machine that could make a microwave pasta with the same firmness and taste of conventional pasta.
After looking at several systems that chemically altered the macaroni and gave it a funny taste, Hershey finally settled on a method devised by an Italian equipment company. 

The concept sounded easy enough: Boil regular pasta till it's just right, dehydrate it and package it.
To reconstitute, add water and zap.
Unfortunately, production was more difficult. "Cooked pasta at some point when it dries becomes little pieces of crazy glue," Mr. Larsen says.
Separation became the next hurdle. 

After months of experimenting, Hershey says it came up with a solution -- a trade secret.
But the perils of pasta production continued.
Hershey planned to import the microwave pasta from Italy last year while the Italian company -- whose name Hershey is also keeping secret -- finished building the equipment for Hershey's factory in Kansas City, Kan.
But it abandoned that idea when it found out the Italian wheat was tainted with a pesticide that doesn't pass Food and Drug Administration muster. 

By the summer, the pasta was ready to roll in Kansas City.
Meantime, Hershey's marketing staff went to work to find ways to convince consumers that microwaved dehydrated pasta tastes good.
Consumers were skeptical. "After they tried it, they loved it," recalls Mr. Larsen, but "just telling people about Perfection Microwave Pasta didn't spark much enthusiasm." 

Hershey plans to try to overcome the skepticism by focusing its TV ads on taste.
In one commercial, a woman raves about using her own special sauce on microwave elbow macaroni "every bit as good as the regular kind." Hershey also plans a public relations blitz among food editors, as well as in-store samples and coupons to cut the steep price, which is double that of regular pasta. 

Although Borden's Mr. Hettinger says "a lot of funny things can happen" to pasta in a microwave, Hershey's Mr. Larsen believes the company has accounted for all the unknowns.
But, he cautions, there are always "the unknown unknowns," or what he calls "the unk-unks." 

