.START 

The National Transportation Safety Board found that the Federal Aviation Administration and Delta Air Lines contributed to the 1988 crash of a Delta jet by not moving forcefully to correct "known deficiencies" among Delta flight crews. 

The Boeing 727 crashed Aug. 31, 1988, shortly after takeoff from the Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport.
Fourteen people were killed.
Federal investigators concluded almost immediately that the crew had failed to extend the plane's flaps and slats, perhaps because they were distracted by a flight attendant's extended presence in the cockpit before takeoff.
Earlier this year, Delta agreed that the flaps weren't properly set and fired three crew members. 

Yesterday, as expected, the board blamed the accident primarily on "inadequate cockpit discipline" on the part of the captain and the first officer, which led to the incorrect setting of wing flaps and slats and prevented the aircraft from obtaining the needed lift.
The other direct cause, the board said, was a malfunction in the takeoff-warning system which, if operating, would have alerted the crew to the fact that the flaps were retracted. 

But fireworks at the all-day board meeting erupted over whether the FAA and Delta were in any way culpable for the accident.
In 1987, after a string of serious errors by Delta pilots, the FAA uncovered significant problems involving the crews, and urged sweeping changes in the carrier's cockpit procedures, pilots' manuals and training programs. 

The airline did make some changes, but some safety board staff members contended that the progress was glacial and that the FAA defaulted in its duties by failing to set a deadline for the improvements.
These aides argued that the actions -- or lack of them -- by the airline and the FAA were direct causes of the accident, and their view was shared by James Burnett, a member of the board. 

But James Kolstad, acting board chairman, asserted that the FAA didn't contribute to the accident. "I don't see how the federal government is to blame any more than the New Jersey state highway patrol is for the death of someone on the highway." 

After extensive haggling, the board members agreed on language saying that a contributing -- but not direct -- cause of the accident was the FAA's "lack of sufficiently aggressive action" to ensure improvements in performance by Delta crews. 

Similar disputes dogged the issue of Delta management.
Again, some staff members argued that the management failed to make important safety changes in cockpit procedures and training until after the August 1988 accident, despite the 1987 criticism from the FAA.
The airline's failure to act, they said, should be cited as a direct cause of the accident. 

One staff member, Jeff Gorney, said, for example, that when a dozen Delta pilots were interviewed after the accident about which crew member was responsible for visually checking whether the flaps were set correctly, "we got four or five different answers." 

But board member John Lauber contended that Delta had, in fact, taken steps before the crash to improve crew performance.
The compromise language finally approved said that a contributing cause of the accident was Delta's "slow implementation of necessary modifications" to its operations procedures, manuals and training. 

The vote on the report was 4-1, with Mr. Burnett dissenting.
He argued that the actions of the FAA and the airline were direct causes of the accident. 

Jackie Pate, a Delta spokeswoman, said the company was pleased that its actions weren't cited as a direct cause. "The board recognized actions that have been undertaken since the 1987" FAA report, she said. 

The FAA declined to comment except to say that it would carefully review safety board recommendations stemming from the accident. 

