.START 

Brazil's President Jose Sarney said his government has made "a tremendous effort" to reduce spending and can't make further cuts. 

That suggests that the Third World's biggest debtor is still far from winning agreement with the International Monetary Fund on a new lending package.
In an interview, Mr. Sarney said Brazil is "struggling to get an agreement." But the IMF wants further austerity measures from Brazil if it is to strike a new accord. 

During the interview, Mr. Sarney voiced concerns about his country's international debt condition, but he suggested Brazil soon will take steps to ease its recent trade friction with the U.S. Mr. Sarney was in New York to address the United Nations. 

A short-term IMF agreement could free billions of dollars of loans from the World Bank, commercial banks and Japan.
These loans have been blocked by Brazil's failure to meet deficit and inflation targets it adopted as part of a previous agreement with the IMF. 

Citing the need to conserve foreign exchange, Brazil last week failed to make a scheduled $1.6 billion interest payment to its international banks. 

Mr. Sarney criticized the IMF for not being more willing to reach agreement with Brazil, saying IMF officials believe "that they should only negotiate with the {next} administration." Brazilians go to the polls in mid-November to elect a new president, who is expected to take office in March. 

Brazil's political transition "shouldn't interrupt the process" of sorting out its debt difficulties, Mr. Sarney argued.
He said the IMF's inaction "certainly doesn't contribute to the democratic process, it disturbs the democratic process." He added that the U.S., particularly the Treasury, "have done their best to help." 

"With the Bush administration there's a new esprit," a greater openness to Latin America, said Mr. Sarney, who met with President Bush Monday.
The two leaders discussed trade and environmental problems, Mr. Sarney said, adding that they agreed to work together through international agencies to solve trade disputes. 

Mr. Sarney said his country shortly would publish new tariff regulations, but he didn't provide details.
The U.S. in May cited Brazil under the tough Super 301 provision of the 1988 trade law for its import licensing practices.
That provision carries the threat of U.S. trade retaliation if cited trade barriers aren't removed through negotiations within 18 months. 

"This is seen as a very positive step for removing the threat of Super 301," said Mr. Sarney of the coming new tariff rules. "What we hear from {the White House Trade Office} is the need for positive movement toward lower tariffs." 

The president wasn't optimistic about his country's debt situation.
He said Brazil is suffering from "a negative Marshall plan" -- it is paying out sums equal to 4% of its gross domestic product every year to foreign creditors.
There has been a net flow of $56 billion from Brazil the past five years, he said. 

International debt is a political problem "for which a solution must be found," Mr. Sarney said.
If not, the democratic process in Latin America will be threatened, he added. 

Japan, with its huge surpluses, doesn't offer a solution to debt difficulties, he added.
He said that country is like "the horizon: You chase after it but never quite catch it." 

(See related story: "Growth Without Inflation 

