.START 

From the headquarters of Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank its president, Kuniji Miyazaki, can look out over the jigsaw streets and sprawl of the world's richest city.
There's a Dai-Ichi branch in nearly every neighborhood.
Each day, some three-quarters of a million people do business at the bank.
With $386 billion in total assets, it is the world's largest. 

But Mr. Miyazaki vividly recalls what a friend at Bank of America, then the world's largest, said 10 years ago: "Being large doesn't always bring glory." 

Or oversized profit, either.
For a bank that holds more money on deposit than Australia's entire economy generated last year, Dai-Ichi is far from a dazzling moneymaker.
Now it is trying to put profit before size, and American business borrowers are part of the plan.
Last week Dai-Ichi agreed to buy 4.9% of New York's Manufacturers Hanover Corp. and 60% of Manufacturers' CIT Group Inc. for a total of $1.4 billion.
Most of the money, $1.28 billion, will go for control of CIT, a finance and leasing firm. 

"It's a bold move on their {Dai-Ichi's} part, but it's a catch-up move," says Garth Dickey, vice president of Nomura Securities Co. Ltd. 's New York subsidiary. "They haven't been playing a big role in the U.S." 

Why not?
For most of the past 18 years Dai-Ichi Kangyo has seemed a lumbering leviathan, obsessed with size and distracted by the long-lived after-effects of the merger that created the bank. "There is room for improvement," says the understated Mr. Miyazaki.
Says Kiyotaka Kano, the bank's senior managing director for capital markets: "I think the merger is completely done now." He smiles and adds: "After the first 15 years, it went quickly." 

Created in October 1971, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank -- roughly, "First Business Encouragement Bank" -- brought together two of Japan's most venerable institutions, Dai-Ichi Bank and Nippon Kangyo Bank.
Both were founded in the 19th century to accelerate Japan's entry into the industrial world.
Both also were closely guided by the government; Dai-Ichi was amalgamated into an imperial war bank during World War II. 

Each bank had a different style and different clients, and the chemistry in the merged institution was volatile.
A cumbersome merger agreement calling for strictly equal treatment of Dai-Ichi and Kangyo constituencies made things worse. 

For years, branch offices left over from the pre-merger period retained different color schemes, though a spokeswoman says all now have finally been converted to Dai-Ichi Kangyo's warm-red color.
The personnel division was split into three departments, one for employees hired by Dai-Ichi Bank, one for employees hired by Nippon Kangyo, and one for employees hired after the merger. 

Today, 62% of the bank's work force has joined since the merger and there is only one personnel department.
Yet some personnel managers still look after the affairs of old Dai-Ichi hands while others take care of old Nippon Kangyo workers. 

The bank's presidency and chairmanship alternate between "D" men and "K" men.
Mr. Miyazaki is a Dai-Ichi alumnus; the less-visible chairman, Ichiro Nakamura, comes from Nippon Kangyo.
General managers from one of the predecessor banks get two deputies from the other predecessor. 

The meticulous balancing has fostered bureaucratic inertia. "Everything takes twice as long at DKB," says an analyst at a credit-rating agency.
Other bankers in Tokyo recall that when shipbuilder Sasebo Heavy Industries Co. needed cash in the late 1970s, Nippon Kangyo veterans wanted to help their old client, while Dai-Ichi men favored cutting their losses.
The "K" men prevailed. 

The bank denies any internal haggling over Sasebo.
But it admits that a tacit agreement once existed to permit each side to continue lending to old customers.
Of the customers, says Minoru Suzuki, manager of the Dai-Ichi's Ginza branch, "Some still want 'D' men or 'K' men." 

Loyalties to employees and customers made staff-cutting difficult and hindered the closing of branches.
A redundant office stands less than a block from Dai-Ichi's biggest branch, in the lobby of its central Tokyo headquarters. 

Says J. Brian Waterhouse, a securities analyst at James Capel & Co.: "Dai-Ichi Kangyo is a classic example of how not to merge." 

It hasn't prevented a revival of the urge to merge among other Japanese banks.
In August, Taiyo Kobe Bank, another merger product from the early 1970s, and Mitsui Bank, the centerpiece of the Mitsui industrial group of companies, disclosed that they plan to join next April into what will become the world's second-largest bank.
The motive seems similar to the one behind the Dai-Ichi/Nippon Kangyo merger: to get bigger.
Executives of Taiyo Kobe and Mitsui believe that the advantages of size will outweigh the disadvantages of merging. 

Many at Dai-Ichi would agree.
Nobuya Hagura, former Dai-Ichi president, recalls his first International Monetary Fund meeting in 1973, when almost nobody else there had heard of his newly created bank.
Ten years later, he relates, "When I said 'Hagura of DKB,' they said: 'Oh, DKB, the No. 1 bank in the world. ' I didn't need to make any presentation at all." 

Bigness has paid off in other ways.
Visiting dignitaries drop by to meet Dai-Ichi's leaders.
The bank attracts top job-hunters from top universities.
At a branch in Tokyo, a casual workday morning survey shows that nearly every customer is aware his bank is the world's biggest.
A secretary says that is why she banks there. 

But keeping retail operations is hardly cost-efficient.
At the Ginza branch, manager Suzuki says his 69-person staff handles 3,500 walk-in customers a day, including many who come to participate in bank-sponsored seminars and a few seeking help with problems as diverse as taxes and arranging marriages.
Yet two-thirds of those time-consuming customers account for only 5% of his branch's lending profits. 

Why keep such business?
In large part because the bank hopes to sell its individual customers on high-profit consumer loans and credit cards. "We believe the greater the number of customers, the greater the prospects for profitability in the future," Mr. Suzuki says. 

Despite its size, Dai-Ichi still trails its rivals in profit.
Japan's second largest bank, Sumitomo, earns more than Dai-Ichi, as do the U.S.'s Citicorp and Britain's Barclays Bank and National Westminster Bank.
Dai-Ichi's return on shareholder equity, as measured by its operating profit, is next to the lowest of Japan's big commercial banks, at 11.74%, according to calculations by Barclays de Zoete Wedd Ltd.; Sumitomo's, by contrast, is 20.77%.
DaiIchi's rate of earnings increases has just begun to outpace its growth in assets.
Its fiscal 1989 consolidated net income rose more than 30% from 1988's, to $1.4 billion.
Assets rose 16.5%. 

To extend their profit gains, Dai-Ichi's bankers are looking overseas, to the U.S. in particular. 

The merger that created Dai-Ichi took place just as Japanese banks were expanding abroad.
The old Dai-Ichi and Nippon Kangyo each had obtained Japanese government permission to open American branches.
Dai-Ichi was looking at Chicago and Nippon Kangyo in California.
The "D" men won out.
As a concession to the "K" men, Dai-Ichi established a small retail bank in Los Angeles, keeping a 5% interest and placing the remaining ownership with friendly companies. 

But other Japanese banks had zeroed in on California, and rapidly expanded their hugely profitable retail banks there.
Today, Sumitomo Bank, Mitsubishi Bank and Sanwa Bank are among the top 10 banks in the state.
Not until 1981 was Dai-Ichi able to buy out its partners, for about $25 million, and assume full ownership of Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank California. 

Dai-Ichi earlier this year sold its Chicago retail operations, becoming the first Japanese bank to pull out of a major industrialized market since the war. 

None of this has kept Dai-Ichi from lending to corporate America.
With about $32 billion in assets in the U.S., Dai-Ichi has one of the largest U.S. portfolios of any foreign bank. 

But loans to the largest corporations aren't the most profitable.
So the bank has started looking for ways to tap medium-size companies willing to pay higher interest rates than the big multinationals pay.
Two years ago the bank experimented by buying a $125 million portfolio of such loans from U.S. Trust Co. 

Then this month, Manufacturers and Dai-Ichi made their agreement.
The planned purchases were characteristically described by Dai-Ichi as the "largest" U.S. banking investment by a Japanese bank.
CIT will get more than a bigger parent in the transaction.
Dai-Ichi is one of the world's few banks with a Triple-A credit rating. "DKB's credit standing will lower funding costs and therefore improve profit margins for CIT at the same time," says Mr. Dickey, of Nomura Securities.
That, he says, will accelerate the payoff to Dai-Ichi. 

Yesterday came news of Dai-Ichi's move into the U.S. mergers and acquisitions business.
Under an agreement with Clayton & Dubilier, a U.S. investment firm, the bank will introduce corporate customers of Clayton & Dubilier to potential buyers in Japan.
The bank will also invest as much as $100 million in a leveraged buy-out fund established by Clayton & Dubilier. 

If Dai-Ichi Kangyo is waking up to the U.S. market, then Yuko Oana is the reveille bugler.
Dai-Ichi's senior managing director in charge of international operations, he likes the U.S and has golfed on 102 American courses.
He has been something of an iconoclast at Dai-Ichi Kangyo, more interested in performance than size. 

"What is important is profitability, or return on assets, not the size of the bank," Mr. Oana says.
Hisao Kobayashi, general manager of international planning, adds: "We don't just want to be a dinosaur in the U.S.
We are trying to find a good market niche instead." 

Mr. Oana says Dai-Ichi won't pursue retail banking abroad because it is "far too costly; there's too much risk in it.
I don't want to compete with Citibank in that area." He adds, "They're excellent.
They're too good for us." 

Leasing, real estate and project finance interest Mr. Oana.
But Dai-Ichi will have to compete for the best business with American and other Japanese banks.
Mr. Oana also wants Dai-Ichi to be prepared to exploit changes in U.S. or Japanese regulations that now restrict banks' securities businesses.
To that end, the bank soon plans to open a securities subsidiary in New York to trade U.S. Treasurys. 

Dai-Ichi is also seeking expansion opportunities in the European Community market, scheduled to unify in 1992.
Mr. Oana says he hopes to increase revenues from international operations to more than 30% of the bank's total from about 20% now. "We need to wake up and move ahead; we need a revolution," he says. 

His boss, Mr. Miyazaki, is weary of merger trouble. "For a merger like ours {to really work}, it takes about 30 years in Japan," he says. "But the time we're living in doesn't permit us 30 years.
We can be patient for 10 years, but not longer." 

