.START 

Stanley Beck, 55 years old, was named vice chairman, a new position at this financial-services concern.
Peter Cole, president and chief executive officer, said he expects Mr. Beck will be nominated at a later date to the boards of Central Capital and some of its subsidiaries.
Mr. Beck recently resigned as chairman of the Ontario Securities Commission. 

Swire Pacific Ltd., already one of Hong Kong's biggest companies, is investing more money in Hong Kong real estate. 

Executives of Swire's wholly owned real-estate operation, Swire Properties Ltd., outlined a plan to invest about HK$2 billion (US$256.3 million) in two projects in the eastern district of Hong Kong island.
The plan represents the company's first big move since the June 4 Beijing student massacre undermined confidence in Hong Kong's property sector. 

One project involves spending more than HK$800 million to build two office towers; the other calls for spending over HK$1 billion to redevelop factories into office and industrial space. 

But analysts don't see the announcement as a major sign of confidence in the colony, which is due to revert to China's control in 1997.
They said the near-certain profitability of the projects means the company is risking little. 

Lufthansa said its supervisory board approved the company's plans to buy a total of 42 jets over the next seven years, including the purchase of 20 Airbus Industrie A-321 jets and options on another 20 Airbus jets.
The West German national air carrier also said it was converting options for an A-300-600 jet and an A-310-300 jet as well as options for six Boeing 737-300 jets and 14 Boeing 737-500 jets into firm orders.
Lufthansa's fleet, now 163 aircraft, will rise to 227 in 1996. 

Italy's European Community partners gave it six months to close down the Bagnoli steel plant near Naples; failing that, the case will go to the European court of justice.
The European Commission had first set a deadline in June this year for closing the plant, but the Italian government wanted a one-year postponement.
The closing or sale of the Bagnoli plant and three other steel mills, which are owned by the Italian government, was the condition set by the EC for allowing Rome to pay part of the companies' huge debt.
Italy's steel restructuring is expected to cut a total of 20,000 jobs and reduce production by 1.2 million tons. 

The high price of consumer goods in Tokyo prevents residents from enjoying the living standards their hefty incomes should provide, concludes a report by a Japanese government agency. 

The Japan Economic Planning Agency report, based on a comparison between prices in Tokyo, New York and Hamburg, found goods and services in the Japanese capital cost an average 39% more than in New York and 47% more than in Hamburg.
The cost of rents and government-subsidized food products average twice as much in Tokyo as in New York and Hamburg, the report said. 

The report blamed several aspects of Japan's economic structure, including government barriers against food imports such as rice, for adding to Tokyo's high cost of living.
Other factors were antiquated distribution networks, in which a labyrinth of middlemen take a cut, and add-on services in retailing, such as elaborate packaging of goods. 

But the report did have some bright news: Some goods and services, including health care, education and dry cleaning, were found to be cheaper in Tokyo than in the two Western cities. 

Dutch researchers said they've found a way to more than double the success rate for test-tube fertilization.
Their method involves giving women hormones intravenously at short intervals over 14 days, before eggs are removed for fertilization. . . . Switzerland's oldest mountain guide is believed to be 89-year-old Ulrich Inderbinen. "What I like is that I can do it at my age," said the Zermatt resident, adding: "If you want to see Almighty God, you must go to the mountains." 

