.START 

TVSM to Launch Cable Publication, 

NEW YORK -- TVSM Inc., the magazine publisher based here, plans to launch a weekly version of the Cable Guide, going head to head with Rupert Murdoch's TV Guide. 

After quietly testing the publication for a year, executives of closely held TVSM said they would go ahead with a national market-by-market rollout of a full-size weekly television and entertainment magazine with cable system-specific listings.
TVSM, the largest publisher of cable guides, would continue to publish the monthly Cable Guide, which has a monthly circulation of 7.2 million, paid by cable system operators. 

TV Guide, a digest-size publication of the News America Publications Inc. unit of Mr. Murdoch's News Corp., publishes market-specific program guides, listing cable programs available in a geographical area.
TVSM would offer a magazine that tells customers only what their cable system offers. 

Both TV Guide and Cable Guide include broadcast channels in their listings.
System-specific guides avoid potentially confusing lists of programs the viewer doesn't receive.
Analysts expect viewers to read them more closely, making them more-attractive vehicles for advertisers. 

Mark Edmiston, chairman and chief executive officer of TVSM, said the weekly -- its working title is TV Times -- would be launched in February in the San Diego and Huntington Beach, Calif., markets.
A rollout in about 20 markets across the country would follow by Labor Day 1990, Mr. Edmiston said.
Within four years, TVSM expects to have 300 system-specific guides in weekly publication. 

The venture is an ambitious one for TVSM, formed in 1987 by veteran magazine executives.
And a similar venture turned out to be a very large disaster: In March 1983, Time Inc. attempted a system-specific weekly cable magazine called TV-Cable Week.
Cable-system operators balked at taking the publication for their customers, and Time closed the operation six months later, posting pretax losses of some $47 million on the failed magazine. 

"I am not haunted by TV-Cable Week," Mr. Edmiston said. "We have a better understanding of the cable industry because we've published in it for years.
And we already have the computerized technology needed to handle all the different editions we would publish." 

TVSM's venture is spurred by a rush of interest from advertisers in and publishers of cable and TV magazines.
They are targeting both network and cable TV watchers, and as cable grows -- it is now in 55% of all U.S. television households -- marketing to the television watcher is expected to intensify. 

TV Week Network, which represents Sunday-newspaper TV program guides in 29 of the top 30 markets, began operation only last year and has generated $12 million of sales in its first year, handling only tune-in ads from broadcasters and cable networks. {Such ads promote a program scheduled for a particular night.} 

TV Guide has a strong hold on most tune-in advertising from media companies, but the new weekly could hurt TV Guide's newsstand sales, which in 1989's first half averaged about 7.3 million copies a week at 75 cents apiece. 

Joseph Cece, president of TV Guide, says that a key to TV Times' success will be how successfully it sells the magazine to cable subscribers. "They can only support it by making the customer pay," Mr. Cece says. "And customers aren't used to paying for this." 

Subscribers to the monthly Cable Guide get the magazine from their operators, who offer it as an incentive for taking the cable service.
But cable subscribers will be asked to pay $2.79 a month for the weekly TV Times. 

