.START 

In the face of deficit pressure and growing support for arms control, Congress appears ready to abandon any notion of deploying a space-based anti-missile system in the next generation. 

For the first time since President Reagan unveiled his 1983 proposal to build a "Star Wars" defense shield, critics and even many supporters on Capitol Hill expect that spending for the program will decline next year -- perhaps significantly. 

Such a move, which would come despite objections from the White House and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, would be an important symbolic and political blow to the multibillion-dollar effort, called the Strategic Defense Initiative. 

Even with a strong commitment to the Star Wars effort, it probably would take a decade to deploy a full-blown system.
Congressional aides and defense analysts say the new mood is likely to preclude fielding any space-based defense for at least the next 15 or 20 years, and thus largely turn SDI into an open-ended research project for the foreseeable future. 

SDI's congressional support has eroded so sharply over the past year or so that lawmakers increasingly wonder "whether anything other than a research program makes sense," House Armed Services Committee Chairman Les Aspin (D., Wis.) said during a news briefing yesterday. 

The Soviet Union's latest arms-control proposal also "spells trouble for SDI funding," Rep. Aspin told reporters, because it removes the issue as a U.S. bargaining-chip during negotiations.
Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze indicated over the weekend that the Soviets no longer will insist on limits on testing and deployment of space-based weapons as a precondition to negotiating reductions in long-range nuclear arms. 

All these factors point to a turnaround for SDI after six years of budget increases averaging nearly 25%.
The Senate Armed Services Committee voted to authorize $4.5 billion in spending for SDI for the fiscal year starting Sunday, but the House Armed Services Committee voted for only $3.1 billion.
House and Senate conferees are likely to compromise on a level below the current $3.8 billion, according to lawmakers, congressional aides and Pentagon officials familiar with the deliberations. 

Meanwhile, citing overall fiscal restraints and "SDI's current major uncertainties," the traditionally supportive Senate Appropriations Committee recently approved $3.7 billion for SDI, or nearly $1 billion less than the Bush administration's already pared-down request.
And the committee included strict restrictions on how funds could be used, which could further delay any deployment decisions. 

Yesterday, the Senate overwhelmingly rejected a move to boost the Appropriations panel's figure. 

Gen. Colin Powell, the incoming chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told lawmakers earlier this month that "these kinds of drastic reductions" fall "well below what is needed to keep the program viable." He said, "I am rather stunned at what has happened in recent weeks" as committees have voted on SDI funding. 

Expressing the same concerns, Secretary Cheney recently sent a letter warning congressional leaders that budget cuts are coming "perilously close to forcing abandonment" of longstanding goals of starting to deploy SDI before the end of the 1990s. 

Even Vice President Dan Quayle, in an interview with the Los Angeles Times three weeks ago, acknowledged that the Reagan administration may have oversold SDI. Conceding that President Reagan's idea of deploying "an impenetrable shield" to protect the U.S. against all incoming missiles was only "political jargon," Mr. Quayle said the concept has been revised into a smaller and cheaper program.
The current emphasis is on using hordes of small, orbiting rockets, dubbed "brilliant pebbles," to destroy Soviet missiles before they release any warheads. 

Some of the administration's pessimistic budget predictions clearly are intended to strengthen its hand in negotiations on the defense-authorization bill.
Nevertheless, many researchers and outside analysts are convinced that level or declining SDI budgets will force the program to wither and eventually lose much of its political appeal. 

Without significant year-to-year increases, "there simply won't be money for the full-scale engineering and development necessary for deployment," says Ashton Carter, associate director of Harvard University's Center for Science and International Affairs. "I don't see SDI as a rallying point any more," even for many conservative lawmakers, he asserts. 

Rep. Aspin and other House Democratic leaders appear to have settled on a strategy of methodically wielding the budget ax to block deployment of even a substantially scaled-down version of SDI. "I'm not sure it's a good investment" to proceed with such plans, Rep. Aspin told reporters. "My instinct," he said, is that even a limited system intended merely to protect the U.S. against an accidental launch of Soviet missiles "doesn't make sense" for technical and fiscal reasons. 

