.START 

First there was the Power Lunch.
Then came the Power Tie. 

Power Entertaining may be next. 

To cushion the leap into the dog-eat-dog business world, De Land, Fla. 's Stetson University School of Business Administration this fall is offering a 12-part seminar with a major section dubbed "power entertaining." 

Classes will focus on such powerful topics as social conversation ("avoid being judgmental"), etiquette ("stand up when a person enters the room"), planning for social occasions ("seat the honored guest on the hostess's right"), dressing for success and, in case of overseas clients, cross-cultural entertaining. 

"As the students become emerging professional types, they're going to be expected to host social occasions," says marketing professor Stephen Barnett, who thought up the idea. "Unless you've read a book on it or come from a family that did a lot of entertaining," there isn't much chance to learn it, he notes. 

While teaching a sales management course last spring, Mr. Barnett recruited Margaret Lee, wife of Stetson President H. Douglas Lee, to give a few lectures on entertaining -- and she was impressed with the students' interest.
So Stetson agreed to give the concept some more, well, power, and offer the non-credit program. 

This type of course isn't yet standard fare at other business schools.
A Stanford University spokesman says the closest thing its business school offers -- besides a "dress for success" student fashion show -- is a course on "Power and Politics." Harvard and Columbia business schools have equally slim pickings.
Wharton has an "Executive Life Style" seminar series on skills from wine tasting and stress management to executive dressing. 

Business schools "are scared of it {teaching entertaining} now.
But five years from now, they'll all have it," says Letitia Baldrige, who wrote a book on executive manners and lectures at Wharton. "We're not talking about being aristocratic.
We're talking about being efficient." 

Mr. Barnett concedes his brainchild initially "got a lot of ribbing from the faculty." But, he notes, studies of group dynamics show he's not entirely out to lunch: "The person who plans a good party is the same person who's a good manager when you get a group together." 

