.START 

Nova Corp. of Alberta and Westcoast Energy Inc. said separately that they will delay proposals to build a total of about two billion Canadian dollars (US$1.7 billion) of ethylene projects in western Canada. 

Nova is a pipeline, oil and gas, and petrochemical concern based in Calgary; Westcoast, based in Vancouver, has oil, gas, and pipeline interests. 

Analysts said the postponements may partly reflect concerns by both companies about industry overcapacity, and weakening prices for ethylene, a key petrochemical building block used to make plastics, anti-freeze and other products. 

"I'd anticipate that there would be more delays" of planned ethylene plants, said William Kuhlke, an executive at Houston-based DeWitt & Co., a petrochemical consulting firm. "There have been more {new}plant announcements than are needed to satisfy demand, according to most forecasts," he added. 

Mr. Kuhlke said ethylene plants scheduled to open in the U.S. are expected to raise U.S. ethylene output to about 48 billion pounds annually by 1992, from about 38 billion pounds last year.
That increase represents about 10% of current world-wide production of about 100 billion pounds a year, a Toronto analyst said. 

Nova said its proposed C$1.1 billion ethylene project at Joffre, Alberta, will be delayed at least a year beyond its scheduled 1992 start-up, mainly because the company recently lost an expected contract to supply ethylene to Union Carbide Corp., Danbury, Conn. 

G.L. Clark, senior vice president, manufacturing, with Nova's Novacor Chemicals Ltd. unit, said Nova expected Union Carbide to purchase about 40% of the new plant's projected output of 1.1 billion pounds of ethylene annually. 

He said Nova still plans to build an ethylene plant at Joffre, where its two existing plants produce 3.2 billion pounds of ethylene a year. "But it won't be in the same time frame" as previously announced, he said, adding: "I think the time frame could be extended by a year or two, or even three." 

Previously, Union Carbide confirmed that it will instead purchase the ethylene from Dow Chemical Co. 's Canadian unit, which is building a C$800 million ethylene plant near Edmonton, Alberta.
A spokeswoman for Dow Chemical Canada Inc. said the plant is still scheduled to go on stream as expected by 1993, with capacity set at one billion pounds of ethylene annually. 

Westcoast Energy said it decided "to defer further work" on a proposed ethylene plant and related facilities at Taylor, in northeastern British Columbia.
The plant would have cost as much as C$900 million to build.
Westcoast said the project, which it planned in partnership with a group of Taiwanese concerns, wasn't large enough to be economically viable.
It would have produced about 660 million pounds of ethylene annually, with associated plants producing derivative products, including polyethylene. 

"It was too small.
There's no point in putting a two-thirds world-scale plant in the middle of nowhere," said a Toronto analyst, referring to the planned Westcoast venture. 

Westcoast said the scale of its project was limited by the amount of ethane available.
Ethane is a component of natural gas, which is less abundant in British Columbia than in neighboring Alberta. 

Westcoast said a rise in ethane supplies would permit it to increase the scale of the proposed project, but it didn't offer specifics, or a possible time frame for resuming discussions. 

