.START 

At nearly midnight last Thursday, 73-year-old Marjorie Hines pushed her slight, nightgown-clad frame through the four feet of water in her kitchen to see if Hurricane Hugo had rattled her favorite china.
From the mucky water she plucked two plates, inscribed with her children's names, as they floated away from the hutch. 

"I was never frightened for my own life," she says, two days later in her 1840 pink clapboard home. "But some possessions are irreplaceable." She cites particularly some waterlogged cabinets and bureaus built by her father ("West Point, 1911," she notes proudly) and a sludge-covered Oriental rug. "Even my party napkins," she adds, "are just sopping wet." 

It's not that Charleston -- historic, aristocratic and sometimes haughty -- can't handle a few wet party napkins.
Over the past three centuries, the city has survived Indian raids, attacks by British troops, the Civil War, tornadoes and a 19th-century earthquake that damaged virtually every building in town. 

But Hurricane Hugo, hardly the picture of a Southern gentleman, has also done more subtle damage, upsetting the proprieties of what journalist William Allen White once called the "most civilized town in the world." In a place where gentility is almost a law, residents are having to deal with -- and occasionally even discuss in polite company -- some of the less genteel things in life. 

Take Ethel-Jane Westpheldt Bunting, an 81-year-old widow whose brick and stucco home, built in 1810, now features a 15-by-20-foot hole in the outside wall of the third-floor guest room.
For her, Hugo wasn't so bad as the hurricane she encountered as a child in Mississippi, during which a windowpane came crashing down on her head.
Her parents, she recalls, spent several hours carefully extracting slivers of glass from her hair. 

Hugo, however, has brought Mrs. Bunting face to face with a more delicate problem.
Since her home was considered one of the sturdiest on her street, several neighbors bunked there during the storm.
With water in short supply, the exceedingly proper Mrs. Bunting, who studied anthropology at Oxford University and once collected Pakistani artifacts for the Smithsonian, was forced to address bathroom protocol and rules about flushing. 

"It's just not me to be talking about such things," she says. 

Mrs. Bunting and her neighbors live in and around the Battery, the most historic and affluent section of town.
Here, brick houses from Revolutionary War days share sidewalks with refurbished slave shanties from the Civil War, all of them overlooking Fort Sumter some three miles away in Charleston Harbor.
At one neighborhood church, St. Michael's, the hands of the steeple clock sit motionless at 10:50, a reminder of when Hugo came ashore. 

In her kitchen, Mrs. Hines points to the wall clock-stopped, too, at 10:50.
Time is of the essence as she sops up water from her living room's dark hardwood floor.
Her pink tennis shoes spotted with mud, she is worried less about the tree limbs that now crisscross her roof than about visitors.
It seems that her home is one stop on the scheduled house tour for the Preservation Society of Charleston -- a tour, she frets, that might go ahead as planned. 

"I don't know when we'll be able to get help," she says. 

What little help there is in this exclusive tip of the city's peninsula is being stretched to keep up the most important thing in Charleston: appearances.
Despite repeated pleas from city officials to conserve water, local blue bloods have taken to their wrought-iron balconies and porticoes to hose away the refuse that Hugo deposited.
Even gardens receive an extra helping of water that otherwise might go into drinking glasses. 

On Lenwood Street, Frank Rhett is watering his tiny flower bed with not one, but two sprinklers.
Around the corner, on Murray Boulevard, stands Hugh Cannon's house, built in 1929 and overlooking the Ashley River.
There, Mr. Cannon, who lost four of the six white columns from his front porch, has enlisted six itinerant workers to clear branches and bricks from his manicured yard.
He even makes ham and cheese sandwiches to help keep them from accepting offers from his neighbors. 

Residents don't deny that they know how to put on airs.
Edward Mayberry Walker -- related, he points out, to a signer of the Declaration of Independence -- remembers being asked at a party once how long his relatives had been in the area. "Since the '70s," he answered.
When the questioner sniffed, "Oh, my family has been here since the '50s," Mr. Walker simply replied, "I mean, the 1670s." 

Mr. Walker says his family was lucky in being able to move their 14th-century Italian chair and other antiques upstairs, out of Hugo's reach.
His wife, Hildy, adds that most of Charleston was less fortunate. "This city will never look the same," she says. "It will take five years to look respectable and 25 years to look good again." 

One Charleston matron, who didn't want her name in the newspaper, says she was stunned when a neighbor stopped by to borrow her phone, one of the few in South Charleston with service restored.
The neighbor was calling her mother to say she was going to come stay for a while because she had lost her roof.
The woman's mother agreed and then, adding that she was going to a luncheon that afternoon, suggested that her daughter bring her pink silk dress and an extra silver bowl. "Now that's a real Southern story," says the matron. 

Concerns about silk dresses notwithstanding, Hurricane Hugo has wreaked real havoc on the Southeast coast, particularly in Charleston, where its 135-mile-an-hour winds created an obstacle course of fallen trees and power lines.
The storm has claimed the lives of some 24 people in the U.S. and has left tens of thousands without phones or electricity. 

Such conditions have left Charleston swarming with profiteers, who have charged Charlestonians $10 for a bag of ice, $600 for a chain saw and $1,000 for a power generator.
Mayor Joseph P. Riley Jr., his baby face now haggard, quickly helped to set $200 fines and 30-day jail terms for those caught price gouging.
Ever-confident of local mores, he has announced his certainty that the offenders aren't from Charleston. 

Mr. Rhett was lucky enough to escape the gouging, at least on one count: He has a gasoline-powered generator already hooked up to his house.
And he offers to let Mr. Walker, who lives across Lenwood Street, run an extension cord to it.
Mr. Walker's first priority is his refrigerator.
In the freezer portion, hundreds of dollars of shrimp, game hens and venison are rapidly thawing. 

Mr. Walker breaks the 7 p.m. curfew, hoping to sneak past the National Guardsmen patrolling the Battery, to drive to his printing shop to get a 30-foot extension cord.
Stopped by the police, he explains the situation -- generator, refrigerator and all -- and is allowed to finish his errand. 

Then, it seems, the generator needs more gasoline to run through the night.
Mr. Walker siphons enough from Mr. Rhett's car to fill the tank.
The next morning, however, the Walkers find their kitchen floor covered with water.
The refrigerator hasn't received enough power to cool the food sufficiently. 

Surrendering, the Walkers cook all the meat, eat some and give the rest to neighbors.
Says Mrs. Walker, "We're such spoiled 20th-century Americans." 

