.START 

Tokyo share prices advanced broadly under the lead of Sony and other electrical issues, pushing the Nikkei index to a record high in relatively active trading.
Prices dropped sharply in London and Frankfurt, however. 

Tokyo's Nikkei average climbed 484.11 points to stand at 35444.82 at the end.
That comfortably surpassed the previous record of 35140.83 set Aug. 21.
The sizable gains spawned speculation among traders that the Tokyo market will continue to rise for a while. 

In early trading in Tokyo Wednesday, the Nikkei index advanced another 206.72 points to 35651.54. 

On Tuesday, share prices started sprinting ahead from the outset and continued to build up momentum throughout the day.
Volume on the first section was estimated at 900 million shares, growing from 784 million the previous session.
The Tokyo stock price index of all issues listed in the first section rose 32.02 points to 2675.22. 

Behind the market's broad advance, traders said, was a welling sense of anticipation that the yen will finally be able to stabilize itself against the dollar following last week's agreement in Washington by the so-called Group of Seven major countries that the U.S. currency is overvalued.
This week's intervention by the Bank of Japan and other central banks to hold the dollar down raised expectations that the yen may regain its former strength, according to traders. 

In the morning, traders said, trading was out of focus and buy orders were scattered over a wide range of issues.
In the afternoon, however, the focus sharpened.
The market fixed its attention on electricals such as Sony, Fanuc and Pioneer Electronic, among others. 

Buyers hunted Sony on news that the company is now in the final stages of negotiations involving a cash purchase of all the shares outstanding of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. of the U.S.
A Sony spokesman in Tokyo declined comment on the reports from the U.S. 

Sony gained 410 yen to stand at 8,810 yen ($62).
Its rise took other electricals up on its coattails.
Among the other gainers were Matsushita Electric Industrial, up 70 at 2,390, and Pioneer, up 170 at 5,370. 

Fanuc went up 500 to 8,000.
Traders traced the gain to expectations that Fanuc, one of the country's major manufacturers of industrial robots, will boost its sales and earnings this fiscal year because of growing demand from companies pouring money into efforts to upgrade their production equipment. 

London shares plummeted on worse than expected U.K. trade and current account deficits, pushing the Financial Times 100-share index to its lowest close in more than two months. 

The index, the most closely watched market measurement, closed 23.5 points lower at 2336.1.
The index opened stronger, hitting a session high of 2368.4, but the technically important 2350 level was erased before midday.
The 100-share index failed to rebound substantially even though Wall Street showed strength in early dealings. 

The 30-share index ended 23.8 points lower at 1913.5.
Volume was 450.8 million shares, a fairly light session, but higher compared with a 1989 low of 280.5 million shares Monday. 

The third-worst monthly trade deficit on record proved too big a challenge for the market to overcome, dealers said. 

"We had an attack of the jitters after the trade figures," a dealer with a large U.K. brokerage firm said. "The market came off a little too sharply." 

While the trade report drew substantive selling into the market, dealers said knee-jerk concerns over U.K. interest rate increases subsided and helped keep the key index from an even sharper decline. "After the initial selling {following the trade data}, people began reappraising the interest-rate picture," a dealer with another large London brokerage firm said. 

B.A.T Industries, a big part of the 100-share index, managed to remain in positive territory throughout the session, closing at 818 pence ($13.20), up 2 pence, on 9.6 million shares traded. 

Although it fell sharply in late and thin dealings, B.A.T was supported by news that the conglomerate, which faces a hostile bid from Sir James Goldsmith's Hoylake, is moving to inject more shareholder value into the company by spinning off some assets. 

DRG, another hostile takeover target, ended higher after Pembridge Investments, a Bermuda-registered holding company headed by a former colleague of Sir James, launched a bid for the U.K. paper and packaging concern.
DRG closed at 609, up 

Share prices on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange closed sharply lower in active trading, pressured by a lower dollar and fears of rising interest rates.
The DAX index tumbled 26.90 to 1609.03. 

Equities began to slide at the opening, and the sell-off accelerated in the course of the session, brokers said. 

"The market is caught between a rock and a hard place," said one broker at a West German bank. "The dollar is falling, which is bad for exports, but the Bundesbank still seems determined to raise its rates." 

Hopes that the central bank will refrain from raising its discount and Lombard rates soon because of the dollar's plunge to 1.90 marks were dashed by Bundesbank President Karl Otto Poehl.
Mr. Poehl said Monday that the Bundesbank is pondering whether current interest rates are consistent with the strong economic growth in West Germany.
Most observers are now counting on a rate increase Oct. 5, the next Central Bank Council meeting. 

The main sellers were domestic institutional investors, brokers said.
Many foreign operators are holding on to their stocks because of expected currency gains from a stronger mark, they added. 

Blue-chip stocks, especially automobile issues, had the heaviest losses.
Daimler Benz plunged 18.5 marks to 777.5 marks ($409), and traders said the company might delay its huge share issue a bit longer to wait for the share price to recover. 

Volkswagen dropped 12.9 to 463.1, and Bayerische Motoren Werke slumped 12.5 to 624. 

Banking stocks were also sharply lower, as analysts fear that another rate increase will put pressure on the banks' interest margins.
Deutsche Bank plummeted 14.5 to 683.5, Dresdner Bank skidded 9.8 to 354, and Bayerische Vereinsbank fell 10 to 380. 

Meanwhile, prices closed higher in Brussels, lower in Zurich, Amsterdam and Milan, and mixed in Paris. 

Shares closed higher in Sydney, Singapore and Wellington, were mixed in Manila and lower in Hong Kong, Taipei and Seoul. 

Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end. 

