.START 

Call it a failed attempt at Chinese-style glasnost. 

China's new Politburo Standing Committee, formed after the June suppression of the pro-democracy protests, met the press yesterday for the first time.
The six members strode in flashing smiles and wearing well-cut Western suits, clearly hoping to soften their image in a culture attuned to political symbols. 

But the glasnost stopped when Communist Party chief Jiang Zemin and his five party stalwarts took on questions.
This wasn't the time to indicate an easing of the repression that has gripped China since the massacre of hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of civilians in Tiananmen Square.
Instead, it was pure party line.
Said a Chinese intellectual who witnessed the event on television: "It was like my weekly political study class, except not nearly as interesting." 

For Mr. Jiang, the 62-year-old former mayor of Shanghai, the news conference for Chinese and foreign reporters in the Great Hall of the People was something of a national coming out.
He tried to appear relaxed, though several attempts at humor fell flat.
Taking his seat at the podium, he looked at the crowd and said, in English, "Hello." No one responded, leaving an awkward silence.
It was a marked contrast to the smooth handling of the media by his now-ousted predecessor, Zhao Ziyang. 

Dealing with the press was probably a minor irritant for Mr. Jiang compared with the struggle to live up to his role as the new heir-apparent of senior leader Deng Xiaoping.
Mr. Jiang has to contend with the reality that real power resides not with the Politburo Standing Committee, but with Mr. Deng and a group of revolutionary octogenaraians, which some Western diplomats refer to cynically as "the sitting committee." 

Mr. Deng's previously designated successors, party chiefs Mr. Zhao and Hu Yaobang, both were sacked.
Their mistakes included being too soft on "bourgeois liberalism," a catchword to describe Western influences the party doesn't like. 

Mr. Jiang hinted the 85-year-old Mr. Deng, whose health fluctuates, isn't ready to relinquish his last remaining post, the military chairmanship.
As for the previous heir-designate, Mr. Zhao, who was ousted as head of the party June 24, he said only that the party's investigation into his mistakes is continuing.
That leaves open the possibility Mr. Zhao -- who is accused of supporting the "turmoil" and splitting the party -- will face criminal charges. 

Mr. Jiang did, however, suggest that his predecessor isn't under arrest. "Because he has a longer record in serving the party, I think he enjoys better treatment in life than I do," he said. 

China watchers looking for signs of a softening line came up short.
Mr. Jiang was asked about the discrepancy between two descriptions used by Chinese leaders of the student-led democracy movement.
One is "counter-revolutionary rebellion," a grave criminal charge in China; the other is the more neutral phrase "turmoil." He replied: "We definitely can say that it was a counter-revolutionary rebellion." 

Furthermore, Mr. Jiang gave no indication the tide of repression, arrests and executions will subside, despite condemnation overseas.
He declined to rule out the possibility captured dissident students and intellectuals will be executed.
And he dismissed a foreign reporter's query about the arrest and mistreatment of one unidentified student by saying: "I've heard many examples that sound like fairy tales from the Arabian Nights." 

On economic issues, Mr. Jiang and the other leaders stressed that China would proceed with its policies of reform and opening to the outside world.
But when it came to details, there were signs only of continuing retrenchment, not market-oriented liberalization. 

Standing Committee member Yao Yilin, who heads state planning, suggested that private enterprises may be squeezed.
In recent weeks, the official media have said such businesses will be forced merely to pay their fair share of taxes.
But Mr. Yao, apparently reading from a prepared text, hinted at broad sanctions. "We will put appropriate restrictions on their negative role in the national economy," he said. 

