.START 

President Bush flatly declared he will veto the Democratic congressional leadership's alternative to his capital gains tax-cut proposal, drawing even starker battle lines for this week's showdown vote on the issue. 

On a day when he and his aides were working hard to win over House Democrats, Mr. Bush sent a letter to Congress declaring there is no chance he will accept the Democratic plan to raise the top income-tax rate and expand the tax benefits of individual retirement accounts. 

"No matter how you dress it up, that alternative is a tax increase plain and simple," Mr. Bush said in his letter. "That's no alternative, and my response will be equally plain and simple -- veto." 

Mr. Bush strongly reiterated his support for the measure passed by the House Ways and Means Committee, which would reduce the top capital gains tax to 19.6% for the next 2 1/2 years and index gains to inflation thereafter. 

The Democratic leadership's alternative would raise the top tax rate for individuals to 33% from the current 28%, but set the top rate on capital gains at 28%.
In addition, the Democratic plan would allow everyone, regardless of income, to claim deductions for contributions to IRAs; those who currently don't qualify for such deductions could take 50% deductions on annual IRA contributions of as much as $2,000. 

Democratic leaders maintain that the capital gains tax cut backed by Mr. Bush would unduly benefit the rich at the expense of middle-income and poor Americans.
They argue that their alternative would benefit more average Americans and spur savings. 

But Mr. Bush, in his letter, repeated his familiar arguments that a capital gains tax cut would benefit all Americans by spurring new investment that would create more jobs.
The president even stole some Democratic-style rhetoric about blue-collar workers to make his point. "This is important to the American factory worker whose job may be on the line unless his company can bring down its capital costs," Mr. Bush argued. 

White House aides said that Mr. Bush yesterday personally joined his administration's broad-scaled lobbying effort on capital gains by calling the wavering House Democrats.
Mr. Bush's aides already had been wooing such Democrats and offering inducements for their support on the issue. 

Mr. Bush has said before that he would veto a plan that raises the top tax rate, but his letter was his most direct attempt yet to shoot down the Democratic leadership's alternative.
The strong wording of the letter suggested that Mr. Bush sees little room left for negotiation or compromise, although it didn't flatly rule out melding elements of the Democratic proposal dealing with IRAs with a capital gains tax cut. 

