.START 

The fierce fight over cutting capital-gains taxes is supposed to be a clear contest between conservatives, who want to slash taxes, and liberals, who oppose measures helping the rich. 

Oregon's Rep. Ron Wyden is a liberal Democrat; he votes the liberal position more than 80% of the time.
Conversely, Texas's Rep. Charles Stenholm is a conservative cotton farmer and the very emblem of the Democrats' Boll Weevil wing; his liberal voting record is less than 20%. 

Yet Rep. Wyden, on this issue, is voting with the Republicans and some conservative Democrats to cut capital-gains taxes.
Rep. Stenholm is sticking with the House leadership and not only voting against the cut, but working against it. 

This demonstrates former House Speaker Thomas O'Neill's dictum that "all politics is local," even on a visible vote like this one.
Oregon timber interests are a powerful factor behind Mr. Wyden's active role in trying to turn fellow Democrats toward President Bush.
In contrast, Mr. Stenholm puts a farmer's priority on lowering interest rates, and so is drawn to a Democratic alternative that promises to do more to reduce the budget deficit and also encourages savings by expanding the largely middle-class tax break for individual retirement accounts. 

"I'm hearing from the people who are basic to the economic future of my state," Rep. Wyden says.
Answers Rep. Stenholm: "A majority of people in my district would like to see us do more about the deficit than decide who's going to get a tax cut." 

The capital-gains vote, which is expected tomorrow, is likely to be close and decided by swing Democrats.
All but a handful of the 176 House Republicans will stay with the administration, which must build on its alliances with Southerners in the Ways and Means Committee and capture 45 to 50 Democrats to ensure a majority for the president.
After beginning late, the Democratic leadership is on the defensive and still faces unrest on the left.
But the party's greater test is on the right, where it can't afford to lose more than half of the more than 80 Democrats in the Deep South and border states including Texas. 

In the first major economic showdown between the White House and the House on any major issue, Reps.
Wyden and Stenholm illustrate the competing strategies.
Mr. Wyden reflects the administration's effort to exploit local interests to reach beyond the Republican's traditional conservative economic base in the Democratic-controlled House.
Rep. Stenholm is just as crucial for the new Democratic leadership, which must split the old Boll Weevil wing -- so helpful to Ronald Reagan -- if it has any hope of denying Mr. Bush his victory. 

The fight is important to the new speaker, Thomas Foley of Washington, who has links to both Rep. Wyden and Rep. Stenholm.
The speaker is a native of the Pacific Northwest and is familiar with many of the same economic interests driving Mr. Wyden.
And as a former chairman of the House Agriculture Committee, Rep. Foley can call on ties to farm-state Democrats such as Mr. Stenholm, and also other swing delegations in Southern border states and in the Midwest. 

But the speaker will have his hands full trying to defeat the tax-cut plan, which, with President Bush's ardent support, was narrowly approved by the House Ways and Means Committee two weeks ago.
The measure would reduce the top tax rate on capital gains for 2 1/2 years to 19.6% from the current 33%.
After that, the rate would be set at 28%, and the gains would be indexed for inflation.
Proponents say the measure would raise revenue in the short run and boost economic growth in the long term. 

Democratic leaders assert that the capital-gains tax reduction would almost exclusively benefit the wealthy without much proven benefit to the economy as a whole.
In its stead, they are seeking to substitute a package that would increase the top tax rate on the richest Americans to 33% from the current 28% and also to expand the deduction for IRAs, which would help both middle-income and upper-income people.
Over five years, the package would raise an estimated $25 billion that, the leaders say, would be set aside to reduce the federal budget deficit. 

Republicans are seeking to label the alternative as just another tax increase from the "tax-and-spend Democrats." The Democratic leadership describes the Bush plan as a raid on the Treasury by the "super rich." 

For Rep. Wyden, the issue is far more mundane and parochial, since timber sales by individuals are given capital-gains tax treatment.
He notes that Oregon has 20,000 privately owned woodlots covering four million acres.
He also says that his state has one of the nation's largest per-capita concentrations of small businesses.
A cut in the capital-gains tax would be a boon to these people, whom he asserts are more middle class than wealthy. 

"The theory that a capital-gains differential will just help rich people is an absolute myth," he says.
After addressing an AFL-CIO convention in Portland, Ore., recently, Mr. Wyden says union members who had Christmas-tree businesses on the side urged him to vote for the cut. 

As a co-chairman of the House's 121-member forestry caucus, he has taken an active roll in doing just that.
Just last week, he met with Mr. Bush in the White House on the capital-gains issue, and although he prefers a permanent cut, he is now helping to round up Democratic votes for the pending capital-gains bill.
Over the weekend, House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) tried to change Rep. Wyden's mind, but the Oregon lawmaker refused to budge.
While the House leadership was in turmoil earlier this year, Mr. Wyden explained, he and other Democrats had gotten themselves "in concrete" on the issue. 

Mr. Wyden's position isn't without risk.
He has ambitions for election to statewide office, and one potential rival, Democratic Rep. Les AuCoin, has aligned himself with the party leadership, saying the GOP plan poses a threat to the timber industry.
Mr. AuCoin has supported capital-gains tax cuts in the past, but the White House plan, he says, invites a short-term liquidation of timber assets that jeopardizes the industry's long-term supply. 

The Democratic leadership's strategy focuses on keeping its own defections to fewer than 40.
This means holding its liberals, some of whom are grousing about the alternative package's IRA expansion.
More importantly, it means winning the votes of at least half of the Democrats in Texas and in more than a dozen Southern and border states.
Indeed, the fight has taken on a clear regional cast, with influential Texans such as Rep. Marvin Leath arguing that Southerners must stand together with their Ways and Means allies in favor of the tax cut if their conservative voice is ever to be heard. 

Indeed, Rep. Stenholm's decision to fight the capital-gains cut is causing him trouble with his Boll Weevil colleagues, for whom passing the measure is a long-cherished goal. "My arm is being twisted in the armpit pretty good," he says. 

But Mr. Stenholm is holding firm with the Democratic leadership because he says he sees the capital-gains plan as a budget gimmick that over time will lose money after a short-term revenue gain.
He also says the IRA plan would be more useful to his constituents and the economy as a whole, which needs more savings. "Those who vote against the IRA will have a lot of explaining to do," he says. 

The Texas Democrat was consulted in the drafting of the Democratic plan, and though he denies ambitions to move up in the leadership, he has been a prominent ally of the leaders in recent debates.
He is close to Rep. William Gray of Pennsylvania, the third-ranking Democrat, and Speaker Foley attended a recent fund-raising reception for him in Texas. 

Mr. Stenholm announced his stand this week alongside moderate Democrats from Midwestern farm districts, but his message is aimed foremost at the Southerners.
North Carolina and Virginia are two delegations where the leadership hopes this tack will succeed. "It's not the time to make the deficit worse," says Rep. Jim Olin, a Virginia Democrat and retired electronics executive.
But Mr. Leath scoffs: "Anybody who thinks liberal Democrats are going to put that money toward deficit reduction is smoking rope." 

