.START 

Might the government take the wind out of the whistle-blowers' act? 

The False Claims Act, as it's officially known, includes provisions allowing private citizens to bring civil suits on behalf of the government.
They're based on a principle called qui tam -- Latin shorthand for "he who sues for the king as well as for himself." But what if the king, in this case the Justice Department, decides the extra help is a royal pain? 

In essence, that's the defense industry's best hope to turn back a wave of fraud cases being filed under the statute.
Defense contractors have attacked the act on constitutional grounds, but they've lost all three federal court rulings on the matter to date.
Now, they are looking to the Justice Department, where an internal debate has been brewing over whether the qui tam provisions undermine the department's authority. 

If the Justice Department formally opposes the whistle-blower provisions, "it could have a profound effect" on how a judge would rule in such cases, asserts Herbert Fenster, a Washington defense attorney who represents some of the nation's biggest military concerns. 

So far, Justice officials haven't taken a public position, and as far as pending cases go, that's as good as saying they have no problem with where things stand.
Nonetheless, sentiment against the provisions -- at least in their current form -- continues to swell within the top ranks of the Justice Department. "There is a fair degree of unanimity that there are serious" constitutional objections to the provisions within the department, says one high-ranking government official. 

At this point, defense-industry lawyers and plaintiffs' attorneys are hoping to sway Justice Department opinion.
Both have met with Solicitor General Kenneth Starr, who represents the government before appellate courts.
It's unclear what view Mr. Starr may take on the issue.
The False Claims Act is the result of Civil War-era contractors cheating the government, often supplying dying donkeys or faulty firearms.
Signed into law by President Lincoln in 1863, it has proved a valuable tool in the government's continuing fight against malfeasant contractors. 

The qui tam provisions work like this: A citizen, believing that a government contractor has committed fraud, files suit on behalf of Uncle Sam and then notifies the Justice Department he has done so.
Justice, in turn, has 60 days to decide if it wants to join the case while the suit is kept under seal.
Either way, the whistle-blower shares in any monetary recovery. 

Much of the sentiment against the act stems from amendments made in 1986 that have encouraged more private citizens -- usually company employees -- to sue.
Among other things, these changes allow whistle-blowers to remain parties to suits even after the government intervenes.
They also increase the percentage of the recovery whistle-blowers can keep in such cases to between 15% and 25% from 10%. 

In the past three years, the Justice Department has intervened in 27 such suits and has declined to enter 67; another 87 cases are awaiting Justice's decision on whether to join.
Meanwhile, more than $25 million already has been added to the Treasury as a result of these complaints.
The statute "has proven to be a cheap, effective remedy against government contracting fraud," says Amy Voorhes, a spokeswoman for Business Executives for National Security, a military preparedness advocacy group. 

The growing number of suits brought under the act has the defense lobby quaking. "We still don't know whether what we've seen is just the beginning of the wave," says LeRoy Haugh, a vice president at the Aerospace Industries Association, a Washington trade group.
He complains that even ill-founded False Claims suits "taint the whole industry," not to mention waste company time and resources. 

Justice has its own worries.
In particular, department attorneys say conflicts between private plaintiffs and the government can arise.
The government, for instance, may choose to settle a case for a certain amount, but the citizen may want more or insist upon going to trial.
Or a whistle-blower may demand documents from a defense contractor, but Justice demurs in the name of national security. 

When the U.S. doesn't intervene in these suits, other questions are raised.
Does the act clash with the Constitution's separation-of-powers doctrine by improperly delegating prosecutorial functions to private citizens?
Does a whistle-blower who isn't claiming personal injury have legal standing to sue on behalf of all U.S. taxpayers? 

Though there is intense congressional pressure not to oppose the statute, senior Justice officials in the civil division have advocated altering the qui tam provisions to inhibit private citizens from bringing suit when the Justice Department doesn't intervene. 

"The government's interests should be protected by public officials, not by self-appointed and self-interested private parties who have suffered no injury at all," asserts Paul Gewirtz, a Yale law professor who has submitted papers supporting the contractors to the courts. 

To this point, though, they have ruled otherwise. "There is no case-law for the claim that the Congress may not authorize private persons to engage in conduct that might also be the province of government," U.S. District Judge Robert P. Aguilar wrote in a June opinion involving Lockheed Corp. 

Lawyers who bring False Claims cases maintain that the constitutional wrangling is merely a ploy by the contractors to avoid facing the meat of these cases: whether or not they've bilked the government.
To even talk about constitutionality "dignifies their argument too much," says John Phillips, a Los Angeles attorney who helped draft the act's 1986 amendments. 

Attorney Herbert Hafif, who has pursued False Claims cases against Northrop Corp. for alleged fraud on MX missile parts, the air-launched cruise missile and the B-2 Stealth bomber, says: "The amendments passed Congress and President Reagan signed them and nobody questioned the constitutionality then.
Now, all of a sudden, you find these misguided attacks repeated over and over. {The constitutionality question} is a mythological problem." 

