.START 

Citizens & Southern Corp. and Sovran Financial Corp. agreed to merge in a stock swap valued at about $4.7 billion, to create the nation's 14th largest bank holding company. 

The new super-regional, to be named Avantor Financial Corp., will have about $47 billion in assets.
It will have operations that will arc down the Atlantic seaboard from Maryland to Florida, and include some of the fastest-growing markets in the country. 

Bennett A. Brown, chairman and chief executive officer of Citizens, said the merger is in response, in part, to the changing environment in banking, particularly the specter of nationwide banking and the threat of international suitors. "We want to be on the leading edge of the movement, not just a part of it," he said in an interview. 

Citizens successfully fought off a hostile $2.4 billion takeover attempt by Charlotte, N.C.-based NCNB Corp. earlier this year.
Mr. Brown said the decision to merge with Sovran had nothing to do with that battle, even though Sovran was frequently mentioned as a possible other bidder.
A Citizens spokesman said the company hadn't received any other takeover approaches. 

Albert B. Gornto, current chairman and chief executive of Norfolk, Va.-based Sovran, said the two concerns had had merger talks for about two years.
What finally brought them together, he said, was the working out of terms that would allow a "merger of equals." 

Under the agreement, which would be accounted for on a pooling-of-interests basis, shareholders of Sovran would receive 1.23 shares of the new concern for each of their 59.8 million common shares outstanding.
Citizens shareholders would receive one share of the new concern for each of their 62 million shares outstanding.
The agreement has been approved by the boards of both companies, but is still subject to shareholder and regulatory approvals. 

Citizens shares closed yesterday at $34.875, up 75 cents, and Sovran's at $42.125, up $1.375, both in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
The agreement was announced after the market's close. 

The new company will operate dual headquarters in Atlanta and Norfolk under a single office of the chairman.
Mr. Brown, 59 years old, will become chairman and chief executive of the new company.
Dennis C. Bottorff, 45, currently president and chief operating officer of Sovran, will continue in those positions at Avantor, but will, by the merger agreement, become chief executive when Mr. Brown retires. 

Hugh M. Chapman, currently president and chief operating officer of Citizens, will be named vice chairman of the new concern and chairman when Mr. Brown retires.
Mr. Gornto will be chairman of the new concern's executive committee. 

Analysts and industry executives generally praised the transaction.
Said John Poelker, a consultant and former president of Citizens: "Their biggest difficulty would have been whether or not they could get the top guys to think about business in the same way.
But they're both big, conservative well-run companies that know each other very well." 

Citizens and Sovran both have strong market shares in geographic areas that don't overlap.
Citizens is entrenched in Georgia, South Carolina and Florida, while Sovran is strong in Virginia, Maryland, Tennessee, Kentucky and Washington, D.C.
Both banks have a community-oriented focus and conservative practices.
Both banks have traditionally shied away from riskier foreign loans and leveraged buy-outs, part of the reason both have relatively low levels of non-performing loans.
Neither expects to see any loss of jobs from the merger. 

Some analysts said, however, that the merger may be motivated more by takeover fears than anything else.
The agreement does give each bank the option of buying about 20% of the other's common stock, in a measure designed to ward off an unwanted bidder.
The merger, "is not going to make them acquisition-proof, which I suspect was their motive," said John Mason, an analyst with Interstate/Johnson Lane Inc.
He said recent events, such as a Japanese bank's planned purchase of a stake in Manufacturers Hanover Corp., indicate that big international suitors might like the opportunity to buy a big U.S. institution. 

Richard Koenig in Philadelphia contributed to this article. 

