.START 

Michelin Group, the French company known for making high-priced tires for luxury cars, is taking some unique marketing risks in marrying middlebrow Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co. 

Michelin could damage the elite name it has long cultivated as it attempts to capture the lower-priced tire market that other tire-makers shun. "They'll have to be careful that they don't tarnish their hard fought-for reputation and mystique," contends Harry Millis, a tire-industry analyst at McDonald & Co., Cleveland. 

In addition, the proposed $690 million acquisition of the U.S.'s second largest tire producer is likely to trigger a brutal price war among the top four producers as Michelin fights to increase its presence in the robust North American market.
With the Uniroyal takeover, Michelin would surpass Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. as the world's No. 1 tire-maker, but also assume an additional $810 million in debt and undisclosed pension liabilities. 

Even as raw-material costs soared last year, Michelin slashed prices on tires just to win coveted market share at General Motors Corp.
That forced similar price-cutting on tires shipped to Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. Sales to Detroit are important, because new-car buyers tend to replace original equipment tires with the same brand. 

"The price wars will be phenomenal," predicts Mitch Urbanski, an automotive consultant at Transportek Inc., of Troy, Mich. 

Auto makers this year are paying less for tires on the 1990 model year than they did on the 1988 model year, says Donald DeScenza, a Springdale, Conn., independent automotive analyst.
Both Michelin and Uniroyal Goodrich officials declined to be interviewed. 

With the planned acquisition, Michelin would about double its market share at GM. According to figures from Modern Tire Dealer, a trade publication, Michelin/ Uniroyal Goodrich would supply an estimated 45% of GM's passenger and light truck tire needs. 

But retaining its dominant position with GM is far from assured, acknowledges B. Charles Ames, a partner at the New York investment firm that's selling Uniroyal Goodrich to Michelin.
He expects GM to buy more tires from other producers to lessen its dependence on Michelin/Uniroyal. "They'll probably want to balance out the shares and not let one guy get way up there." GM has a policy of not commenting on its relationships with suppliers. 

Conceivably, such a situation might help unit volume at Goodyear, which last year supplied 25% of GM's passenger-tire needs, and General Tire & Rubber Co., a unit of Continental AG of West Germany.
General last year supplied 18% of GM's tires, according to Modern Tire Dealer.
Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., a unit of Bridgestone Corp., of Japan, supplied 18.5% of GM's tires in 1988 but was being phased out as GM announced a move to reduce the number of its suppliers. 

With Uniroyal Goodrich under its wing, Michelin also is expected to try to increase its share at Chrysler, says automotive consultant Mr. Urbanski. (At Ford, the tire market share is more evenly distributed, with the dominant position held by Firestone).
At Chrysler, Goodyear is vulnerable, because last year it supplied 86% of the auto maker's passenger tires, with the rest supplied by Michelin. 

Mr. Urbanski believes Michelin will use its own name as well as the Goodrich T/A brand, popular among sporty car enthusiasts, to try to increase market share at Chrysler.
The Goodrich T/A line is already original equipment on some Chrysler Jeep products. 

But the French company may phase out the Uniroyal brand name. "It will fall by the wayside in a few years," predicts Mr. Urbanski. "It's just another tire." He notes that Uniroyal tires already have taken a back seat to Goodrich in national advertising. 

A Michelin spokesman said the company intends to keep both Uniroyal and Goodrich tires.
But Uniroyal Goodrich, which has been strapped for cash, had trouble supporting two brands and this year earmarked most of its national ad budget on Goodrich tires. 

Michelin may also have to spend considerable amounts of money to modernize Uniroyal Goodrich's aging plants.
If it doesn't, contends McDonald's Mr. Millis, it could damage its 50-year-old prestige image and reputation for quality. 

This week Uniroyal Goodrich executives are touring the country, meeting with dealers.
So far, they have received positive feedback about Michelin's proposed acquisition, a spokesman for the company says. 

"Uniroyal has been struggling with national advertising, and Michelin is a stable, big-time player," says Jack Emery, president of Hombre Tire Centers, an independent distributer of Uniroyal tires in Pittsburgh. "They bring a lot of assets to the table, and they have a mystique." But independent analyst Mr. DeScenza notes that if there's a recession in the next two years, Michelin could be squeezed for cash trying to service its own debt as well as that of Uniroyal Goodrich. 

tires, in percent 

