.START 

Some executives at L.A. Gear have been cashing in on the company's soaring success -- while retaining substantial stakes in its future performance. 

Robert Y. Greenberg, chairman, got $6.2 million in early August for selling only 7% of his stock in the Los Angeles-based sportswear and athletic footwear manufacturer, filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission show.
Stephen Williams, an executive vice president, received $3.1 million for selling 22% of his shares, according to the filings. 

Both sales were part of a public offering of 1.2 million shares, a spokesman for the company said.
Neither Mr. Greenberg nor Mr. Williams could be reached for comment. 

Mr. Greenberg retains 1.8 million shares, while Mr. Williams still holds 280,000, according to the SEC filings. 

Yesterday, L.A. Gear shares hit a 52-week high (adjusted for a recent stock split), closing at $41.50 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
That was up $3.25 from the previous close. 

L.A. Gear has had a slew of good news recently.
The company split its stock 2-for-1, predicted sales for September would hit a record, and signed on pop superstar Michael Jackson as its spokesman. 

The announcement of Mr. Jackson's involvement with the company, and recent strong orders for L.A. Gear goods at the International Sporting Goods Show, "are creating a lot of momentum" in the stock, said Salomon Brothers analyst Heidi Steinberg.
She added that some arbitragers held short positions in L.A. Gear shares, and the rise yesterday could be in part from covering of those positions. 

Salomon is recommending purchase of L.A. Gear shares, and is expecting them to outperform the market as a whole, she said. 

Speaking at a conference for securities analysts in San Francisco earlier this month, Mr. Greenberg said the deal with Mr. Jackson "literally stunned most retailers, which is good news because when they're stunned you can sell them anything." Sales are already up on the news, he said. 

HEALTHY BUYING: Dennis Crean, president of the industry group of HBO & Co., has more than doubled his stake in the hospital information company.
Early in August, he bought 34,000 shares for about $340,050, according to SEC filings. 

Mr. Crean is the third HBO insider to buy shares this year, bucking a trend of insider-selling at other companies in the software and medical sectors. 

Mr. Crean said he had been bullish on HBO stock for some time, because "the company's been on a turnaround" and the stock, which had fallen as low as $6, "has gotten going again." But he didn't buy his recent stake until he won $2 million in a lawsuit against a New York brokerage firm that he charged mismanaged his options account. 

In the earlier transactions, Larry Gerdes, chief executive officer of the firm's Medical Systems Support Inc. unit, purchased 7,000 HBO shares in April and July.
Holcombe Green, a member of the board, purchased 35,000 shares, also more than doubling his stake, in several purchases in April.
Neither could be reached for comment. 

On the over-the-counter market, HBO shares rose 12.5 cents to $12.50. 

COMPUTER SALE: At Compaq Computer Corp., the president of its international division, Eckhard A. Pfeiffer, sold two-thirds of his stake in the company, SEC filings show.
He sold 50,000 shares, for $4.7 million, or an average price of about $94 a share, according to the filings.
Both the company and Mr. Pfeiffer declined to comment. 

Compaq shares finished at $89.125, down 62.5 cents, on the New York Stock Exchange. 

