.START 

The bond market snapped out of a six-day depression yesterday after the government's two-year note auction drew better-than-expected demand. 

The government sold $9.75 billion of two-year notes at an average yield of 8.39%.
That was up from 8.37% at the previous two-year note auction in August and was the highest average yield since the May 25 auction when the average yield was 8.84%.
Bond dealers said investors were attracted to yesterday's auction by the relatively high yield on the two-year notes. 

Also helping bonds yesterday was a buoyant dollar, which remained firm despite a relentless onslaught of central bank intervention.
A minimum of 12 central banks from Asia, North America and Europe sold dollars yesterday, following up a barrage of selling on Monday.
Still, the dollar was quoted only slightly lower against the West German deutsche mark, and higher against the yen. 

Prices of Treasury bonds opened on a weak note, falling as much as 1/8 point after the Department of Commerce reported strong orders for durable goods.
But prices recovered shortly after the auction results were announced and held the gains as the dollar rebounded on foreign exchange markets.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond ended 1/2 point higher, or up by $5 for each $1,000 face amount.
The benchmark's yield eased to 8.23% from 8.28% Monday. 

"It was a great auction," said James R. Capra, a senior vice president at Shearson Lehman Government Securities Inc. "Everybody who bought in the auction made money," he said, because yields on the two-year notes fell after the auction and ended at about 8.36%.
Mr. Capra said bids through Shearson from individual investors were twice as high as those at the previous two-year auction. "We saw more individuals than we've seen in a long time," he said. 

Brian J. Fabrri, economist and managing director at Midland Montagu Securities Inc., said foreign investors were also big buyers at yesterday's auction. "There was strong demand out of Europe," he said. 

Even Japanese investors, who have tended in the past to show a preference for long-term government securities over short-term securities, purchased modest amounts of notes at yesterday's auction, according to some bond market traders and economists.
William M. Brachfeld, executive vice president at Daiwa Securities America Inc., estimated that Japanese investors purchased $500 million of the new two-year notes.
But other analysts estimated that Japanese investors bought far more than that amount. 

The success of yesterday's auction was a surprise to some bond traders who had expected the international efforts to depress the value of the dollar to damp demand for Treasury securities, especially among foreign investors. 

They also worried that the Treasury's huge borrowing needs would drive up interest rates further.
Not only must the market absorb this week's slate of $32.3 billion of new Treasury securities, but the market must also digest a flood of new corporate and municipal securities. 

Yesterday, for example, more than $1.4 billion of new tax-exempt state and local government securities were issued, including $700 million of New York City general obligation bonds.
Today, the state of Florida is expected to issue $850 million of general obligation bonds. 

In addition, traders are expecting more than $10 billion of new junk bonds within three months and are awaiting details of the first installment of a large volume of bonds to be issued by Resolution Funding Corp., a new government agency created to help rescue the nation's ailing savings and loan associations. 

All of that supply comes on top of what already has been a record year for new corporate and municipal debt.
So far this year, more than $190 billion in municipal and corporate debt has been issued to the public, according to Newark, N.J.-based Securities Data Co. That's up from $181.4 billion in the same period last year and surpasses the previous nine-month record of $184.2 billion in the first three quarters of 1987. 

In its quarterly survey, Securities Data found that the volume of junk bonds fared poorly during the period with only 95 bond offering being underwritten for the year as of Monday.
That was the smallest number of new junk issues since 

Today, the government will auction $7.75 billion of four-year notes.
In when-issued trading, the notes were quoted late yesterday at a yield of 8.32%, unchanged from levels late Monday. 

Treasury Securities 

Most Treasury securities were higher yesterday in modest trading.
The benchmark 30-year bond was quoted late at a price of 98 21/32 compared with Monday's closing price of 98 4/32.
The latest 10-year notes were quoted late at a price of 98 2/32 to yield 8.27% compared with 97 25/32 to yield 8.31% Monday. 

Short-term rates rose slightly yesterday.
The discount rate on three-month Treasury bills was 7.77% for a bond equivalent yield of 8.02%, while the rate on the six-month Treasury bills was 7.82% for a bond equivalent yield of 8.23%. 

At yesterday's two-year note auction, the government received bids totaling $1.13 billion from individual investors through so-called noncompetitive tenders, up from bids totaling $1.03 billion at the previous two-year note auction Aug. 22. 

Here are details of yesterday's auction: 

Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it. 

The notes are dated Oct. 2 and mature Sept. 30, 1991. 

Municipals 

Demand for the $700 million New York City bonds was strong enough that the underwriters will shortly be announcing a repricing, trimming yields on the long end by about .025 percentage point, according to Goldman, Sachs & Co. 's Richard Kolman, manager of municipal underwriting and syndication.
A slight restructuring is also possible. 

Today, underwriters led by Lazard Freres & Co. are expected to introduce an $850 million issue of Florida State Board of Education public education capital outlay refunding bonds, on the heels of the more than $1.4 billion tax-exempt outpouring this session. 

The deal's proposed structure hadn't been finalized by late yesterday, but the offering is expected to consist largely of long current interest term bonds, maturing to around 2025.
There will likely be a mix of discount and full coupon bonds.
A small portion of capital appreciation bonds is also expected. 

New Jersey Turnpike Authority 7.20% issue of 2018 was at 96 1/2 to 96 5/8, up 5/8 from late Monday.
It yielded about 7.49%, .05 percentage point less than on Monday afternoon. 

Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, New York, 7 1/8% issue of 2019 was up 1/2 at 95 1/4 to 95 1/2. 

Foreign Bonds 

Despite the U.S. dollar's decline on foreign exchange markets, prices of major foreign government bonds fell on fears that some central banks in Europe and Japan may soon consider raising interest rates as a way to cut the dollar's strength. 

In Britain, prices of government bonds plummeted, and money market rates rose on speculation that the government may face mounting market pressure to push bank lending rates higher.
Banks' base rates now stand at a four-year high of 14%. 

Also hurting British bonds was news of a larger-than-expected U.K. current-account deficit in August.
The deficit totaled #1.997 billion {$3.23 billion} in August.
That was less than the revised July deficit of #2.185 billion but well above forecasts that had placed the gap at about #1.5 billion. 

The benchmark 11 3/4% Treasury bond due 2003/2007 fell 1 1/8 point to close at 112 10/32 to yield 10.04%, while the 12% issue due 1995 lost one point to end at 103 3/4 to yield 11.02%. 

In West Germany, prices of government bonds fell as investors continued to speculate about a rise in the Lombard rate, the effective ceiling on overnight bank loans.
Many analysts expect the rate, now at 7%, to be increased by one percentage point. 

However, one West German financial official said the central bank probably won't raise the rate right away. 

Although deutsche mark bond prices rose slightly in early trading as the dollar fell, the bonds turned lower later on news that the U.S. Treasury market was weaker on the back of a sharply higher rise in orders for U.S. durable goods. 

Bonn's 6 3/4% issue due 1999 fell 0.37 point to 98.48 to yield 6.96%, while the 6 3/4% notes due 1994 were off 0.275 point to 98.35 to yield 7.17%. 

In Japan, Monday's sharp bond market rally gave way to more fundamental sentiment that the dollar is likely to resume its upward climb. 

"People are still worried about the direction of the currency market," said a Tokyo bond trader. "People think the G-7 {Group of Seven} intervention is temporary, not permanent, not successful," the trader said.
Another trader said investors believe the dollar's decline thus far hasn't satisfied the Bank of Japan, whose officials apparently want the dollar below 135 yen. 

"If the central banks can't push the dollar lower {through intervention}, we won't be surprised if the BOJ takes another step" and pushes money market rates higher, he said. 

Japan's benchmark No. 111 4.6% bond due 1998 ended on brokers' screens at 96.36, down 0.17 point from a day ago.
The yield rose to 5.205%. 

Mortgage-, Asset-Backed Securities Sears, Roebuck & Co., a leader in packaging credit-card loans for sale to investors, plans to make its second securities offering to retail buyers. 

The $250 million credit-card securities issue is scheduled for next week through an underwriting group led by Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. 

The credit-card securities market, which now totals more than $15 billion, has grown substantially since it began in January 1987. 

The market focused exclusively on institutional investors until this spring, when Citicorp made the initial offering targeted to retail buyers. 

The new Sears offering is expected to have a four-year maturity and yield about .4 percentage point more than the four-year Treasury note.
That would translate into a yield of about 8.75%, based on current Treasury rates. 

In the mortgage-backed market, active issues ended 9/32 higher after moderate trading. 

Government National Mortgage Association 9% securities for October delivery finished at 96 3/4, up 9/32; and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. 9% securities at 96 2/32, up 9/32. 

The Ginnie Mae 9% securities were yielding 9.60% to a 12-year average life assumption, as the spread above the Treasury 10-year note held at 1.32 percentage points. 

Corporate Issues 

Petrolane Gas Service Limited Partnership issued $375 million of junk bonds yesterday priced at par to yield 13 1/4%, in line with market projections. 

The 12-year senior subordinated debentures are noncallable for three years and nonrefundable for five years. 

Despite the recent problems in the junk bond market, traders said there was fairly strong demand for the issue.
An official at First Boston Corp., which underwrote the issue, said the notes drew interest from a diverse set of investors with demand far exceeding supply. 

A smaller tranche of $125 million of nine-year senior secured Petrolane notes was privately placed with Metropolitan Life Insurance Co.
The First Boston official said the decision to place the notes privately wasn't tied to the recent weakness in the high-yield market.
The notes, he said, were committed to Metropolitan Life by previous arrangement. 

So far this week, two junk bond issues have been priced, including Formica Corp. 's $100 million of 10-year notes priced late Monday at par to yield 14%. 

In the broader corporate bond market, prices ended about 1/4 higher in light trading. 

