.START 

Aflatoxin, the fungus-produced poison that contaminated much of the Corn Belt last year, is being detected in newly harvested corn in parts of western Illinois. 

Although the scope of the outbreak is much less than last year, when it was found in several states in the Midwest and southern Plains, its recurrence signals that aflatoxin might be more of a chronic problem in the Midwest than commonly thought. 

The outbreak, although isolated, is also rekindling fears in the grain trade that the reputation of U.S. corn is eroding among major foreign buyers, some of whom have been willing to pay a premium in the past for Midwest corn over other world sources, in part because of the traditional aflatoxin-free billing of Midwest corn. 

Indeed, some traders are speculating that foreign buyers have delayed purchases of U.S. corn for the past several weeks in order to avoid any chance of getting the last remnants of the tainted 1988 crop, said Daniel W. Basse, director of market research at AgResource Co., Chicago.
The fungus that produces aflatoxin can continue to excrete the poison in poorly stored corn. 

In addition to sluggish export demand, the impending harvest, which will rebuild U.S. stockpiles, is keeping corn futures prices in the doldrums.
At the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday, the price of the corn contract for December delivery slipped 0.75 cent and settled at $2.2975 a bushel. 

Aflatoxin, a potent carcinogen in some laboratory animals, is excreted by a fungus that flourishes in hot, dry climates.
Some scientists suspect aflatoxin is at least partly to blame for high rates of liver cancer in humans in some regions of Asia and Africa, where aflatoxin contamination of food is common.
Aflatoxin, which occasionally infests the corn and peanut crops in the Southeast, was thought to be a fluke in the Midwest until last year's outbreak, which was the third in 12 years. 

Because of spotty drought conditions earlier this summer in much of the Midwest, crop scientists had expected aflatoxin to show up in scattered areas this fall.
Widespread rains in late July and August appear to have prevented contamination on last year's scale. 

The effects of the 1989 outbreak won't be clear for several weeks.
The corn harvest in the Midwest has barely started and aflatoxin is difficult to accurately survey -- last year, Iowa authorities didn't grasp the size of the outbreak until the harvest was nearly complete. 

According to crop scientists and grain analysts, some elevators in about six Illinois counties between the Mississippi River cities of Moline and Quincy are detecting aflatoxin in newly harvested corn offered for sale by local farmers.
Many elevators are refusing to buy corn that contains more than 20 parts of aflatoxin per billion, the level considered unsafe for human consumption by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 

Walker Kirby, a University of Illinois plant pathologist, said much of the newly harvested corn crop in some of the Illinois counties contains aflatoxin.
Testing indicates that most of the contamination, however, is at levels that federal regulators consider safe for consumption by livestock. 

Officials in Iowa said yesterday that too little corn has been harvested in the state to determine whether aflatoxin is a problem this year. "We expect it to be spotty," said Gary Bruns, Muscatine County extension agricultural adviser. "We are keeping our fingers crossed." 

Because of concerns about aflatoxin in stored corn, as well as the possibility that it is in the new crop, Iowa regulators are continuing to test milk for contamination and are mulling whether to begin routinely testing processed corn products, such as corn meal, for aflatoxin. 

In the past year, dairy farms in several states had to dump milk after unintentionally feeding contaminated corn to cows.
In recent weeks, inspectors in Iowa have detected traces of aflatoxin in some milk samples at levels considered safe for consumption. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

PRECIOUS METALS: Most futures prices turned easier, despite a further drop in the dollar.
Gold for December delivery ended with a loss of $1.50 an ounce at $373.10, while December silver was off two cents an ounce and ended at $5.355.
October platinum ran counter to the trend, extending Monday's strong advances with a gain of $2.80 an ounce at $490.90.
However, this ending price was well below platinum's high for the day of $495.50.
Traditionally, gold has tended to rise when the dollar has declined, but, currently, the metal isn't getting help from the cash market for bullion, which remains quiet, according to one analyst.
One reason is concern that producers will sell gold on a rally, stifling the advance, the analyst said.
Another reason is the question of what the dollar will do, he said.
Traders were reminded of the dominant influence of the dollar on gold despite the lack of upward reaction by gold on the dollar's decline Monday and early yesterday.
Late in the day, the dollar showed signs of slowing its decline and possibly leveling off. "Precious metals instantly went on the defensive and sold off from best levels," he said. 

COFFEE: Futures prices held in a narrow range as traders awaited developments from coffee talks in London and Washington.
The December contract ended with a gain of 0.71 cent a pound at 81.91 cents.
Analysts, traders and coffee industry executives aren't expecting any startling developments from the two week-long meeting of the Council of the International Coffee Organization that began Monday in London.
Neither are they anticipating any big developments from the meeting between President Bush and Colombian President Virgilio Barco tomorrow in Washington.
Nevertheless, traders remained nervous and very sensitive to any news, according to analysts and trade sources.
As a result, prices moved very little.
In London, Colombia was expected to submit a proposal that would be the basis for the restoration of export quotas on green coffee shipments from producing countries.
According to one dealer, attempts to restore quotas would fail until sales of coffee to countries that aren't members of the International Coffee Agreement at cheaper prices are eliminated and export quotas are made more flexible to allow more shipments of mild coffees.
In Washington, the two presidents are expected to dwell on Colombia's fight on the narcotics trade, which has become economically associated with the severe drop in coffee prices.
The loss of coffee income is hampering the fight against drugs, the Colombian president said in a letter to President Bush. 

COPPER: Prices eased for the fourth consecutive day.
The December contract was off 3.10 cents a pound to $1.1970.
There were no new fundamental developments to influence prices, according to one analyst.
Active selling against the spot, or cash, position on the London Metals Exchange weakened prices in that market and set the tone for New York trading, the analyst said.
As the New York December contract fell below $1.20, selling orders that had been placed around that level were triggered and caused the price to fall further, he said.
However, when December hit its low for the day at $1.1890, which was below the previous low of $1.19 set on Sept. 11, renewed demand developed, helping prices to recover slightly.
Another analyst observed that the weakness was a continuation of the selling influenced by a higher-than-expected increase in London Metal Exchange stocks reported Monday.
Another rise is anticipated next Monday, the analyst said.
A third analyst said that, in addition, there has been an increase in inventories of copper held by producers in the U.S. and overseas, which also helped depress prices. 

