.START 

Biovest Partners, a three-year-old venture capital concern that helped turn San Diego into a hotbed of biotechnology startups, is calling it quits. 

The disbanding of Biovest is no simple business failure.
By most measures, the firm has been quite successful in funding new, growing companies.
And when it recently solicited $10 million in new venture capital, the fund was oversubscribed. 

Partners Howard E. Greene Jr. and Timothy J. Wollaeger are bailing out primarily because they are disillusioned. 

They misunderstood that real-world venture capitalists spend more time raising money than building new companies these days.
And they were turned off by the hardball financing tactics of bigger venture capital firms.
Thus, the breakup of Biovest sheds some light on the current venture-capital scene. 

Biovest started five companies in the San Diego area and helped start a sixth in Menlo Park, Calif., since the partnership was formed in October 1986.
Mr. Greene had been chairman and Mr. Wollaeger senior vice president of Hybritech Inc. before the San Diego genetic-engineering concern was acquired by Eli Lilly & Co., the pharmaceutical giant, in March 1986. 

With hindsight, the partners, both 46 years old, now say they were "naive" to think they were venture capitalists in the conventional sense.
They enjoy working with people to build companies and discovered they dislike reviewing business plans and romancing investors with dog-and-pony shows.
Venture capitalism has been glamorized as the business of creating new companies, while the real work is largely fund raising, the partners say. 

The depressed market for new public offerings has heightened some of the field's "parasitic" tendencies, noted Walter Channing, general partner of C.W. Group Inc., a New York venture capital firm.
Without a brisk market in initial public offerings, company founders and small backers are more likely to be forced to give up big chunks of their ownership stakes in exchange for money to stay in business. 

Such conditions help to create adversarial relationships between deep-pocketed venture capital funds and small seed-capital firms such as Biovest.
Biovest, without funds to participate in second-round or third-round financings of the tiny companies it nurtured, found itself allied with management against richer venture capitalists on the companies' boards. 

"There's a terrible conflict of interest" among investors when a scarcity of new capital gives the wealthiest partners power to dictate financing terms, Mr. Greene said.
Unless founders and early investors can "pay to play," -- come up with money to protect positions -- their equity can be squeezed.
This is especially unfair to scientists and founders whose "intellectual property" is the company's main asset. 

Biovest got a bitter taste of these "cram financing" tactics several times earlier this year.
The partnership lost a third of its stake in Vical Inc., a drug-delivery technology concern.
Mr. Wollaeger and Mr. Greene had to dig into their own pockets for money to maintain Biovest's stake in Pyxis Corp., a medication-dispensing systems developer.
Pyxis employees saw their collective stake cut by 50% as the price for raising $1.5 million. 

Certain investors "held a gun to our head until our funds ran out and then said, 'OK, here's the price, '" said Ronald Taylor, Pyxis chief executive.
He declined to identify the venture firms involved. 

"The big problem is that I thought all venture capitalists were like Tom Perkins, the guy I understudied with at Hybritech," Mr. Greene said.
Mr. Perkins is the retired co-founder of Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers, a prominent San Francisco venture-capital firm and Hybritech investor. 

But if Kleiner Perkins -- like Mr. Perkins himself -- once got intimately involved in the management of companies, today it more closely resembles other big venture-capital companies.
To Mr. Greene, many of the venture capitalists who now sit on company boards with Mr. Greene and Mr. Wollaeger are "pencil pushers" with Ph.
D.s and M.B.A.s from top schools who lack operating experience in business.
They are more likely to grill management on technical matters than focus on recruiting key people and forging strategic partnerships with large drug companies, the two men said. 

"If they've only served on boards and never had to negotiate with a Merck, a Johnson & Johnson or a Sandoz, they have outrageous ideas about what to expect, and can't really understand what management is wrestling with," Mr. Greene says. 

The partners considered raising $30 million in "dry powder," financial ammunition that could be used to protect Biovest's investments from predatory venture capitalists, Mr. Wollaeger said. "But we decided we didn't want to become another run-of-the-mill venture capital fund." Biovest specialized in working with companies at an embryonic stage, contributing seed capital and guidance before seeking conventional venture-capital financing.
After abandoning the notion of transforming Biovest into a larger operation, the partners solicited an additional $10 million in seed capital.
They say the new fund was oversubscribed before they decided to throw in the towel. 

The pressures of the business were great enough to cause serious personal strains among the partners. "Sure, some strains are normal any time you're trying to do something difficult," Mr. Wollaeger said.
The "marriage broke down as we began to focus our energies on different companies," Mr. Greene said. 

The two partners have already taken new positions -- at small medical-products companies.
Mr. Greene began working full time this month as president and chief executive officer of Amylin Corp., a tiny San Diego biotech concern developing diabetes treatments.
Mr. Wollaeger was recently named president and chief executive officer of Smith Laboratories Inc., a San Diego-based maker of medical products. 

While it won't be making any new investments, Biovest will continue to operate until 1996, when its assets will be liquidated.
For now, stock certificates and records will be kept at Biovest's small office in a San Diego suburb. "I may use {the office} as a retreat to get away," but won't be coming in regularly, Mr. Greene said. 

"Tim and Ted brought real hands-on operating experience and guidance to their young companies.
It's sad to see them go because it leaves a void in our marketplace," said Ray Dittamore, a managing partner in accounting and consulting firm Ernst & Young's San Diego office. 

Biovest started five of the 20 biotechnology firms in the area in the past three years.
Besides Amylin, Vical and Pyxis, Biovest provided initial funding for Cytel Corp. and Biosite Diagnostics Inc.
It also helped start Neurex Corp. Biovest raised a total of $32 million for the companies. 

