.START 

They were merely mushroom omelets, served on the campus of Mississippi State University, but they became emblematic of a striking vulnerability in America's food chain: More often than not, imported food sails through Customs uninspected.
And, more often than we know, the food is dangerously tainted. 

The mushrooms in the omelets were scooped out of a 68-ounce can imported from China and became part of the Feb. 13 breakfast menu in the university cafeteria.
By midmorning, students had begun trooping into the campus health service, some retching, others complaining of abdominal cramps and diarrhea.
The number quickly reached 22 and would likely have escalated far beyond that had the health service director not drawn a connection to the mushrooms, and alerted the cafeteria. 

For the Food and Drug Administration, the trouble was just beginning.
On Feb. 23, laboratory tests uncovered the source of the illness: staphylococcal bacteria.
It was the first major U.S. outbreak of staphylococcal food poisoning ever linked to canned food.
Outbreaks soon followed in New York and Pennsylvania, affecting a total of more than 100 people, many of whom had to be hospitalized.
As a result, the FDA ordered importers to detain most of China's canned-mushroom shipments for tests and began a nationwide recall of cans that had been linked to outbreaks. 

But the federal agency's failure to catch the mushrooms at the docks would nonetheless fuel serious doubts in Congress about its ability to screen both the surging tide of imported foods and the foreign processors that ship to the U.S. Annual imports of food have tripled since the early 1970s to 30 billion pounds, valued at over $20 billion.
The FDA under Commissioner Frank Young expanded its inspection force by nearly 50% to 600 inspectors, who are assigned to stand watch at the nation's seaports and borders. 

Fairly porous borders, it turns out.
Out of an estimated one million food shipments in fiscal 1987, the agency checked the shipping documents on only 9% and tested only 2% for bacteria and other impurities, according to a report by the House Energy and Commerce Committee's investigative subcommittee, which opens hearings on the problem tomorrow.
Of the products tested, 40% didn't meet FDA standards.
And of 3,400 foreign plants registered to ship canned food to the U.S., the agency has inspected only 31 over the past five years. 

"At the very least, it is fair to presume that tens of millions of pounds of imported food" that should be rejected each year as unfit to eat are instead being consumed, says the subcommittee staff.
The result: thousands of people are getting sick or hurt, according to FDA records. 

Even once the FDA hears of a problem, it is sometimes slow to react.
The agency had received scores of complaints from consumers over the years about bad canned mushrooms, but never made a determined effort to get to the bottom of the persistent pattern of illness.
Then came the problem with Chinese mushrooms. 

"We didn't know whether the Chinese were growing them on night soil {human excrement}," says FDA microbiologist Joseph Madden. "We didn't know if there was one rogue producer.
We had heard of black-market mushrooms moving through Hong Kong.
We had evidence of labels being removed, and new labels being put on cans in Hong Kong." 

On May 19, FDA officials decided to impound the 68-ounce, wholesale-sized cans of Chinese mushrooms and exempt retail-sized cans, since none of those have been implicated in any outbreaks.
Even now, the hunt for contaminated mushrooms goes on: Eight Chinese canneries are embargoed from shipping anything at all, while the shipments of 50 others are being detained at the docks until tests prove them safe. 

Adrian Garcia, an FDA inspector in Nogales, Ariz., a busy entry point for Mexican fruits and vegetables, is a good example of the agency's finger in the proverbial dike.
Mr. Garcia samples fresh produce from 700 trucks that trundle across the border each day.
He'll send the samples off to an FDA lab, which will look for excessive pesticide residues.
In glaring contrast to this solitary guard, the U.S. Agriculture Department has posted 85 inspectors and supervisors to Nogales.
But they are grading the size and quality of tomatoes and other produce, checking for blemishes, not poisons. 

Inevitably, though, someone eventually discovers the tainted food that crosses the border.
In New York City, Evelyn Sternbach, a 32-year-old public school teacher, says she was "sick as a dog for three weeks" last year after eating some imported soft cheese.
She was five months pregnant at the time, and doctors she consulted were mystified by her high fever and acutely painful headaches.
After she miscarried, the hospital detected listeria monocytogenes -- an often deadly bacterium and a major source of food poisoning -- in her amniotic fluid. 

At a country club in Scituate, Mass., the lobster roll was the undoing of two elderly women last year.
One woman, Anne Merritt, was rushed by ambulance to the emergency room to have her stomach pumped.
Tests of the canned Canadian lobster showed it was contaminated by listeria and other bacteria, according to an FDA report. 

And two years ago in Anderson, Calif., a woman bit into an imported banana and cut her gums on an embedded razor blade.
The heavily stained blade appeared to "have been there from the time it got on the banana boat," according to the local police, though investigators never did determine exactly who tampered with the banana. 

Incidents such as these lead to scores of recalls each year.
Last year, there were five recalls of Danish cheese alone, as well as recalls of frozen rabbits from Hong Kong, Guatemalan chewing gum and canned tuna from American Samoa -- all of which had cleared Customs.
This year's recalls are just as diverse, ranging from powdered Japanese horseradish to Hungarian jam. 

"I recognized the need to deal with imports four years ago," says the FDA's Dr. Young.
He increased the number of inspectors even though it meant diverting manpower from inspections of domestically produced food.
As a result, the number of foreign shipments detained for suspected contamination has jumped 52% since 1985.
FDA inspectors have detected, among other things, bat fur in Chinese prune candy and illegal dyes in Hong Kong tapioca. "This effort is paying off," the commissioner asserts. 

Nonetheless, it's clear that the job is just too huge for the FDA, no matter how diligent its inspectors are.
James Jones, an FDA supervisor in Houston, is trying to cover 1,200 miles of the Gulf Coast and Mexican border with six inspectors.
At Laredo, Texas, he hopes to add a second border inspector because the volume of Mexican produce and other FDA-regulated imports is doubling every three years. 

The unmanned Canada-North Dakota border may be the most porous of all.
Until two weeks ago, FDA officials had never even surveyed what was coming across the border at Pembina, N.D., the busiest port of entry in the state.
Of 60,000 shipments of Canadian food grains and fish a year, the agency takes only 40 samples for pesticide testing. "We have no one who does just imports," says John Feldman, the Minneapolis district director.
Instead, the agency relies heavily on import notices from U.S. Customs officials and the cooperation of food importers and brokers. 

"This is essentially an honor system," says Rep. John Dingell, chairman of the oversight subcommittee, which has been conducting a broad investigation of FDA activities. "It works fine with an honorable people.
Unfortunately, we haven't found enough honorable people." 

One of the many scams pulled by unscrupulous importers is so-called port-shopping.
If the FDA rejects shipments at one seaport, some importers simply try a port where the agency's guard is known to be down.
Others blatantly distribute rejected food products in defiance of FDA notices of refusal.
A recent FDA survey found that more than 12% of all rejects ended up on U.S. dinner tables. 

One notorious importer was ordered by the FDA to ship a bacteria-contaminated load of frog legs back to India, says Edward Kellmer, a U.S. Customs investigator in Newark, N.J. Instead, the importer dipped the entire load in chlorine and tried to slip the disinfected -- and bleached -- frog legs back into the U.S.
The importer, convicted of smuggling, is now in another line of work. 

These illicit practices are fairly common because "the penalties are small and odds of getting caught are even smaller," says Mr. Dingell, a Michigan Democrat. 

The odds of apprehension are further reduced by factors beyond the FDA's control.
Almost every year, it seems, the agency must gear up for emergencies that sprout overseas.
In each crisis, FDA inspectors have to drop what they are doing and start enforcing embargoes. 

In 1986, there was the fallout from the Chernobyl nuclear-power disaster in the Soviet Union, triggering fears that radioactive contamination of Europe's food chain would result in "Chernobyl cheese" and other tainted products making their way into American supermarkets.
Last March, the discovery of two cyanide-laced grapes forced the FDA to embargo all fruit imports from Chile.
No sooner had the agency lifted that ban than it was blindsided by the mushroom crisis. 

"We suspected wild poisonous mushrooms had been commingled with other mushrooms, but the onset of symptoms was too swift for that," says Mr. Madden, the FDA microbiologist.
For weeks, conflicting lab results kept the FDA from taking immediate action against imports of the mushrooms. 

Reginald Bennett, an FDA microbiologist, was working 12 hours a day trying to solve the riddle, as the stacks of 68-ounce cans from the outbreaks rose higher and higher in his lab.
He even tried feeding Chinese mushroom soup to lab monkeys, but that didn't faze them.
On April 26, Mr. Bennett had a brainstorm: Perhaps heat from the thermal canning process had altered the molecular shape of the toxin in the mushrooms so that it couldn't be detected by traditional lab techniques.
By adding urea to the mushroom samples, he figured he might be able to restore the toxin to its original shape. 

"The whole thing just fell into place," says Mr. Bennett. "I came into the lab and by evening I knew it was staph." 

The mushroom problem forced FDA officials to grope through a black-market maze of counterfeit labels and canning codes from unregistered -- or defunct -- Chinese canneries.
It highlighted the FDA's vulnerability to such subterfuges and called into question the effectiveness of its registration system. 

Currently, to begin exporting canned foods to the U.S., a foreign plant need only obtain an FDA registration number and fill out a form describing its canning methods. "There is no approval process," says an FDA official. "Forms get filed with us; we accept the forms." On occasion, the official adds, an outside consultant evaluates certain types of canning processes for the FDA, not to identify unsafe plants but to spot trends "of possible concern." 

The FDA, meanwhile, seldom sends any inspectors overseas to determine why certain plants are shipping adulterated food to the U.S. market.
Last year, it inspected only 14 plants.
All were in the European Community, and all but one flunked.
So far this year, despite round after round of recalls, an FDA inspector has yet to set foot in a foreign cannery. 

Partly for this reason, the military conducts its own inspections before it buys from foreign canneries.
Two years ago, an Army inspector toured a tuna cannery in the Philippines and reported finding baskets of fish -- some "decomposed" -- sitting on a "maggot-covered floor" beneath roosting birds.
The plant's cooking process was "inadequate" and its water supply was polluted, the inspector said, adding, "This plant {is} capable of causing serious illness and death." 

The FDA, acting on the Army's report, ordered that all of the plant's shipments be detained at the docks until lab tests proved the tuna safe.
FDA inspectors later inspected the plant and recommended numerous improvements in sanitation.
As of last month, the plant had received a clean bill of health from the Philippine government and was again exporting to the U.S. 

The FDA, however, never did a followup inspection of its own. 

