.START 

Former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Samuel Pierce exercised his right against self-incrimination and refused to answer questions before a House subcommittee investigating the federal housing scandal. 

"On the advice of counsel and for the reasons given in my opening statement, I respectfully decline to answer the question and I assert the rights guaranteed me by the Fifth Amendment," Mr. Pierce said to each of eight questions from the panel's chairman, Rep. Tom Lantos (D., Calif.). 

While Mr. Pierce refused to respond to allegations of political influence-peddling at his agency, the subcommittee released documents indicating that former President Reagan hastily authorized the release of HUD funds in 1982 for a New Jersey project in an effort to boost a GOP senatorial candidate. 

Mr. Pierce had testified last spring that politics didn't play a role in the awarding of HUD funds.
But the documents showed Mr. Pierce was aware that President Reagan had authorized funding for a project in Ewing, N.J.
A memo indicated that Mr. Pierce learned of the funding hours before Mr. Reagan announced the award at a Sept. 17, 1982, campaign appearance on behalf of then-GOP Rep. Millicent Fenwick, who lost her Senate race a month later. 

Ironically, funds for the New Jersey award were diverted from a Durham, N.C., project that has figured prominently in the subcommittee's investigation of HUD. Other former HUD officials have testified that Mr. Pierce directly ordered that the North Carolina project be funded, despite opposition from his agency's professional staff.
A former law associate of Mr. Pierce's was among the project's boosters. 

Efforts to reach Mr. Reagan through his Washington attorney were unsuccessful yesterday. 

In his opening statement yesterday, Mr. Pierce, who had been subpoenaed by the subcommittee after refusing to appear voluntarily Sept. 15, complained that his lawyers haven't had sufficient time to review 48 boxes of HUD documents and other material he said may be relevant. 

"Under these circumstances, my counsel has advised me, and I have agreed, to assert my constitutional rights under the Fifth and Sixth amendments by refusing to answer questions before this subcommittee," he said, reading his statement in a small, crowded hearing room.
The Sixth Amendment guarantees the right to counsel. 

Republican and Democratic members of the subcommittee were unanimous in praising the fairness they said Chairman Lantos accorded to Mr. Pierce. "It's been four months since his last testimony," said Rep. Christopher Shays (R., Conn.). "It defies logic that he needs more time." 

Paul Perito, Mr. Pierce's chief counsel, later complained that the panel appears to have prejudged his client.
Because his firm was hired Sept. 6, "we just didn't have enough time" to prepare Mr. Pierce, Mr. Perito said. 

Mr. Lantos noted several times that using the Fifth Amendment doesn't imply any guilt on Mr. Pierce's part.
Robert Wise (D., W.Va.), however, said Mr. Pierce's refusal to answer questions "does nothing to quell the trial that's going on in public opinion." He added, "Ultimately, you are the one who loses by this." 

The HUD scandals, Mr. Lantos said in his opening statement, "include political influence peddling, rampant waste, blatant favoritism, giveaways and gross mismanagement of HUD programs." Mr. Pierce ran HUD during the eight years of the Reagan administration. 

Television and radio broadcasts of Mr. Pierce's appearance weren't allowed, because his lawyers invoked a House rule that permits subpoenaed witnesses to bar broadcast equipment.
His lawyers also requested that House members who aren't members of the subcommittee be excluded from the proceedings.
They weren't. 

Mr. Lantos rebuked Mr. Perito when he tried to ask if a decision had been made on his request to exclude non-subcommittee members from questioning his client. "At this hearing," Mr. Lantos told Mr. Pierce's attorneys, "you are in fact a potted plant." The statement alluded to the Iran-Contra hearings, when Oliver North's attorney, Brendan Sullivan, said, "I'm not a potted plant." 

Outside the hearing room, Mr. Perito complained of being "muzzled by the chairman." His associate, Robert Plotkin, said that "we have to wait and see" if Mr. Pierce will answer questions at his next scheduled appearance Oct. 27. 

Jill Abramson contributed to this article. 

