.START 

Monday's provincial election results have revived the debate over Quebec's place in -- or out of -- Canada. 

"Everybody presumed independence as an issue was an historical artifact.
I don't think you can say that anymore," said Claude Forget, a Quebec cabinet minister in the early 1970s and now a vice president of a Montreal financial-services concern. 

Premier Robert Bourassa and his Liberal Party were returned to office with an overwhelming majority in Monday's election, taking 92 of the 125 seats in the National Assembly. 

The revitalized Parti Quebecois took only 29 seats.
But it grabbed 40% of the popular vote, the same share of the vote it garnered in a 1980 referendum on Quebec independence.
And the Parti Quebecois put Quebec independence front and center on its platform this year after dropping it in the 1985 election.
The results of Monday's vote are a victory of sorts for party leader Jacques Parizeau, 59 years old, a rotund professor and former Quebec finance minister. 

A year ago, many observers predicted the Parti Quebecois was near death and would be replaced by a new nationalist, but not separatist, opposition party.
Instead, Monday's election results put the Parti Quebecois back in business. 

Mr. Bourassa will also come under attack from another direction.
The Equality Party, a new group that ran candidates in English-speaking districts, traditionally Liberal Party strongholds, won four seats.
The Equality Party was created to protest Mr. Bourassa's decision last year to ban English on exterior commercial signs.
But the unexpected success of the Equality Party frees Mr. Bourassa to take a harder -- not softer -- nationalist line. 

"Mr.
Bourassa has proved he can win without English-speakers," said Bernard St-Laurent, a political columnist with the Montreal Daily News. "The natural pressure on the Liberals will be to move closer to the Parti Quebecois." 

Meanwhile, the unraveling of the Meech Lake constitutional accord, which would recognize Quebec as a "distinct society" within Canada, could give Mr. Bourassa another push toward some form of independence.
Mr. Bourassa calls the accord "the absolute minimum" Quebec requires to remain in Canada.
If the accord doesn't go through, as now seems likely, Mr. Bourassa will be forced to come up with an alternative plan. 

"The country is in big trouble," Mr. St-Laurent said. 

"Meech Lake is a test," said Soucy D. Gagne, president of Sorecom Inc., a public-opinion polling concern. "A majority of Quebeckers are federalists but not unconditionally," Mr. Gagne said, echoing almost word-for-word Premier Bourassa's victory speech Monday night. 

The revived debate over independence will be different in at least one significant way from the battle in the 1970s.
Then, fears about the impact of independence on the economy were a dominant theme.
Now, after six years of robust economic growth, those fears don't exist. 

"Everything seems possible in a climate of (economic) confidence," Mr. Forget said. "People are more willing to take a bold step they might have judged as too risky in other times." 

But Mr. Forget notes that the debate is just beginning. "I believe there will be a resurgence of the soul-searching -- on both sides -- about Quebec's place in Canada we saw in the past," he said. "We're starting to talk about (independence) again but only hypothetically." 

