.START 

STATES MUST COPE with any federal tax break for capital gains. 

And many are concerned about the effect on revenue bases and forecasts.
Most states conform to federal law for simplicity and are expected to continue to, Robert Ebel of the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations says.
But Tax Notes magazine found no eagerness for gains-tax-cut proposals in surveying state tax officials.
Some Democratic officials were critical of the leading plan -- a cut to a 19.6% top tax until 1992, then indexing of asset values. 

Many officials recall how revenues were jerked up in 1986 and repressed in 1988 after Congress phased out a capital-gains preference. "Unlike the federal government, we have to balance budgets," says New York Tax Commissioner James Wetzler, a Democrat.
Schemes, like the pending bill's, to shift income into earlier years cause wild, unpredictable swings in tax revenue that upset budget forecasts and can cause deficits, he says; if Congress narrows the tax base to spur activity, states will wind up taking the same "supply-side gamble." 

Asset indexing would produce more predictable results, though, he adds. 

WHAT WILL STATES DO about capital gains is a big question for investors. 

Combined U.S. and state rates are especially important in high-tax states such as New York, Massachusetts, and California; as federal base rates have fallen, state tax has become a bigger factor in figuring net yields.
But what states do and what investors reap may depend on how Congress forges any cut in capital-gains taxes, says Arthur Andersen & Co.
If the new law exempted part of a gain (the bill would tax only 70% of gain at a top 28% rate) or indexed asset values (adjusting them for inflation), states probably would follow suit and investors would benefit, the CPA firm says.
But if Congress simply set a flat low tax rate for gains, the firm says, states might find it easier to refuse to go along, at least not all the way.
That would limit benefits for investors and enlarge the impact of state taxes on their decisions. 

SEPARATE MAILINGS of 1989 capital-gains and Medicare forms are planned. 

As Congress debates proposed 1989 cuts in capital-gains and Medicare-catastrophic-care taxes, the IRS is making plans to get correct return forms to taxpayers on time, late in December.
Ten million are affected by the Medicare tax and 12 million to 15 million by capital gains, with some overlapping.
All will get the basic 1989 forms in the general mailing, with cautions about these two matters.
Once the IRS knows what law applies, it will rush correct instructions and any needed form to the printers. 

People who owe the Medicare tax won't get that form in the basic package; instructions will say why and tell them to expect an additional mailing.
People who may have capital gains will get the current Schedule D, but will be told to expect more instructions.
The IRS hopes that it and the printers can move fast enough to get the supplemental mailings to taxpayers at about the same time as the general mailing, says Ellen Murphy, IRS public-affairs director. 

The extra mailings are expected to add $8 million to the $120 million cost of printing and posting 1989 forms. 

IF WITHHELD TAX reported by a third party exceeds the sum shown on a taxpayer's return by $5 or more, the IRS would have to notify the taxpayer of the excess, under a provision in the bill.
In March, the IRS conceded that it had failed to credit some taxpayers for withheld taxes they had neglected to claim on their returns. 

FOREIGN INVESTORS must file returns disclosing reliance on tax treaties that conflict with tax law, under proposed IRS rules, even if they otherwise wouldn't file at all.
Requirements are broad and penalties severe.
Steven Hannes of Deloitte & Touche, CPAs, contends they will make the use of treaty clauses burdensome. 

REMEMBER 1984?
It was Reagan vs.
Mondale, who was seen as "dovish." IRS private ruling 8936002 finds "reluctantly" that an unidentified charity didn't campaign for Mondale and needn't lose its exemption, although it backed TV ads promoting peace and arms control.
The ads named no names and could be viewed as nonpartisan. 

LOOKING AHEAD, indexing will offer a small income-tax cut again in 1990. 

Tax brackets and standard deductions are adjusted for consumer-price-index rises in the year ended Aug. 31.
Publisher Research Institute of America figured the changes in advance of the IRS and finds, for example, that the lowest tax rate, 15%, will apply until 1990 taxable income passes $32,450 on a joint return (up from $30,950 in 1989) or $19,450 on a single return (up from $18,550).
Basic standard deductions will go to $5,450 on a joint return from $5,200 and to $3,250 on a single return from $3,100. 

The added standard deductions for those 65 or older or blind will rise to $650 from $600 for a married person and to $800 from $750 for a single person.
Those deductions are doubled for someone who is both over 65 and blind.
The minimum gross-income threshold for filing a return and other thresholds affecting rates will increase. 

Subject to indexing for the first time in 1990, the personal exemption is to rise to $2,050 from $2,000. 

BRIEFS: Ineffective tax control is costing American Samoa $2 million a year in lost revenue and impeding it from reaching self-sufficiency, the Interior Department's inspector general asserts. . . . The U.S. plans to begin talks with Italy in the week of Oct. 9 on updating their 1984 tax treaty. 

