.START 

American Telephone & Telegraph Co. has galvanized the struggling European market for electronic messaging with its planned purchase of Istel Ltd., one of Britain's biggest players in the field. 

The planned #180 million ($291 million) acquisition, announced yesterday as expected, marks the U.S. communications giant's entry into Europe's $1.5 billion market for electronic transmission of corporate documents and messages over computer-controlled phone lines.
The AT&T move "will stimulate the whole business," said Timothy Stevens, a London-based industry consultant with Input Ltd. Though fast-growing, he added, the European market is small and "needs a kick." 

AT&T's purchase -- and extra investments it says it may make -- will bring much-needed cash to speed development of such services in Europe.
And as the biggest buy-out in the field so far, the AT&T move will also prompt its competitors to boost their own investments in Europe.
A pack of acquisition-hungry rivals already has assembled.
About 20 U.S., European and Japanese companies vied against each other and AT&T this year for the prize of buying Istel in an auction held by its board. 

For the past few years, U.S. businesses have been wiring themselves rapidly to send each other invoices, orders, memos and other messages over computer networks, rather than through the mail or by courier.
European businesses, by contrast, have been more cautious.
A recent survey by Logica PLC, a British consulting firm, found just 16% of big European corporations have begun using such "electronic document interchange" services.
But interest is rising fast: An additional 17% said they would begin electronic document transmissions soon. 

Such surveys, along with industry forecasts of 20%-plus annual sales growth for Europe, have the world's computer and telecommunications companies ready to move.
Besides AT&T, such U.S. giants as International Business Machines Corp. and General Electric Co. (unrelated to Britain's General Electric Co.) have been expanding their electronic messaging businesses around Europe.
The local competition includes Siemens AG of West Germany, Fiat S.p.
A. of Italy and the International Computers Ltd. unit of Britain's STC PLC. 

A decade of telecommunications deregulation in Britain has made this country the hottest market in Europe for electronic document interchange, and the first port-of-call for multinationals such as AT&T seeking a European berth.
Istel ranks second in Britain's EDI market, after International Network Services Ltd., a 60-40 joint venture between International Computers and GE. "We welcome any move which stimulates the uptake of (document interchange and other electronic message services) on a global scale," said a spokeswoman for the ICL-GE venture, commenting on the AT&T move. 

As reported, the Istel purchase would be AT&T's first big move into document interchange and related services in Europe or the U.S. AT&T hopes eventually to import some Istel services and products to the U.S., said John Berndt, president of AT&T's International Communications Services division.
These may include Edict, an Istel computer-software system that manages document interchanges.
Moreover, Mr. Berndt said AT&T is prepared to fund Istel's planned expansion in Europe, which last year provided only about 1% of Istel's Britain-dominated revenue of #85.1 million. 

But the steep sales price, 25 times Istel's expected net income this year of about #7 million, shows just how hungry AT&T is for a foothold in electronic messaging.
Besides its strength in document interchange, Istel's computer networks carry more than half the package-holiday travel bookings made electronically in Britain.
Istel also provides an electronic information-service that offers British life-insurance and mortgage price quotations.
Still, document interchange and these other electronic-communications services currently represent just 20% to 30% of Istel's total revenue, although Istel Chairman John Leighfield forecast that figure will reach 60% in the mid-1990s. 

Istel's biggest business today is in an odd field for AT&T: 38% of Istel revenues come from managing the computers of British car maker Rover Group PLC. Istel was a division of Rover, a British Aerospace PLC unit, until an Istel management buy-out in 1987.
Included in AT&T's purchase price for Istel is an undisclosed sum to buy out Rover's remaining 23.6% Istel stake.
Istel's other revenue sources include planning complete computer systems for clients; setting up computerized factory-automation systems; and running back-up computers in case a client's main computers fail.
AT&T said it doesn't plan to shed these businesses. 

The AT&T purchase also increases its competition with British Telecommunications PLC, Britain's main phone company.
For years, British Telecom has been an AT&T customer, buying AT&T phone equipment, and an AT&T partner, handling the British end of Britain-U.S. phone calls.
But last month, British Telecom pounced on AT&T's own turf by agreeing to pay $355 million for Tymnet, a McDonnell Douglas Corp. unit that runs an Istel-type network in the U.S. AT&T's purchase in Britain will make it a direct competitor to British Telecom in managing the basic computer networks on which electronic document interchange and other services run. 

Yesterday, officials of both phone giants played down the significance of their growing rivalry.
British Telecom called itself "fairly neutral" about AT&T's purchase, and AT&T's Mr. Berndt denied speculation that his company may seek a license to compete with British Telecom's main business of providing Britain's basic phone service. 

But AT&T didn't take any chances of a diplomatic tiff with its old partner.
Mr. Berndt said he sent his British Telecom counterpart word of the purchase on Monday night -- along with a complimentary advance copy of the news release. 

