.START 

When a company goes bust, it's always better to be a junk-bond holder than a stockholder.
At least, that's what junk investors think. 

But there's a little-known principle in bankruptcy law that sometimes allows shareholders to wrest control of an insolvent company from its creditors.
That rule now is being tested in a battle over Revco D.S., a prominent $1.3 billion leveraged buy-out of 1986 that entered bankruptcy court in 1988 and recently has been floating a proposal to restructure its debts. 

Usually, in U.S. bankruptcy proceedings, creditors are kings and they take whatever value remains in an insolvent company.
Junkholders often get 90% of the reorganized company's stock in compensation for forgiving most of their loans, while shareholders may get wiped out. 

But there's an exception, called the "new value" exception.
It says shareholders who add new money and management skills to a bankruptcy reorganization deserve a big piece of the pie, because the resulting company will be healthier.
Of course, if shareholders get more value, creditors get less, because the pie usually isn't big enough to feed everybody. 

The "new value" principle dates from the 1930s but seldom is applied in bigger bankruptcy cases.
Now, bankruptcy players say the Revco case affects everyone who holds bonds of debt-laden concerns.
If Revco shareholders win, they say junkholders might lose out to equityholders in other bankruptcy cases. 

Currently, a similar principle is being tested in the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel case, where Goldman Sachs, holder of 34% of Wheeling's stock, has said it might raise new equity and debt for that company's reorganization.
Revco's preliminary plan would sell 55% of the new Revco stock for $150 million in cash to the closely held company's majority shareholders, putting them in the saddle.
Senior creditors would be paid in full.
But junkholders would get new Revco stock and bonds valued at only about 25 cents on the dollar.
Together, Revco junkholders and trade creditors would get 45% of new Revco stock, instead of 94%, as they wanted. 

The stakes are high: Revco isn't exactly prospering now, but investment bankers involved in the current battle say the company's shares might be valued at more than $1 billion in five years' time, if all goes well. 

As more LBOs unravel, the "new value" exception "will be the issue of the 1990s," predicts David Schulte of Chilmark Partners, financial adviser to Revco junkholders. "Nobody will want to own a junk bond again" if Revco stockholders, who paid $19 million for Revco common in the buy-out, can "stiff" junk buyers who paid $760 million for unsecured notes, Mr. Schulte says. 

Revco says it hopes its proposal "will lead to intensive, good faith negotiations to reach a consensual plan to get out" of bankruptcy court.
Revco has sole right until Oct. 31 to file an official plan but doesn't yet have a target date for filing.
Meanwhile, Revco's preliminary proposal turned up yesterday in federal bankruptcy court in Ohio as part of an unrelated filing. 

The nation's second-biggest drugstore chain was taken private in December 1986 by management and Salomon Brothers, which holds Revco junk as well as shares.
Now, Revco junkholders fear the company's plan to reorganize under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy law might be "crammed down" their throats. 

Led by veteran vulture investor Talton Embry of Magten Asset Management in New York, junkholders are fighting Revco and its shareholders with court motions, tense negotiations, nasty letters and a reorganization plan of their own.
Their chief targets are Jeffrey Steiner of Banner Industries and his designees on Revco's board, whom they think are the movers behind Revco's proposal. 

Banner, an aggressive acquirer of companies in recent years, is an indirect but powerful Revco player.
In 1988, Banner bought a European investment fund that held a big stake in D.S. Partners, which now owns 60% of Revco common stock and wants to invest $150 million in the reorganization to maintain a controlling stake. 

But with Revco insolvent, the company "belongs to its creditors," Mr. Embry recently wrote to Revco directors.
Mr. Embry's clients own about $120 million face value of Revco's unsecured notes, bought for about 50 cents on the dollar before the bankruptcy-law filing.
Revco's various junk bonds currently are quoted at anywhere from five cents to 50 cents on the dollar. 

Mr. Embry heads the Revco noteholders committee, whose reorganization plan would give junior creditors 94% of Revco common.
Under this plan, junkholders would offer to raise $75 million of new equity for Revco.
They'd give D.S. Partners less than 1% of Revco common and Revco managers, 4% to 5%.
Some think Revco junkholders, who'd get almost 40% of new Revco common under the company plan, are being greedy. "I don't know why they'd be jealous" of the majority shareholders, says Nathan Meyohas, general manager of D.S. Partners and a Revco director in Mr. Steiner's camp. 

While creditors think Mr. Steiner and D.S. Partners control Revco -- they've asked the court to let them look into that issue -- Mr. Meyohas says that isn't so.
Banner has three designated directors on Revco's board.
After filling two vacant seats yesterday, Revco now has a 10-man board. 

Mr. Meyohas thinks the best plan should win. "We're saying, and Revco management is saying, the company needs $150 million, not $75 million" of new cash, as junkholders are proposing. "The sour experience of the past suggests there should be a little cushion allowing for mistakes," Mr. Meyohas says.
Asked if an outside investor might pay more than $150 million for 55% of Revco, he says, "the company is not for sale." 

Harvey Miller, a lawyer for D.S. Partners, says the "new value" principle has prevailed in several smaller reorganizations in recent years, including Jartran, which rents trailers.
In those cases, "the equity people got most of the new equity for putting in new money," he says. 

But Chilmark's Mr. Schulte says that in the 1980s "$200 billion of public junk bonds were sold on the assumption that a bond comes ahead of a stock" when a company fails.
Should equity investors be allowed to "sprinkle a little dough on a leveraged pie" and own a company after it defaults? 

