.START 

SHEVARDNADZE URGED total destruction of U.S. and Soviet chemical weapons. 

Taking Bush's chemical-weapons reduction plan a step further, the Soviet foreign minister proposed that the two nations "radically reduce or completely destroy" stockpiles of such arms even before a treaty is reached by a 40-nation parley in Geneva.
Bush had offered Monday to cut stocks by 80%.
In a speech to the U.N. General Assembly, Shevardnadze also said Moscow would halt nuclear tests and stop making weapons-grade plutonium and uranium if Washington reciprocates. 

Bush said he was pleased by Moscow's reaction to his initiative, adding that the superpowers had achieved "common ground" on arms issues. 

PIERCE REFUSED to testify about HUD, invoking the Fifth Amendment. 

The former housing secretary exercised his right against self-incrimination and refused to answer questions before a House subcommittee investigating allegations of mismanagement and fraud at the federal agency.
The panel, however, released documents indicating that former President Reagan authorized the release of HUD funds for a New Jersey project in 1982 in an effort to boost a Republican senatorial candidate's campaign. 

Pierce, who was subpoenaed by the panel after failing to appear Sept. 15, complained that his lawyers haven't had sufficient time to review material. 

VIETNAM COMPLETED the withdrawal of its troops from Cambodia. 

Thousands of Hanoi's soldiers and army vehicles crossed the frontier from Cambodia, ending Vietnam's 11-year occupation and leaving the Phnom Penh government to fight alone against the Khmer Rouge guerrillas.
Vietnam and the Cambodian regime it installed have expressed hope that the pullout will ease their economic and diplomatic isolation and eventually resolve the last major conflict in Indochina. 

China and other nations that supply arms and political backing to the rebels haven't agreed to halt support for a three-party guerrilla alliance. 

The European Community proposed more than $650 million in new aid next year to help Hungary and Poland restructure their economies.
At a meeting in Brussels, an EC Commission spokesman said the amount could be increased since several nations suggested they could eventually raise their commitments. 

The Senate rejected an effort to restore cuts from fiscal 1990 appropriations for the D-5 Trident missile and the Pentagon's Star Wars project.
The action came as the chamber approved revisions adding nearly $8.5 billion to a $279.6 billion spending bill to fund the Pentagon. 

Suspected Communist rebels ambushed and killed two U.S. civilians working at an American air base in the Philippines, shortly before Quayle arrived to discuss the future of U.S. military installations in that country.
The attack, about 50 miles north of Manila, came amid growing opposition to U.S. military camps in the Philippines. 

Charleston, S.C., began recovering from last week's lashing by Hurricane Hugo.
Tap water was determined safe, some stores reopened, and truckloads of food, blankets, generators and other necessities reached the city.
But about 80% of the area's residents remained without electricity. 

China's Communist Party leader insisted that those arrested last spring in Beijing's crackdown on a student-led pro-democracy movement were criminals.
Jiang Zemin called the protests "a counterrevolutionary rebellion," and he refused to rule out more executions. 

Moslem militia chieftains rejected political changes being considered by Lebanon's legislators, and said the country's 14-year-old civil war would continue.
In Beirut, police said a three-day-old truce was "generally holding" without serious violations. 

Hungary's Parliament adopted liberal laws lifting most limits on travel abroad and emigration.
In Czechoslovakia, about 100 East Germans left West Germany's Embassy after an emissary from East Berlin vowed that they could emigrate within six months if they returned to their homeland. 

A judge in Medellin dismissed charges against two reputed leaders of Colombia's drug-trafficking network, who were accused of killing the country's attorney general, a Bogota newspaper said.
A lack of evidence was cited.
In Cartagena, tourists fled after a bomb killed at least two people at a hotel. 

Helms has hired former civil-rights activist James Meredith as a domestic-policy adviser.
Meredith, 58, who in 1962 became the first black to enroll at the University of Mississippi, recently called integration a "con job." Helms, a GOP senator from North Carolina, is up for re-election in 

Investigators in Paris have found traces of a Czechoslovak-made plastic explosive in the wreckage of a French DC-10 airliner that exploded last week over Niger, killing 171 people, the newspapers Liberation and Le Parisien reported.
A similar discovery reportedly was made following the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet over Scotland. 

