.START 

CBS Inc. signed an agreement with Turner Broadcasting System Inc. for cable rights to the Winter Olympics in 1992 and 1994, giving Turner's new TNT channel a programming boost and helping CBS defray a small portion of its own costs. 

The TNT deal would be the first time a broadcast network has sold a portion of exclusive Olympics programming to a basic-cable rival.
It is likely to raise questions of saturation, and the pact also may draw criticism from CBS affiliates. 

CBS alone will air up to 120 hours of Winter Games, 27% more time than the ABC network aired for the disappointing 1988 Winter Games.
Now TNT will have 50 hours of its own daytime events, plus 50 hours of late-night reruns of CBS's prime-time coverage. 

The cable deal with Turner, the company that put CBS into takeover play several years ago, will give CBS at least $50 million total from Turner for the two Winter Games. 

That is a tiny sum given CBS's rights fees, which total $543 million.
But CBS may get another $10 million by handling all national ad sales for TNT and sharing the proceeds with the cable partner. 

(CBS will pay $243 million for rights to the 1992 Winter Games in Albertville, France, and $300 million for the 1994 Games in Lillehammer, Norway.
The Olympic Games had occurred every four years, but after 1992 the Summer and Winter Games will alternate every two years, starting with winter 1994, then summer 1996, and so forth.) 

Philip A. Jones, immediate past chairman of the CBS affiliates board, said stations must accept that some cable programming will be necessary to offset CBS's huge costs.
He praised the TNT deal for protecting affiliates by giving CBS control of TNT ad sales. 

But the CBS-Turner pact could upset some affiliates.
The saturation issue will become important to local stations if the Winter Games lack drama and if the American team does poorly, said Mr. Jones.
Another snag may be one of time-zone considerations. 

Virtually all of CBS's prime-time coverage will be taped events that happened earlier in the day; CBS will have daytime coverage only on weekends.
But TNT will cover events from 1 p.m. to 6 p.m. and thereby include contests as they happen. 

CBS therefore will be careful to give TNT only the events that CBS won't want to air, on tape, later in the evening, said CBS Sports President Neal H. Pilson.
Indeed, the onetime adversaries turned partners haven't yet worked out exactly which events CBS will give Turner. 

Terence F. McGuirk, president of Turner Sports, said he's confident that TNT will end up with "a full cross-section" of attractive events, even though CBS has first choice. 

