.START 

Ford Motor Co. moved to grab a stake in Jaguar PLC to head off an imminent deal in which General Motors Corp. was seeking to buy 30% of the British auto maker. 

Top GM executives met during the weekend of Sept. 16 and 17, and the agreement to buy the Jaguar stake was a key item on the agenda, say individuals familiar with the unusual session.
Ford, though, got wind of the pending pact between GM and Jaguar and two days later -- Sept. 19 -- announced that it was seeking to buy 15% of Jaguar's shares on the open market.
The unwelcome move angered Jaguar officials and put the pending GM-Jaguar pact on hold. 

GM and Jaguar now are reassessing their options, say people close to the situation.
Those individuals add that GM and Jaguar may soon announce some sort of agreement in which GM will take a significant stake in Jaguar. 

Ford executives, in explaining their "preemptive strike" for Jaguar shares, previously said they were reacting to an anticipated bid for all or part of Jaguar by GM.
It wasn't previously known, however, that GM and Jaguar were on the verge of announcing an agreement for GM to take a 30% stake. 

GM and Ford, the world's two largest auto makers, clash every day in the car and truck market, but rarely over acquisitions.
The last such instance occurred in 1985, when the two companies were rival bidders for Hughes Aircraft Co. GM won by entering a complex bid valued at just above $5 billion, about $1 billion more than Ford was willing to pay. 

GM and Ford believe that the allure of the Jaguar name, as well as the distinctiveness of its cars, would make a linkup with Jaguar worthwhile.
Top planners at GM, it's understood, recommended some time ago that a GM purchase of all or part of Jaguar would help diversify the company's products in the growing luxury-car segment of the market. 

Jaguar shares topped the most active list in the U.S. national over-the-counter market yesterday, with almost 2.2 million shares changing hands.
But the price dropped slightly -- to $8.84 bid, down 44 cents -- apparently because investors believe the price ran up too far after Ford's Sept. 19 announcement. 

Ford already has purchased just over 1% of Jaguar shares, and must wait until the middle of next month to receive U.S. regulatory clearance to buy its 15% goal.
The British government has a "supervote" share that prevents any buyer from purchasing more than 15% of Jaguar's stock, without that government's approval before the end of 1990. 

GM's once-troubled European operations have produced a sharp turnaround in the past two years, and GM is eager to continue its momentum in the marketplace there.
GM's Opel marque has a solid image and a recent string of highly successful new models, but it doesn't have Jaguar's highbrow appeal. 

Ford officials, for their part, also have long coveted a link with Jaguar, which explains their "preemptive strike" strategy despite their traditional disdain for anything resembling a hostile takeover.
Ford, whose European operations also are doing well, is also discussing possible links with Sweden's Saab-Scania AB, but it's clear that Jaguar is closer to its heart. 

"I'd much rather pull up to the office in the morning driving a Jaguar than a Saab," one top Ford executive confided recently. "Saab's cars are dowdy; Jaguar's are exciting." 

Jaguar does have considerable problems, including the lack of financial resources to develop new cars.
It has launched only one totally new car in this decade.
GM and Ford apparently believe that they could provide Jaguar with the financial resources to develop cars that would capitalize on the lure of the Jaguar brand name. 

Recently, Jaguar reported a plunge in first-half pretax profit #1.4 million ($2.2 million) from #22.5 million. 

The risk for both GM and Ford, though, is that Jaguar may find itself overwhelmed by the new Japanese luxury cars.
Honda Motor Co. entered the luxury-car field with its Acura division three years ago, and Toyota Motor Corp. and Nissan Motor Co. plan to launch their luxury marques -- Lexus and Infiniti -- this fall. 

