.START 

Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady said the world's leading industrial nations are coordinating economic policies well and that the evidence for that is continued noninflationary economic growth. 

Addressing the plenary session of the annual meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, Mr. Brady noted that the dollar has declined this week on the foreign exchanges.
Over the weekend, the world's seven leading industrial nations declared the dollar's recently increased value inconsistent with longer-term economic fundamentals, and they agreed to intervene in foreign exchange markets to undercut the greenback. 

But yesterday, West German Finance Minister Theo Waigel cautioned other members of the so-called G-7 countries about the limits of intervention in the foreign exchange markets. "We should also address the economic fundamentals and form a judicious policy mix," Mr. Waigel said. 

For the moment, that mix won't include a rise in West German interest rates, though.
Mr. Waigel's chief aide, Hans Tietmeyer, said his country wouldn't consider raising interest rates until the current round of wage negotiations with labor unions is completed.
Some analysts have advocated raising interest rates in Japan and West Germany to reverse the recent rise in the dollar's value.
Besides those two countries, the G-7 includes the U.S., France, Britain, Italy and Canada. 

In his speech, Mr. Brady warned against judging the success of economic cooperation on the basis of short-term developments. "Pundits would have us judge ourselves in terms of yesterday's rally or drop in the exchange markets," but policy coordination should be judged "by whether the world economy is experiencing solid growth -- and it is," he said. 

Mr. Brady also hailed progress made on improving the U.S. trade deficit. "The U.S. trade deficit declined by more than 20% in 1988 and is continuing to decline this year," he said. 

But the U.S. Treasury secretary came in for some criticism at the IMF meeting. "It is essential that governments reduce remaining fiscal imbalances promptly," IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus said in his speech to the annual meetings. "This task is particularly urgent in the United States, where the private savings rate is now very low," he said, alluding to the continuing U.S. budget deficit. 

Mr. Brady extolled the U.S.-backed debt strategy to the IMF and World Bank.
He said that since Mexico and its bankers reached a proposed agreement following the strategy, domestic interest rates in that country have dropped to 34% from 55%, cutting the government's interest payments on its domestic debt by as much as $10 billion a year.
He said over $2 billion of private capital had flowed back into Mexico. "A cloud has been removed from Mexico's horizons, and the world knows it," he declared. 

Mr. Camdessus also stressed the need to continue lending to heavily indebted countries. "Financing has to be sufficient and timely," he said. "The banks shouldn't think that reticence on their part will lead to a larger contribution from the multilateral organizations." 

World Bank President Barber Conable, in his speech to the meetings, departed from his usual theme of economic development to attack military spending. "All nations have the sovereign right to defend themselves," he said, "but let us hope that in the changing political climate in the 1990s, resources are increasingly allocated to more productive purposes, in industrial countries as well as developing countries." 

Eduardo Lachica contributed to this article. 

(See related story: "Brazil's Sarney Says Nation Is 'Struggling' to Secure A New Lending Package" -- WSJ Sept. 27, 1989) 

