.START 

Human reproduction has always depended on the laws of nature more than the laws of man, but the advent of test-tube babies and frozen embryos has forced society to find methods to cope with the new ways of creating and storing human life.
In the U.S., the issue made headlines last week when a Tennessee judge awarded custody of seven frozen embryos to their biological mother, against the wishes of her ex-husband. 

The public quarrel of Mary Sue and Junior Davis has highlighted the ethical questions surrounding in vitro fertilization treatment.
Many equally troubling questions remain about the legal status of frozen embryos and the ethics of keeping human life on ice.
While these questions are only just being raised in the U.S., some have already been examined in the Australian state of Victoria, which pioneered IVF technology 10 years ago.
Victoria has passed a series of laws based on the premise that a human embryo has certain basic rights that deserve to be protected -- including the right to life -- and encouraging the "adoption" of unwanted embryos where suitable. 

Twelve of the world's first 16 test-tube babies were born in Melbourne, Victoria, where the technology that enabled the Davis embryos to be frozen was developed.
The world's first frozen-embryo baby was born here in 1984.
In another first, two Australian girls, conceived at the same time in a laboratory dish, were born in Melbourne 16 months apart. (The embryo that would later become the younger sister had been frozen for 16 months.) 

In 1982 Victoria set up the world's first parliamentary committee to look at ways of regulating IVF, embryo preservation, and surrogacy.
Before any laws could be passed, however, the ethical issues made headlines in 1984 with the news that the world's first test-tube "orphans" were in a deep freeze in a Melbourne laboratory awaiting a life-or-death decision following the sudden death of their multi-millionaire Californian parents.
Most attention has focused on the legal issue of whether the embryos have inheritance rights to the $8 million estate left behind by the couple -- Elsa Rios and her husband, Mario, who died without leaving wills. 

The eggs were taken from Mrs. Rios at a Melbourne IVF clinic in 1981, were fertilized by an anonymous donor and then frozen while waiting to be implanted back into Mrs. Rios; an earlier implant attempt had failed.
The embryos lost their "mother" and step-father when a plane crashed in South America. 

Common law tradition in Australia, as in the U.S., has long provided rights of inheritance to embryonic human beings who have been conceived but have not yet been born, though their inheritance was contingent on being born alive.
About 90 women volunteered to carry and "adopt" the Rios embryos, including a small number of women in the U.S. 

Close friends say Mrs. Rios intended to return to Melbourne to have the embryos thawed and implanted back into her body.
They say she hoped an IVF baby would help replace her only child, a 10-year-old daughter from her first marriage, who had been killed in 1976 gun accident. 

With pressure mounting to settle the Rios-embryos case, the Victoria government assembled an expert panel of doctors, lawyers, clergy and social workers to decide their fate.
The panel recommended that the embryos be removed from cold storage since their parents had died without leaving instructions.
This sparked public outrage.
A coalition of groups, including the Australian right-to-life movement, insisted that the plight of the orphan embryos be brought before the state legislature, which subsequently passed a law preserving abandoned embryos in case another infertile couple wanted them. 

The Rios embryos continue to be controversial.
Doctors are reluctant to implant them in any of the women who have volunteered to receive them, out of concern that that the genetic material used to assemble the embryos had not been tested for AIDS. Doctors also believe there is little chance the embryos would survive thawing as the techniques used to freeze them were relatively primitive. 

In 1987, in the wake of the Rios case, Victoria passed the first legislation specifically drafted to control IVF programs.
Under the Infertility (Medical Procedures) Act, IVF centers are required to keep a register of information including "particulars of any abnormality identified at or about the time of birth and of the parents of the child and of the donors of gametes used in the procedures." They are also required to send details of abnormalities to the state Health Commission, where they are entered in the register. 

IVF clinics are also required to keep confidential records about donors and their gametes so that people who develop from donated embryos can have access to information about their biological origins.
Such records theoretically could also be used in the future to prevent IVF incest and unwitting marriages or sexual relationships between genetic relatives. 

The law also requires IVF centers to monitor the quality of genetic material supplied by donors.
This requirement is aimed at reducing the chance of an infectious or genetic disease being passed on to a child.
Some would-be donors are rejected. 

In a bid to prevent the stockpiling and deterioration of frozen embryos, IVF centers, encouraged by a law that requires them to review the status of frozen embryos after five years, have put a five-year limit on the period of time embryos can be kept in storage.
This prevents the implantation of embryos years after they were frozen, avoiding situations in which a woman formed from an IVF program could later be implanted with, say, her own brother or sister embryo. 

Another aim of the law is to limit the number of embryos that can be created by ensuring that a couple uses IVF only as a last resort.
Couples are required to undergo 12 months of counseling before being accepted into an IVF program. 

The law also requires IVF centers to establish prenatal "adoption" programs to find parents for embryonic "orphans." Donor couples are required to sign consent forms that specify what will be done with their embryos, eggs and sperm if they aren't able to give instructions.
The consent forms include the options of prenatal adoption, allowing embryos to die, or making them available for government-approved research.
The consent forms are intended to cover a range of situations in which a couple may donate an embryo to a second couple.
This could happen if, for example, a woman becomes pregnant and she and her husband don't need the spare embryos, or if there is an illness, accident or death and a couple can no longer use their embryos. 

In cases in which one of the couple withdraws consent -- as in the Davis case in the U.S. -- the matter is referred to the state health minister, who assumes guardianship of the embryos on behalf of the state government.
The minister has the final say on whether to allow an embryo to die or donate it to a third party.
If he wishes it to be used for experimentation, that decision must be approved by a parliamentary committee.
The donor couple has the right to appeal to the courts to settle a consent dispute. 

Who are the parents of a child formed from an embryo implanted in a woman who isn't the biological mother?
Under Victoria's law, the couple whose gametes were used to build the embryo surrender all rights to and responsibilities for any resulting child.
The recipients of the donated embryo become the legal parents.
Many legal questions on this issue remain unanswered, including what action would be open to the donors if their embryo is given to another couple when they asked the IVF program to let it die, or if they are accidently given someone else's embryo. 

The Victoria government has also examined the issue of research on embryos.
It has banned the creation and freezing of embryos specifically for experimentation.
Research on spare embryos, although recommended in earlier government committee reports, is currently under review.
A Senate report to the federal Parliament in 1987 recommended that human embryos be protected from "destructive" research from the time of fertilization. 

In years to come, Mr. and Mrs. Davis's argument over custody of their embryos may be regarded as almost trivial when compared with the fate of the thousands of frozen embryos stored at clinics around the world.
At present no one seems to know what to do with them.
In Victoria, there are about 2,000 frozen embryos; Australia-wide, there could be as many as 10,000.
The deputy director of legal affairs of the Council of Europe, Fritze Hondius, said in Australia earlier this year that there could be as many as 20,000 frozen embryos stockpiled across Europe. 

In his decision in the Tennessee case last week, Circuit Judge W. Dale Young declared that the embryos are not property, but children. "From fertilization, the cells of a human embryo are differentiated, unique and specialized to the highest degree of distinction," Judge Young said. "Human life begins at conception." 

A major issue in the trial was how to describe the embryos.
Mrs. Davis said she considers herself "the mother of these embryos," which she called "the beginning of life." Mr. Davis said he did not consider the embryos "life." 

Science and technology have far outpaced the law and traditional ethics.
There are even more stunning prospects for the future: cloning; growing human embryos in the laboratory as a source of organs for transplant surgery; women giving birth to their own brothers and sisters or grandchildren; widespread womb-leasing and surrogacy; animal-human and human-robot hybrids; the use of artificial, animal or dead women's wombs to incubate human embryos; and genetic engineering.
The world is on the verge of a reproductive revolution, the outcome of which may depend on how it first treats frozen human embryos. 

Mr. Pirrie is a reporter in Melbourne for The Age. 

