.START 

KID SICK?
More employers search for ways to help parents come to work. 

With more young mothers in the labor force and more fathers willing to assume a larger share of the parental load, increasing numbers of companies see economic benefits in providing alternative child care for employees with ailing youngsters at home or an absent baby sitter.
Honeywell Inc., for one, figures it saves $45,000 in nine months by underwriting 80% of the cost of emergency care. 

Approaches vary.
Apple Computer Inc. runs an "isolation room" at its day-care center for sick children who aren't considered infectious.
National Medical Enterprises operates a Wee Care center at one of its hospitals to look after mildly ill kids for $2.50 an hour.
In New York, seven companies team in a pilot program to offer emergency care at employees' homes.
Bank of New England provides a referral service where workers can find help. 

Boeing Co. ponders the issue for a year. "We are aware of the changing nature of the work force," it says. 

ENTREPRENEURSHIP isn't growing.
It just looks that way. 

People nowadays aren't any more interested in starting their own businesses than their forebears of a generation ago, say David Evans and Linda Leighton of National Economic Research Associates.
With the aging of the Baby Boom generation, there simply are more people today with the experience, education and tax incentives to fit the entrepreneur's mold. 

According to the economists, older males are more likely than their younger colleagues to be out on their own.
Similarly, the more education, the more likely a man will have his own incorporated business.
Ironically, though, male high-school dropouts -- also growing in numbers -- are more likely to be running unincorporated businesses.
Among women, entrepreneurs are apt to be mothers with advanced degrees who have children three years old and younger at home. 

SHORTAGE OF TEACHERS for some classes spurs aggressive recruiting drives. 

New York City can't find enough teachers of math, science, special education and English as a second language, and it expects the need to reach critical proportions over the next five years as 40% of its faculty reaches retirement age.
In Richardson, Texas, officials complain that "everybody's scrambling for minority teachers." 

To cope with its problem, New York City runs job fairs and staffs a recruiting office in Puerto Rico.
New Jersey clears provisional appointments for college graduates without education degrees who pass a national teacher exam.
Roanoke, Va., seeks minority teachers through specialized publications.
Dallas looks for bilingual teachers along the Mexican border; it also offers a $1,000 bonus for bilingual talent.
Austin tries such rewards but gives them up as a bust for attracting and retaining teachers. 

Dallas hires minority recruiting firms to target blacks and Hispanics but finds it does better on its own. 

PENSION COVERAGE for U.S. workers is "broad but incomplete," the Employee Benefit Research Institute says.
It says 59% of all nonagricultural workers aged 16 or older worked for employers with pension plans.
But three-quarters of these workers actually participated and only two-thirds of them were entitled to benefits. 

WORKING WOMEN are less likely to smoke than full-time homemakers or unemployed women, University of Pennsylvania biologist Ingrid Waldron finds.
Married people are much less likely to smoke than divorced ones. 

HYATT HOTELS CORP. closes its Chicago headquarters tomorrow so 400 corporate employees can learn what hotel work is really like.
Darryl Hartley-Leonard, the president, will be a doorman and front-desk clerk. 

BOSTON RECRUITS 50 young adults to take the school year off for community service.
They'll be paid $100 a week plus a $5,000 scholarship.
Nearly $1 million of private contributions supports the effort and a related summer program. 

LIKE FATHER, like son, often decides who chooses a hazardous career. 

"The greater the probability of death associated with an occupation, the more likely a son will follow his father into that occupation." So finds Joan Mahoney, a researcher at the State University of New York at Buffalo, in a study of 4,660 men in 347 occupations, ranging from logger, ranked the most-hazardous blue-collar trade, and pilot, the most-dangerous white-collar work, to typist and usher, among the safest of jobs.
Sons believe they can control the dangers involved, she speculates.
And they're also aware of the standard of living their fathers' jobs have earned. "The higher the income associated with the occupation, the more likely the son will follow in occupational footsteps," she says.
But the greater the son's educational level, the less likely he is to follow.
And whites are more likely to pursue their father's careers than nonwhites. 

"The battles won and benefits reaped by {nonwhite} fathers may not be passed along to sons," she suggests. 

THE CHECKOFF: The University of Maryland offers a 12-week course on how to be a nanny. . . . Just the facts, please] Buck Consultants advises that terminated pension plans that haven't yet distributed all their assets hold their funds in what are called "wasting trusts." 

