.START 

The National Mortgage Bank of Greece, which faces Justice Department charges that it was involved in a $700 million money-laundering scheme, agreed to pay a $2 million fine to settle separate Federal Reserve Board charges. 

The state-owned National Bank of Greece, which owns 47% of the mortgage bank, also agreed to pay a $125,000 fine. 

The Fed said the mortgage bank's U.S. offices, which have limited powers, were improperly accepting deposits.
Neither the National Bank of Greece nor the mortgage bank admitted to the charges. 

The settlement allows the mortgage bank to reopen its U.S. offices after it submits a compliance plan to the Fed.
The five offices have been closed since mid-June, when the Justice Department filed criminal charges against the mortgage bank, alleging that it helped Greek-Americans evade federal income taxes by funneling their money out of the U.S. and into secret bank accounts in Greece.
The bank has denied the criminal charges. 

The leaders of half the Arab world's people assembled in Sanaa, the capital of North Yemen.
Their mission: to lay the basis for an economic bloc to serve a population of 80 million. 

Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, who is later this week to fly to France and the U.S., was the first to arrive, followed by Iraq's Saddam Hussein and King Hussein of Jordan.
The three leaders and North Yemen's President Ali Abdullah Saleh founded the Arab Cooperation Council in Baghdad in February and met again in Alexandria in June. 

This summit is intended to establish a practical framework leading ultimately to a common market following the pattern of the European Community. 

Accords ready for the leaders' signatures cover such topics as trade, the war against drug trafficking, agriculture, education and migrant workers. 

A new electronic voting system designed to speed up decision-making in the Soviet parliament broke down when deputies tried to use it for the first time.
The system's display showed "3A" as the number of votes in favor when President Mikhail Gorbachev called on members of the Supreme Soviet to vote on cutting discussion of the agenda.
Deputies then proceeded to vote by hand. 

Panda Motors Corp., a small company with close ties to Rev. Sun Myung Moon's anti-communist Unification Church, plans to build an automobile-manufacturing plant in China's Guangdong Province.
A spokesman for Panda, based in Vienna, Va., said that the company hoped to clear some remaining hurdles with the Chinese government soon and that Panda plans to start operations as soon as next April.
The Chinese news agency Xinhua said the plant would cost $250 million. 

Swedish aerospace and automaker Saab-Scania AB's new combat plane JAS 39 Gripen will cost 10 billion kronor ($1.51 billion) more than the calculated 45 billion kronor over the next 10 years, Swedish press reports said.
Newspapers, quoting a secret report to be delivered to Defense Minister Roine Carlsson Oct. 2, also said the accident during a JAS prototype test flight in February cost almost 3 billion kronor.
Cost overruns in developing the new combat plane may force Sweden to buy a foreign aircraft, probably American, said Sweden's military chief, Gen. Bengt Gustafsson. 

Malaysia hopes to get a slice of the $7.86 billion anti-drug allocation of the U.S., Deputy Home Minister Megat Junid Megat Ayob said.
Mr. Megat and Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad said that the drug problem was Malaysia's "No. 1 enemy." In Malaysia, anyone convicted of drug trafficking gets a mandatory death sentence.
Since 1975, 229 people have been sentenced to death, of whom 81 were hanged.
The others are awaiting appeals or dates for hanging. 

The feasibility of a fixed link between Spain and Morocco across the Straits of Gibraltar will be discussed during the first official visit to Spain by Morocco's King Hassan II this week.
Such a link -- either by bridge or tunnel -- is considered economically unviable.
But even the willingness to discuss it reflects an improvement in longstrained relations between the two countries.
Last year, King Hassan canceled a scheduled visit to Spain after Madrid voted in favor of a United Nations resolution calling for self-determination in the Western Sahara. 

Although slow to acknowledge the threat of AIDS, mainly because of concern about hurting tourism, the Thai government is now helping to marshal an AIDS-prevention campaign. 

From January to June last year, the percentage of drug users who turned themselves in for rehabilitation and were found to have the virus rose to nearly 30% from nearly zero. "It got into a few needles and it suddenly just exploded," says Eugene Vadies, a Bangkok-based consultant for the World Health Organization's Global Program on AIDS. 

Nearly 10,000 Thais are recorded as being infected with the virus, 81 have AIDS-related diseases and 25 have the full-blown disease.
Officials fear that the same explosion of cases that has occurred among drug users could easily afflict the nation's booming sex industry.
Thailand has an estimated 600,000 female prostitutes.
Male prostitutes are estimated to be in the thousands. 

Public-health officials say the campaign could slow the rate of new cases, but they expect a huge medical bill in the next few years as those infected reach the extreme phases of the disease. 

East German leader Erich Honecker emerged after a long absence through illness to receive credentials from two new ambassadors, the official East German news agency ADN reported. . . . A spokesman for the Paris Opera Ballet said that Rudolf Nureyev's five-year contract as the ballet's artistic director ended in August and attempts to sign him on for three more years had been fruitless thus far.
The contract dispute centers on the length of time the ballet star must spend each year with the company. 

