.START 

Chemists say they are on their way to solving a recycling riddle that will let consumers continue to use the plastic shopping bags, bottles, cups and other items to which they have become accustomed. 

Right now, the inherent chemistry of plastics makes it impractical and uneconomical to melt such items into reusable scrap.
As a result, an increasing number of communities, supermarkets and fast-food restaurants are banning the material altogether. 

"At stake is the future of the plastics industry," says Darrell Morrow, the projects manager of a major recycling effort involving industry and government at Rutgers University. "We are convinced that we can reclaim plastics and find economical uses," he says. 

But the task isn't easy, and researchers are trying a variety of approaches.
The problem is that different plastic resins, because of their different molecular structures, are like oil and water -- they don't mix.
And most plastic products are made up of several different resins.
A single beverage bottle, for example, contains at least three.
Melted together, multiple resins form a dark mush of little economic value. 

Chemical companies have been experimenting with this brittle lump to make such prosaic items as bricks, lumber, fence posts, park benches and insulation.
But such products, generally flammable and weak, have limited uses. "There's no doubt that ultimately we have to be able to separate the resins and recycle them to {high value} products," says Donald Genson, business director of solid waste management at Dow Chemical Co. 

"My starting material is the black mush," says Bruce Nauman, a chemical engineer at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y.
He says that he and several colleagues have been able to separate a mixture of six different polymers -- used to make such different products as beverage bottles, oil containers, films, cups, packaging materials and labels -- that account for more than 90% of plastic trash. 

His technique involves dissolving the mixture in a solvent of xylene at different temperatures.
Polystyrene, a packaging material, dissolves in the solvent at room temperature; the next polymer -- low density polyethylene, used in plastic films -- dissolves at 75 degrees Celsius; and the rest dissolve at temperatures that reach a high of 138 degrees Celsius for the polyvinyl chloride used in motor oil containers. 

"It is a process that can get the polymers essentially in the form they left the factory," Mr. Nauman says. "This is the most innovative recycling technology in the world today." 

But Rutgers's Mr. Morrow has more faith in the physical separation technique being pursued at his university's Center for Plastic Recycling Research. "We have stayed away from the chemical process, because that won't be economical," he says. 

Rutgers's approach calls for careful separation of different plastics at the consumer level -- Coca-Cola bottles from Styrofoam cups, for instance -- and further sorting at collection centers.
Different resins are then separated using a mechanical process that takes advantage of differences in their gravity and electric charges.
Elaborate filtering mechanisms further purify each resin.
Sidney Rankin, another researcher on the project, says that two of the most widely used plastics that go into beverage bottles and milk containers "can be recycled as virgin resins." 

Researchers at Dow and Du Pont Co. are trying an altogether different tack aimed at bypassing the need for separating resins.
This approach is based on the fact that many new resins are created by manipulating the chemical structures of existing ones.
The researchers are developing molecules that are attracted at one end to the molecule of one resin and at the other end to the molecule of another resin, thereby binding two incompatible resins into a plastic that may have useful properties for new applications. 

The researchers decline to disclose details of the so-called compatiblizers, or binding agents. "At this stage of the game, we don't want to tip our hands to competitors," says Dow's Mr. Genson. 

Under intense political pressure, almost all the major companies have plunged into recycling ventures.
Last April, Du Pont formed a joint venture with Waste Management Inc., and last June seven polystyrene makers, including Dow, Amoco Corp. and Mobil Corp., formed a company to open recycling centers across the country to reclaim the material that goes into throw-away cups and fast-food containers. 

But no matter how well the resins are separated and purified, researchers doubt that any recycled plastics will find their way back into food and beverage containers any time soon.
They say the fear of oils, chemicals and metals contaminating the recycled material would make it hard to get Food and Drug Administration approval for such use. 

Rutgers's Mr. Morrow says most uses will probably be in non-food areas.
He says that Procter & Gamble Co. is currently evaluating containers made from recycled soft drink bottles to package a liquid detergent.
Other major uses, he says, could be in automobiles. 

