.START 

When Felice Casson heard that Banca Nazionale del Lavoro's Atlanta branch made unauthorized loans to countries besides Iraq, he called Rome for more information. 

The Venice magistrate's interest was understandable.
For two years, he has been investigating illegal arms sales by Italian companies to Iraq's archenemy, Iran.
And he believes he's got convincing evidence BNL branches in Paris, Turin and Rome were helping to finance them. 

Mr. Casson has said BNL's former chairman, Nerio Nesi, and former director general, Giacomo Pedde, are under accusation of being accessories to the illegal international traffic of armaments.
Mr. Nesi and Mr. Pedde have denied wrongdoing. 

Mr. Casson says he doesn't know whether the scandal surrounding BNL's Atlanta branch, which allegedly issued some $3 billion of credits to Iraq without management authorization, will have any bearing on the case he has been building.
He has talked informally with the Rome magistrate investigating the state-owned bank's Atlanta branch but adds that "the Rome investigation is still in the most preliminary stage." 

The title magistrate embraces many positions in Italy's judicial system, including public prosecutors, judges and investigative attorneys. 

Mr. Casson hopes to complete his inquiry within a few months.
So far, he adds, he hasn't received any information from Rome about BNL Atlanta's lending. 

The accusations against Mr. Nesi and Mr. Pedde are part of a larger investigation by Mr. Casson into illegal weapons sales to Iran between 1983 and 1988.
Since 1967, Italy has required Italian companies to gain governmental approval before entering negotiations for arms-export sales.
In early 1987, the government prohibited the issuance of any more licenses to export arms to Iran or Iraq, which at the time were fighting the Gulf War.
The hostilities have since ended. 

Three other BNL staffers are accused by Mr. Casson of being accessories to illegal arms sales, while eight others are being investigated.
Mr. Casson has also accused some government officials involved in the granting of arms-export licenses. 

Mr. Casson says state-owned BNL took part in several international banking pools, along with several French banks, that financed the sale of weapons to Iran.
The largest single transaction involved $131 million of ammunition that on paper was destined for France, but which actually went to Iran, he says. 

No one disputes the exports in question involved military materials, unlike in the Atlanta case, where investigators have only found evidence of exports that could be used in either civilian or defense applications. "They were things like ammunition shells and gunpowder," Mr. Casson says. 

