.START 

At 41, Wade Whitehouse is like a baited bear.
He lunges from side to side attempting to escape the torments of his life, but they are too many.
He is afflicted by shame, by anger, by lost love and betrayed hopes. 

At his core, he is confused and damaged beyond repair by the beatings his father inflicted and his ill-understood inability to resist.
Although near-maddened by the accumulated pain, and although his struggles to free himself more often than not only turn the screws that hold him more tightly, Wade clings to a belief in his capacity for goodness. 

If only, he thinks, he could sweep away his rage and his fear he could break free to be a good father, husband and son. "He could become a good man.
That was all he wanted, for God's sake." 

But that is out of reach.
Wade's wild swings only bring more pain until he becomes not a good man, but truly his father's son. 

Wade, simultaneously repellent and deeply sympathetic, is literary kin to Bob Dubois, the protagonist of Russell Banks's excellent "Continental Drift." But Wade is a greater achievement and "Affliction" (Harper & Row, 355 pages, $18.95) is an even finer novel.
Mr. Banks, himself a victim of an alcoholic, abusive father, has superb command of his muscular, distinctive prose.
As Wade strives against his afflictions, the shortness of breath is ours.
From inside the chambers of Wade's heart we see the walls closing in. 

Mr. Banks's terrain is a landscape of limited horizons where even modest goals are unattainable.
Despite the confines of their disappointed lives, however, Mr. Banks's characters are dreamers and strivers.
They've been cheated, or cheated themselves, out of a better deal in life, and they know it.
They just don't understand it.
But Mr. Banks does and he knows that people are responsible for the choices they make.
He has enormous sympathy for his characters, but he doesn't let them off the hook.
Bad decisions bring painful consequences.
Good intentions aren't enough.
Regret doesn't earn redemption. 

The setting, as in earlier Banks novels, is small-town New Hampshire bypassed by the American dream.
The economic good times of the 1970s and 1980s didn't penetrate into these valleys locked in their long winters. "For the tens of thousands of years that these narrow valleys and abrupt hillsides have been populated by human beings, life has been characterized by winter, not summer," Mr. Banks writes. 

Wade and townsmen like him work at mind- and body-numbing jobs (Wade drives a snowplow and is the town policeman, which principally means he directs traffic outside the school early each morning), but they are distantly aware of wealth elsewhere.
Poverty presses them down and makes them feel more ashamed, more inadequate. 

In their financial lives these men always get the short end.
They pay too much for flawed homes.
Their cars constantly need repair.
The free-market system may be working well elsewhere, but in Mr. Banks's New Hampshire, the human system is breaking down.
Lawford, 20 minutes north of Hanover, is a town in which people's dreams are dead before they are 40. 

Wade had many dreams.
And he is so brilliant a creation that a reader suffers with Wade one minute only to shake his head the next with those others in Lawford who watch Wade's bad choices lead him deeper into despair.
Wade's violence appalls, but he is no freak.
His hopes stir recognition.
The dents life has made in his spirit are familiar. 

In Mr. Banks's world, the death of young dreams cracks the heart.
Teen-age sweethearts Wade and Lillian, both children of alcoholic fathers, dreamed of escaping Lawford's patterns; dreamed they were special. "He had promised he would not drink or fight.
He had promised.
Many times they had decided together that these were stupid activities, drinking and fighting, fine for their stupid insensitive friends to indulge in, perhaps, but not for Wade Whitehouse and Lillian Pittman, who were superior to all that, who were finer, nobler, more intelligent than their friends.
Because they had each other, they did not need anyone else; they believed that." 

Wade struggled so hard against the trap of Lawford life, but now Lawford has corralled him and the young, like Jack Hewitt, cringe at becoming Wade: ". . . the idea of ending up in your forties living a life like Wade's made him shudder and avert his gaze and go quickly back to talking about baseball." 

"Affliction" is told by Wade's younger brother, Rolfe, who escaped the poverty and violence of Lawford by going to college and becoming a high school teacher in the Boston suburbs.
Wade's story, Rolfe explains, "is my ghost life." Like Wade, he says, "I have been ashamed and angry practically since birth" and thus is uniquely qualified to tell the tale. 

Wade's undoing is an unrelenting story set against a backbeat of rifle fire from the hills.
Deer season opens as "Affliction" begins and closes as the novel ends.
As his life is falling apart, Wade is determined to understand a killing that took place in the woods near Lawford. 

He cannot, of course, understand the central mystery of "Affliction." What happened to his life? 

In the fullness and the power with which it answers that question, "Affliction" achieves its brilliance. 

Mr. Lescaze is foreign editor of the Journal. 

