.START 

The acquisition of Istel, a British information company, fits neatly into American Telephone & Telegraph Co. 's goal of getting 20% of its revenue from overseas by the mid-1990s. 

In an interview at AT&T headquarters, Chairman Robert E. Allen said AT&T's best hope for growing overseas revenue rests with its Network Systems and international long-distance business.
Because domestic growth from Network Systems, which sells equipment and software to phone companies, is relatively flat, AT&T needs to sell more overseas.
Annual revenue for the telecommunications giant is about $35 billion. 

"Growth rates in the U.S. aren't enough to sustain the business here for an extended period of time given the capital requirements" of making and selling telephone network equipment, Mr. Allen said. "It's a healthy business, now.
But to keep it that way, you need to experience some growth somewhere." 

AT&T has targeted certain countries for expansion based on the openness of the market and how AT&T's technology fits into that market.
Mexico is one such strategic market, Mr. Allen said.
But AT&T doesn't plan to bid for the Mexican phone company, which the government has said it wants to privatize. "I don't have any interest in acquiring a phone system in Mexico, but we'd love to be a supplier," Mr. Allen said.
However, "if a country said, 'Look, we'll give you all our business, but you have to buy the phone company, ' I'd look seriously at that," he said. 

Eastern Bloc countries and the Soviet Union, where phone service is poor, are long-range opportunities for AT&T, Mr. Allen said.
Just before the unrest in China, AT&T had agreed to form a joint venture there making transmission equipment.
That venture hasn't been terminated, Mr. Allen said, but it will probably take longer than expected to execute. 

As is usual in the fall, AT&T is setting budgets for next year and trying to determine if it has too many employees to serve its markets.
Mr. Allen said he believed AT&T still has too many employees, but it will take executives a few months to decide if that number can be reduced through attrition, another early retirement program or some other method. 

An AT&T spokesman said the company will probably decide within the month whether to sweeten its pension benefits to encourage certain employees to retire early. 

Mr. Allen also said that the company is studying how to improve profits from its private branch exchange, or PBX, business.
The market is plagued by price-cutting. "I don't know of anyone who is making much money," in the PBX business, Mr. Allen said. 

Meanwhile, AT&T is continuing to change its culture from that of an in-grown, self-absorbed regulated concern to that of a competitive concern focused on serving customers, Mr. Allen said.
In a telling departure from past practices, AT&T only last week put out an organization chart showing who reports to whom under a new structure announced last spring that created 19 business units, abolished the office of the chairman and established a 12-man executive committee. 

"We used to draw up organization charts then say 'Okay, you guys figure out how this works, ' " said Mr. Allen. "Now we figure out how things work," then develop an organizational structure that fits the concept, he said. 

AT&T also has changed its focus on acquisitions.
It once studied making large, multibillion-dollar acquisitions.
While Mr. Allen still looks at such large deals, now "it's more of a string-of-pearls approach as opposed to (making) a big deal," Mr. Allen said. 

Executives here also said that AT&T is considering manufacturing its own facsimile machines and could someday make its own personal computers.
AT&T recently agreed to have a new line of personal computers made by Intel Corp.
Its fax machines are currently made under an agreement with Japan's Ricoh Co. 

Finally, Mr. Allen said AT&T continues to study whether to expand into the credit card or charge card business by expanding the services offered by its calling cards.
AT&T recently hired Paul Kahn, an executive from First Chicago Corp., as general manager, consumer financial services, to help it determine whether or not to change the business of its calling cards, which are now used by customers only for charging long-distance phone calls. 

