.START 

Continuing a management shake-up, Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc. said Peter Ackerman, a former top deputy of Michael Milken, will be sent to London. 

Until recently, many Drexel clients believed Mr. Ackerman would be the successor to Mr. Milken, the indicted, former junk-bond king. 

But in March, another top Milken aide, John Kissick, was placed in charge of junk-bond sales and trading, giving him some of the most important responsibilities formerly handled by Mr. Milken.
The sale, underwriting and trading of the high-risk, high-yield bonds is where Drexel has made the bulk of its money. 

Drexel said Mr. Ackerman, 42 years old, would relocate from Drexel's junk-bond headquarters in Beverly Hills, Calif., to the 350-person London operation as of Jan. 1.
Mr. Ackerman will retain the position of director of international capital market services, which makes him responsible for developing Drexel's global junk-bond sales effort and international investment banking activities. 

The announcement reinforced speculation on Wall Street that Mr. Ackerman had lost a power struggle with Mr. Kissick.
But Drexel officials denied this. 

They said Mr. Ackerman was never in line to succeed Mr. Milken because Drexel has been forced in its recent settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sever the sales and trading desk of its junk-bond operations from corporate finance, Mr. Ackerman's specialty.
Mr. Ackerman declined to comment. 

Drexel officials said that Chief Executive Officer Frederick Joseph asked Mr. Ackerman about six months ago to go to London -- perhaps only for a few years -- to investigate business opportunities for Drexel in Europe, including the East bloc.
At the same time, Mr. Ackerman will continue to work on investment-banking transactions, such as Sir James Goldsmith's hostile bid for B.A.T Industries PLC. 

However, London has never been a powerful post at Drexel.
It currently doesn't have the London presence of such rivals as Goldman, Sachs & Co., Morgan Stanley Group Inc., Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., Salomon Inc. and First Boston Corp. But, said a Drexel spokesman, "We're developing a long-term business plan {in Europe}, revolving around areas where we have or could have niche businesses, where we have something to add and contribute.
Mr. Ackerman will be there to help develop this plan." 

Mr. Ackerman has also been elected to Drexel's 26-member board, the company said.
Separately, Drexel announced the election to the board of Mohamed W. Khouja and Michel Delloye as representatives of Cie.
Bruxelles Lambert, a Belgian holding company that owns more than a third of New York-based Drexel. 

The move by Mr. Ackerman comes during a year of considerable turmoil at Drexel, particularly in its junk-bond operation. 

Drexel has pleaded guilty to six felony counts in connection with various securities-law violations, paid $650 million in penalties and agreed to a high level of SEC control of its internal operations.
People familiar with the case said the government investigated Mr. Ackerman in connection with Drexel's role in Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. 's buy-out of Safeway Stores Inc., but the government found no wrongdoing and decided not to charge him. 

Associates of Mr. Ackerman said his move makes sense because of the current slowdown in junk-bond-financed takeover bids in the U.S. and the potentially greater opportunities for such bids in Britain and Europe.
Drexel officials denied suggestions that Mr. Ackerman would welcome an opportunity to distance himself from Drexel's junk-bond trading operation in Beverly Hills. 

"I'd been trying to persuade Peter to take this job for six months," Drexel's Mr. Joseph said in an interview. "The B.A.T transaction requires Peter's expertise.
I think Peter will be the most knowledgeable financier in leveraged financing in Europe." Mr. Joseph described Mr. Ackerman -- who has a Ph. D. in international politics -- as "totally powerful and competent" and said his move is "the antithesis of sending him out to pasture." 

Until Drexel agreed to settle charges brought by the SEC, Mr. Ackerman worked side by side with Mr. Milken and played a key role in structuring the various junk-bond financings that were sold by Mr. Milken and his assistants.
Mr. Ackerman started at Drexel in 1973 and joined Drexel's junk-bond desk in Beverly Hills in 1978. 

It's unclear how well Mr. Ackerman will be able to run Drexel's transactionstructuring activities in Beverly Hills from his London outpost.
But Mr. Joseph said distance shouldn't be a problem, to judge by past experience at Drexel. 

"When we moved the high-yield department to the West Coast from the East Coast, people speculated it couldn't work," he said. "But we find talking by telephone is exactly as efficient as walking down to the trading floor and talking face to face." 

