.START 

Congress violated the constitutional right to free speech when it tried to force the Washington, D.C., city council to allow a private Catholic university to discriminate against homosexual students, a federal appeals court has ruled. 

The case arose from a suit brought by two gay-student groups against Georgetown University, in which the groups sought to compel the school to grant them official recognition and certain campus privileges.
A lower court held that a local human-rights statute barred Georgetown from discriminating on the basis of sexual preference. 

In response, Congress last year passed a law making federal funds appropriated for Washington contingent on the city council's adopting a measure that protected religious organizations' right to discriminate against gays. 

The city council sued the U.S. in federal district court, attacking the constitutionality of Congress's action.
In a unanimous opinion, a three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit upheld the district court's ruling that Congress violated the council members' right to free speech by compelling the local legislators to approve a particular bill. 

The appeals-court panel, in an opinion written by Judge Harry Edwards, ruled that legislators' votes "constitute 'speech' protected by the First Amendment." Judge Edwards cited long-standing Supreme Court precedent that the "manifest function of the First Amendment in a representative government requires that legislators be given the widest latitude to express their views on issues of policy." 

Before Congress intervened, Georgetown had agreed to allow the gay-student groups access to university facilities and services, although the school said it wouldn't formally "recognize" or otherwise endorse the groups. 

The Supreme Court will hear arguments Monday in a related case considered to be one of the most important civil-rights disputes pending before the high court.
The Court will review the constitutionality of a lower court's contempt citation against city council members in Yonkers, N.Y., who refused to comply with a court order directing them to build public housing as a remedy for past acts of racial discrimination. 

STATE HIGH COURT upholds use of DNA fingerprinting in a criminal case for the first time. 

The Virginia Supreme Court ruled unanimously Friday that DNA evidence was admissible in two capital cases against Timothy W. Spencer, known as the "South Side Strangler," who has been convicted and sentenced to death for four rapes and murders in Virginia.
It was the first time a state's highest court ruled that DNA fingerprinting was admissible in a criminal case. 

The judges ruled that "no dissent whatsoever {exists} in the scientific community" concerning the reliability of the DNA printing technique.
Blood samples from Mr. Spencer were genetically matched with semen found at the scene of two of the murders. 

The ruling contradicts a finding by Bronx Supreme Court Judge Gerald Sheindlin last month in the murder trial of Bruce Castro.
Following an exhaustive hearing, the New York trial judge found that DNA evidence of a genetic match linking Castro to a double murder was unreliable.
Scientists from the testing company, Lifecodes Corp. of Valhalla, N.Y., recanted their prosecution testimony and testified for Castro, saying that Lifecodes' testing procedures and its results were flawed. 

Lifecodes performed the DNA tests in all four of Mr. Spencer's cases, but Mr. Spencer's lawyer, Jeffrey L. Everhart, of Richmond, said the company didn't use the same procedures as in the Castro case.
He said he will appeal the death cases to the U.S. Supreme Court. 

Mr. Everhart said he was unable to find any expert witnesses to testify against the accuracy of genetic fingerprinting. 

THE TRIAL of the former president of Beech-Nut Nutrition Corp. ended in a mistrial. 

A federal jury was unable to reach a verdict in the case of Niels L. Hoyvald, who was charged with selling apple-flavored sugar water labeled as pure apple juice for babies. 

Judge Thomas Platt of the U.S. District Court in Brooklyn, N.Y., set Nov. 6 as a new trial date.
Thomas Roche, executive assistant to the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District, said the jury was deadlocked at 10-to-2 and then at 9-to-3 for convicting Mr. Hoyvald in the mail-fraud and conspiracy case.
Mr. Hoyvald was convicted in February 1988 of 351 counts of willfully violating federal food and drug laws.
That conviction was overturned in March on technical grounds. 

Mr. Hoyvald couldn't be reached for comment.
The company, a unit of Nestle S.A. of Switzerland, didn't have any comment. 

PROSECUTORS WON'T SEEK a new indictment against Michael Milken by the Oct. 1 deadline. 

But Assistant U.S. Attorney John K. Carroll, who is leading the prosecution of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. 's former chief of junk-bond operations, said the delay in the expanded indictment will be "weeks, not months." The deadline was set by prosecutors at a hearing last month. 

Mr. Carroll disclosed the change of plans at a hearing held yesterday before U.S. District Judge Kimba Wood.
Mr. Milken was charged last March in a 98-count indictment alleging that he had committed racketeering and fraud.
Also indicted were Mr. Milken's brother, Lowell Milken, and Bruce Lee Newberg, a former Drexel junk-bond trader. 

Other current and former Drexel employees likely to be charged in the new indictment include, Warren Trepp, a Drexel trader, and Peter Gardiner and Allen Rosenthal, former traders, according to individuals familiar with the investigation. 

Also at the hearing, Mr. Milken's lawyers challenged an attempt to subpoena his American Express bills from the American Express Co. for 1983 through 1987. 

Judge Wood has postponed a ruling on the matter, pending a written explanation from prosecutors for why they are seeking the bills. 

LISA ANN JONES will remain free on bail pending the appeal of her perjury conviction despite objections of federal prosecutors.
In federal court in New York, Judge Leonard B. Sand rejected the government's request that bail not be granted.
The judge ruled that the 26-year-old former trading assistant at Drexel Burnham Lambert can remain free on a $100,000 personal recognizance bond.
The government argued that Ms. Jones's appeal of the March conviction raised no substantial questions that could change the trial's outcome.
Last month, she was sentenced to 18 months in jail and fined $50,000 for lying to a grand jury looking into allegedly illegal stock trades. 

PAUL A. BILZERIAN'S request for a new trial has been denied by a federal judge on the eve of the former Singer Co. chairman's sentencing.
U.S. District Judge Robert J. Ward rejected Mr. Bilzerian's arguments for a new trial and said the court correctly ruled that Mr. Bilzerian could be questioned about advice from his lawyers.
Mr. Bilzerian, who was convicted in June on nine felony counts related to his takeover activities, is scheduled to be sentenced this morning by Judge Ward in New York. 

