.START 

Philips Industries Inc. said its board approved a proposed management-led leveraged buy-out for a premium price of $25.50 a share, or $750 million. 

The news sent the company's stock soaring to $24.625, up $4.625 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

The announcement comes on the eve of a turnover in the Dayton, Ohio-based company's top management.
Earlier this year, the maker of parts for building and transportation industries announced the planned retirements of its founder and chairman, Jesse Philips, and its vice chairman and chief executive officer, Robert H. Brethen.
Both men support the proposed buy-out and stand to pocket millions of dollars if it succeeds. 

"It enables them to go out in a blaze of glory," said Elliot Schlang, an analyst at Prescott, Ball & Turbin. 

Under the agreement, Philips will merge with MLPI Holdings Inc., a unit of Merrill Lynch Capital Partners Inc. MLPI Holdings, which was formed for this acquisition, has received commitments from Merrill Lynch & Co. for as much as $250 million in subordinated debt and from Merrill Lynch Capital Appreciation Fund II for as much as $150 million of equity. 

Philips said its management would have a significant equity stake in MLPI Holdings, but that the Merrill Lynch Appreciation Fund would have a majority share. 

The $25.50 per-share offer represents a significant premium over the price the stock has been trading at prior to yesterday's runup.
The company's 52-week high is $23.25. 

The premium price, Mr. Schlang said, derives from Philips' excellent track record.
Its management has excelled in keeping costs down and has had 13 consecutive years of increased earnings in spite of the cyclical nature of the construction industry.
The company also anticipates record earnings of $1.70 a share for the year ending March 31, 1990, Mr. Schlang said. 

For this year ending last March 31, Philips earned $46.3 million, or $1.61 a share, compared with $43.2 million, or $1.52 a share for the previous year.
Sales increased to $941.7 million from $692.5 million. 

Mr. Philips, who will retire Oct. 23 on his 75th birthday, owns 6.6% of 28.9 million shares outstanding.
If the proposed buy-out is completed, he will gain $48.6 million.
The 62-year-old Mr. Brethen, who will retire Dec. 31, owns 1.3% of Philips' stock outstanding, and his gain will be $9.6 million. 

Philips hasn't named a successor for the posts of chief executive or chairman, however, current executives are expected to fill the positions. 

Earlier this year, William McCanna, 49, was named chief operating officer, and Joseph Deering, 49, was named president, succeeding Mr. Brethen.
The company has said the positions of chairman and chief executive will be filled by either Mr. McCanna or Mr. Deering. 

The proposed buy-out is subject to approval by a majority of Philips' common shareholders, and the agreement allows the board to accept other bids. 

