.START 

According to the official propaganda, China's ambitious effort to reform its state-dominated economy is alive and well.
Don't believe it. 

Almost four months after the Beijing massacre, it's apparent that the hard-line stance that brought in tanks and troops to clear Tiananmen Square also has swept away plans to let market forces play a greater role in the economy.
China's economy is likely to be mired in its inefficient, half-reformed state for years to come. 

Key reform programs begun under the now-purged Communist Party chief, Zhao Ziyang, have been scrapped indefinitely.
Aborted programs include decontrol of prices, sales of state-owned enterprises and strengthening the private sector -- all of which seemed likely to move forward a year ago.
Instead, the leaders are preaching austerity, socialist orthodoxy and even recentralizing sectors of the economy that had been well on the way to decontrol. 

"As long as the current regime remains in power, reforms are dead," concludes a Western economist and longtime China-watcher in Beijing. 

The shift away from reform could have profound significance for China as well as the rest of the socialist world.
China's sheer enormity and the clear initial successes of its reforms have made the country the showcase for liberalization experiments around the globe. 

But the Chinese experience also reveals that people laboring under a socialist system don't necessarily want market-style reforms, despite their promise of greater wealth.
While experiments in the countryside a decade ago achieved quick results, later reform measures in the cities provided few benefits.
Last spring's protests were partly a response to the corruption, inflation and inequalities in income that reforms have brought.
Opponents of reform, waving posters of Chairman Mao, took to the streets in May alongside the throngs clamoring for democracy. 

China has more than once veered temporarily from the reform path.
And each time, as the state regained control over problem areas in the economy, Beijing renewed its push for greater liberalization. 

That could happen again.
But it depended in the past on strong, pro-reform leadership.
And, analysts in Beijing say, that can't be counted on this time.
Deng Xiaoping, the architect of China's reform policies, told a visiting U.S. professor recently that the new leadership "will adhere to the policies of reform and opening up." But the 85-year-old leader is in physical and political decline, and his chief pro-reform ally, Mr. Zhao, is out of power. 

Today, Chinese sources say, policy is being guided mainly by Chen Yun, an aging conservative economist, and his disciples, Premier Li Peng and top state planner Yao Yilin.
None can be considered a "reformer." And if hard-line conservatives consolidate power in the post-Deng era, experts say, China is likely to regress. 

"There is no rationality to economic policy any longer," says a Western diplomat. "It's all politics." 

Mr. Li last month pledged to protect those economic reform measures already passed into law.
But he suggested that no new liberalization schemes would be considered for now.
Mr. Li also indicated that the government would stick to its economic retrenchment policy, introduced in September 1988, for at least two more years.
The party's Central Committee is expected to reiterate that theme and stress the need for enhanced central planning when it convenes next month. 

Even so, the failure of reforms isn't likely to affect China's open-door policy.
China needs Japanese and Western investment and technology to develop and won't let the new conservatism interfere. 

The following is a list of China's main reforms and where they now stand: 

-- Price decontrol.
Economists say that allowing prices to respond to market forces is probably the single-most-needed measure for rationalizing the economy, in which about half of prices still are fixed by the state at unrealistically low levels.
But price reform, and resulting inflation, also is destabilizing. 

Last year, still firmly in power, Mr. Deng led the price-reform push. "China's current price reform is a bold, yet risky action," he told a North Korean delegation in May. "I often tell my colleagues to be brave and not be afraid of risks, because otherwise, no progress will be made." 

But when inflation triggered panic buying last fall, Mr. Deng and other reformers lost their nerve.
Price reform, the leaders announced, was on hold.
Prices of many products that were allowed to float are again being controlled as China tries to get a grip on inflation. 

-- Sales of state enterprises.
A year ago, when the government began its austerity drive, liberals led by Mr. Zhao tried to keep the reform process alive by concentrating on a single plan: selling state assets so as to make industry more efficient.
This included selling shares of enterprises to workers, to spur them to work harder.
But since June 4, proposing even partial privatization has become akin to treason.
Party newspapers even blamed proponents of the idea for fueling the student demonstrations this year. 

-- Private business.
Entrepreneurs are under siege.
Authorities say they are merely stepping up efforts to make private businessmen pay their share of taxes.
But in the current climate, analysts see the policy as a political decision to harass and weaken this fast-growing sector. 

Many of China's 15 million self-employed entrepreneurs have amassed the wealth and clout to ignore, or even resist, Communist Party dictates.
During the democracy demonstrations, for example, the successful Stone computer group funneled large amounts of cash and supplies to students at Tiananmen. 

-- Enterprises.
China's austerity plans are wreaking havoc on the most visible beneficiaries of reform: rural enterprises.
These semi-private factories, created to soak up excess farm labor, now employ nearly 100 million people and have an output value of $175 billion a year. 

But the government, trying to curb demand for scarce materials to cool inflation, plans to close rural enterprises deemed to be "inefficient" or wasting energy and raw materials.
About 10% of all such enterprises nationwide may close, officials estimate. 

At the same time, Beijing is pumping billions into its lumbering state-owned factories, two-thirds of which are losing money or barely breaking even.
These coddled enterprises last year received subsidies totaling $12 billion, eating up a third of state revenue.
Economists say the government won't permit such enterprises to go bust.
While the threat of bankruptcy might spur efficiency, there is too much political objection to putting workers on the dole. 

-- Agriculture.
China's first wave of reforms enjoyed their greatest success in the countryside, where peasants were allowed to sell excess production on the free market.
Output soared and farmers got rich. 

But national grain output has fallen as peasants turn to more lucrative pursuits.
Irrigation systems, once manned collectively, are in ruins. 

The talk in the official think-tanks today is of Maoist-style recollectivization, though that won't be easy.
Taking land from peasants would provoke an outcry. 

Chen Junsheng, a state councilor, warned this month of the dangers of rolling back reforms in the countryside. "The implementation of an adequate level of collectivization must be based on the voluntary wishes of the masses," he told party workers in Inner Mongolia. "We must avoid using force." 

