.START 

Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. outlined a plan to keep Seaman Furniture Co. out of bankruptcy court by asking banks and bondholders to make major concessions. 

In an unusual step, the plan calls for a total of $42 million of new money to be injected into the struggling New York furniture retailer by Seaman family members, KKR's leveraged buy-out fund and KKR itself. 

It marks the first time KKR has had to dip into its $5.6 billion leveraged buy-out fund to help rescue a transaction. 

Along with the painful reorganization proposal came an admission by KKR, the nation's leading leveraged buy-out firm, that the $360 million buy-out of Seaman in 1987 has turned into a lemon. 

"We convinced our lenders that Seaman was not worth what we orginally paid for the company," said KKR general partner Paul E. Raether. "Everybody here is taking a haircut to try to restructure the company so that we go forward." 

Assuming the plan goes through, the 20% of Seaman's stock held by the founding family and management would remain about the same or rise slightly.
But the 80% assigned to the KKR buy-out fund would be sharply reduced in favor of stakes going to lenders.
KKR and the buy-out fund would retain a total of about a third of the shares, the same amount going to the bank lenders. 

Mr. Raether said that Seaman foundered on a slowdown in the Long Island economy, on which the retailer depended for much of its business. 

"The lesson here is don't buy a company with a great deal of leverage when the company basically has one product," he said, adding: "When people {in Long Island} basically stopped buying furniture, the business had no place to go." 

Mr. Raether said bank lenders already have agreed to a major element of the plan, pledging to surrender at least $100 million of the $275 million owed to them by the retailer.
The bank lenders would receive about a third of Seaman's stock in exchange for accepting the $175 million face amount of new debt. 

Holders of about $83 million face amount of Seaman's junior subordinated debentures would receive about an 8% stake in Seaman in return for accepting $20.8 million face amount in new securities, also carrying a lower interest rate but ranking higher in the financial structure than their current securities. 

In addition, the Seaman family agreed to add $7 million to the original $10 million that it and Seaman management pledged as part of the buy-out.
KKR, which originally put up $40 million from institutional investors participating in its leveraged buy-out fund, agreed to fork over an additional $28 million from the fund. 

And though not contractually obliged to do so, but perhaps with an eye to the impact if it didn't make some gesture, KKR pledged to put in $7 million of its own money to help revive Seaman.
Mr. Raether said the money represented an attempt by KKR to take a greater share of the financial blame for Seaman's problems. 

"It clearly has not been a good investment for any of us, and we are prepared to put up a disproportionate share of the new money going forward," he said. "We've worked hard to solve this problem, and hopefully we've got it solved." 

The restructuring would sharply alter the original terms of the Seaman leveraged buy-out.
Banks originally agreed to lend $240 million, with provisions to increase that amount under a revolving credit.
Currently, the bank debt stands at $275 million, according to KKR. 

In a leveraged buy-out, a company's shares are acquired largely with borrowed money by a small group of investors, who expect the debt to be repaid with funds generated by the acquired company. 

Under the new terms, the banks will have $150 million of 12% senior debt, of which interest will be currently payable on only $125 million until Nov. 15, 1992.
Bank lenders also will receive $25 million of senior subordinated pay-in-kind notes, due Oct. 31, 1998. 

The pay-in-kind securities, which pay interest in the form of additional securities, are likely to have a market value well below their $50 million face value, further increasing the financial fallout for banks from the deal if they decided to sell those securities before maturity. 

Holders of 90% of Seaman's 15% junior subordinated debentures would be offered in exchange some new, higher-ranking 12% subordinated pay-in-kind notes due 1999, as well as about an 8% stake in Seaman's stock. 

KKR said that institutional holders of a majority of the debentures currently outstanding already have agreed to the exchange. 

The Seaman family, KKR and KKR's leveraged buy-out fund will receive senior subordinated notes for their injection of $42 million in new funds. 

