.START 

Forget about Mary Lou Retton.
In a few years, the face on your box of Wheaties could be that of Minnesota Fats. 

Once dismissed as the province of hustlers and other unsavory types, billiards is bucking to get into the Olympics. 

Gil and Andee Atkisson, two North Carolina enthusiasts, are lobbying to make billiards, pocket or otherwise, a demonstration or exhibition sport as early as the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain.
They've held informal talks with Ron Rowan, general counsel for the U.S. Olympic committee, and plan to participate in a trade show in Barcelona this fall. 

The couple -- who happen to own Peter Vitalie Co., a pool-table maker in Rosman, N.C. -- is also drumming up support from the Billiards Congress of America.
Billiards "is finally getting all the respect it deserves," a BCA spokeswoman says. 

With over 33 million billiards players in the U.S. and another 20 million world-wide, the couple reason that the games belong in the Games just as much as, say, ping-pong.
It's also good business. "Every {billiards} manufacturer in the world would be interested in having the sport in the Olympics," says a Vitalie spokesman. 

But the Atkissons have work ahead.
Few new sports are selected each year, and the choices are highly political as countries push for the events in which they perform well.
Brunswick Corp., which makes bowling equipment, spent about five years and almost $1 million to help make bowling an exhibition sport -- a category that isn't even officially recognized by the International Olympic Committee. 

Jacqueline Barrett, an IOC spokeswoman, says the IOC has already chosen three demonstration sports, which rank below medal sports, for Barcelona: rink hockey, jai alai and tae kwon do. "It's possible" that others could be added, she says, but points out that board sports such as billiards and chess are "a long way off.
A very long way." 

Mrs. Atkisson, whose husband once played professionally, says the chances might be brighter in 1996 if Atlanta, a strong contender, sponsors the Games.
An American organizing committee may look favorably on an American proposal. 

Mrs. Atkisson sees one thing on their side: "There's nothing you can do to adulterate" a billiards player. "Steroids don't make any difference." 

