.START 

Time was when traveling Americans dining with European friends ran a high risk of having to negotiate a juicy portion of Mr. Ed "au poivre" or a plateful of Black Beauty stew. 

But squeamish tourists can relax a little these days, at least on that count. 

Europe's horse butchers are finding that demand for their product is on the wane in Belgium, France, Spain and Italy, where its low cost and high nutritional value used to entice even the pickiest eaters.
As prices have risen and the influence of animal-protection groups has grown, per capita consumption of horse meat in the European Community has sunk to just over a pound annually, half what it was a decade ago. 

"I haven't served horse meat at home since I got married," says a secretary at a Brussels middle school who, like many European adults, ate it as a child. "I'd rather see them walking around on four legs than have one in my stomach." 

Such attitudes present Europe's horsemeat associations with a sizable marketing dilemma.
In the U.S., beef and pork producers attacked their own dwindling-sales problem head-on with big advertising campaigns.
But customer complaints over the past few years have forced supermarkets to take down even the horse drawings that used to hang over meat counters, and a variety of prototype marketing campaigns have flopped in preliminary testing. 

"Can you imagine a television commercial plugging horse meat?" asks Rene Laporte, director of the French federation of meat producers. "We would risk doing more harm than good." 

So the industry is taking a subtler approach.
After all, horse-meat proponents argue, horse has a lot going for it.
It is low in fat, high in protein and, they insist, tastes better than most other red meats.
Indeed, Genevieve Pinel, secretary general of the Federation de la Viande Hippophagique de France, says her group is spending much of its small ad budget to promote recipes.
The federation has published a cookbook entitled "Gastronomie de la Viande de Cheval" ("Horse Meat Gastronomy"), and on Oct. 20 it plans to provide a popular television cooking program with a specialist who will show how to prepare luscious horse steaks and horse-steak tartare.
Last year, Mrs. Pinel adds, viewers of a similar program were treated to a recipe for bolognaise sauce, suitable for horse spaghetti and horse pizza. 

Health is another marketing focus.
Trade groups in Paris, Brussels and Rome have been sending detailed nutritional data to doctors, urging them to prescribe horse meat for low-fat, high-protein diets.
And posters designed by the French federation typically feature happy, fit-looking horse eaters -- but rarely an actual horse.
One, which shows a middle-aged couple in a pastoral farm scene, bears the slogan "Horse Meat: For Energy." 

The trade associations are also trying to cut overhead and make horse meat more widely available by centralizing butchering operations and by distributing the meat prepackaged to stores. "Supermarkets were drifting away from horse because it requires specialist butchers," says Jean-Pierre Veille, president of Etablissements Barbaud S.A., a Paris-based horse-packing concern.
Although most European cuts differ from those found in the U.S., such things as horse Chateaubriand, filet and rump steak are common. (The more adventurous might sample filet of mule in Spain, or donkey sausages in Corsica and southern France.) 

Despite the falloff, the EC is still by far the world's biggest consumer of horse meat, serving up some 175,000 of the animals in 1987, the last year for which statistics are available.
About 65% of the horses are imported, and they have typically reached at least five or six years of age as work or sport animals or as pets.
Many live horses are shipped by truck from Eastern Europe; frozen or vacuum-packed horse meat comes from the U.S., Canada and Great Britain.
The U.S. alone sold about $82 million of horse meat to Europe last year, according to the U.S. Meat Export Federation, which adds that while horse meat is used widely in American pet food, it knows of no significant U.S. consumption by humans. 

Mark Gustafson, a vice president of the federation, likens the image problem of horse meat to that of veal. "These public perceptions are difficult things to deal with," he says. "Those {calves'} big brown eyes draw a lot of emotion." 

Activists, particularly in Great Britain, have capitalized on that emotion in demonstrations and sit-ins at ports from which horses are shipped. "After all the things that horses have done for people over thousands and thousands of years, I think they deserve a little more]" exclaims Shirley Walbancke of the Horse Rescue Fund in Suffolk, England.
Ms. Walbancke's group was instrumental in getting a law passed in the U.K. banning international shipment of live horses for slaughter. 

"Horses are very sensitive, nervous animals," Mrs. Walbancke explains. "They hate the smell of blood.
They are not used to being cooped up in filthy lorries and often die or injure each other in transit." 

Sentiments like these, which are spreading throughout the Continent, spell trouble for people like Edmond and Therese Baeyens, who run the Boucherie Chevaline de Boondael, a butcher shop in a Brussels suburb. "For many years, it was a good life," says Mr. Baeyens. "Many people used to eat horse at least once a week." In a photograph of his shop during the 1960s, the window is full of horse carcasses. 

Today, the window displays only a single tray of thick, dark red horse steaks.
In recent years, the Baeyenses have had to stoop to what they consider the low end of the meat business: selling beef, veal, pork and lamb. "Horse is much healthier and has no hormones," says Mrs. Baeyens, who has posted signs around the shop stressing that point. 

Historically, man has always eaten horses, and in modern Europe hardship has tended to put them back on the table in large numbers.
During and after both world wars and the Great Depression, several prominent French nutritionists advocated eating cheap, abundant horse meat.
Today, though, horse costs about the same as beef, so consumers now eat it more for taste than for economy. 

And tastes, like views on animal rights, have changed.
The growing popularity of poultry and fish has reduced the market for all red meats.
Even school cafeterias, which along with food charities once used horse meat as a mainstay, are no longer major purchasers. "The meat is not served here, seeing as the students and teachers don't seem to like it," says the cafeteria manager at one Brussels school. 

Moreover, horse meat has gotten some bad publicity.
Jean Durmoy, a French horse-meat trader, says a book published several years ago by a promoter of curative herbal teas, who claims that horse meat is "toxic," is partly to blame for the industry's problems.
The 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster also hurt when it forced a temporary halt in shipments of live horses from Poland, where some were found to be contaminated. 

Of course, there are still horse-meat fans whom nothing will dissuade.
Among them is Michel-Etienne Van Neste, a Belgian arts executive who says he likes it much better than beef or pork. "It has a strong and powerful taste," he notes, adding, "I know it's a noble animal, but when I'm eating it, I forget about all of that." 

