.START 

The battle around the abortion issue has raged for years with the understanding that the major combatants involved are either white liberals, white evangelical Protestants or white Catholics.
Meanwhile, black America -- which is affected more profoundly by abortion than is any other group in society -- has experienced its own sharp internal division.
While most black leaders have favored abortion rights, opinion surveys have found mainstream blacks to be among those most strongly opposed to abortion on demand. 

Where does black America really stand on the issue?
Statistics from the Department of Health and Human Services suggest that black women are more than twice as likely to abort their children as white women.
For every three black babies born, two are aborted.
Forty-three percent of all abortions in the U.S. are performed on black women.
From figures supplied by the federal government and the Alan Guttmacher Institute, Richard D. Glasow of National Right to Life has estimated that some 400,000 black pregnancies are aborted each year.
At the same time, according to a 1988 poll taken by the National Opinion Research Center, 62% of blacks said abortion should be illegal under all circumstances. 

How can blacks consistently tell pollsters they oppose abortion while we exercise that right proportionately more than any other group in America?
In part, black abortion rates reflect the pressure of social service and private welfare agencies in our communities.
A black teen-ager told me she had asked Planned Parenthood in Detroit for help in carrying her baby to term and putting it up for adoption.
But because the baby's father was white, a clinician advised her to abort the baby because, "No one wants to adopt a zebra." Better-educated black women are pushed toward abortion by different forces: the threat to educational hopes or aspirations to economic independence. 

As these women struggle with their profound moral choices, many national black leaders have ceased to look at abortion as a moral problem with moral consequences, and have come to see it instead as an opportunity for forging political alliances.
At the March for Life rally in 1977 Jesse Jackson said, "The solution to a {crisis pregnancy} is not to kill the innocent baby but to deal with {the mother's} values and her attitudes toward life." Twelve years later, he spoke to the enormous April 1989 abortion rights march in Washington. 

The black leadership has succumbed to the temptation to present abortion as a civil rights issue.
By this reasoning, abortion is to women in the 1980s what desegregation was to blacks in the 1960s.
Any erosion of abortion rights would accelerate the "move to the right" that black leaders say threatens black progress.
At a news conference earlier this year sponsored by Planned Parenthood, Jesse Jackson, Andrew Young and Julian Bond issued a statement denouncing Operation Rescue, comparing those who participate in abortion clinic sit-ins to "the segregationists who fought desperately to block black Americans from access to their rights." 

But many blacks wonder whether black civil rights and abortion fit so neatly together.
Black pregnancies have historically been the target of social engineers such as Margaret Sanger, founder of Planned Parenthood.
Sanger was convinced that blacks, Jews, Eastern Europeans and other non-Aryan groups were detracting from the creative intellectual and social potential of America, and she wanted those groups' numbers reduced.
In her first book, "Pivot of Civilization," she warned of free maternity care for the poor: "Instead of decreasing and aiming to eliminate the stocks that are most detrimental to the future of the race and the world it tends to render them to a menacing degree dominant." 

In the late 1930s Sanger instituted the Negro Project, a program to gain the backing of black ministers, physicians and political leaders for birth control and sterilization in the black community.
Sanger wrote, "The most successful education approach to the Negro is through a religious appeal.
We do not want word to go out that we want to exterminate the Negro population and the minister is the man who can straighten out that idea if it ever occurs to any of their more rebellious members." 

There are disturbing indications that this state of mind has not vanished.
Even now, 70% of the clinics operated by Planned Parenthood -- the operator of the largest chain of abortion facilities in the nation -- are in black and Hispanic neighborhoods.
The schools in which their school-based clinics are located are substantially non-white.
In a March 1939 letter, Sanger explained why clinics had to be located where the "dysgenic" races lived: "The birth control clinics all over the country are doing their utmost to reach the lower strata of our population . . . but we must realize that there are hundreds of thousands of women who never leave their own vicinity." 

Blacks must no longer keep silent on this issue.
We cannot permit the public to continue to imagine that we are obediently following our national leaders in endorsing abortion on demand and we must resist the forces that drive black women to seek abortion.
The black community in cities such as Baltimore, Chicago, Detroit and Washington, D.C. has started crisis pregnancy centers to help these women.
We are already besieged by homicide, drugs, AIDS and an alarmingly high infant mortality rate.
We do not need to re-enact the sterilization programs of the 1930s and 1940s. 

Mr. Keath is the founder and president of Black Alliance for Family. 

