.START 

Laurie Massa's back hurt for months after a delivery truck slammed into her car in 1986. 

It still hurt, she says, when her lawsuit against Baker Industries Inc., the Borg-Warner Corp. subsidiary that owned the truck, came to trial last year.
But she wasn't sure the jury would believe her. "It's very difficult to verify a subjective complaint of pain," says Mrs. Massa, a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., nurse.
She adds that the company's doctors "examined me and said, 'Come on, you're faking. '" 

But just before the trial, one of her doctors strapped her into a computerized machine that precisely measured how well she could bend and twist.
Its data showed "real legitimate" signs of low-back injury, says Edward Spievack, the doctor.
The jury agreed, awarding her $200,000.
Baker Industries, which declines to comment on the case, didn't appeal. 

At last, medicine is starting to get a grip on low-back pain, which accounts for about one-quarter of all lost workdays in the U.S. and costs $15 billion to $20 billion annually in medical expenses and lost earnings.
Doctors still can't tell what's wrong in 85% of cases.
But low-back machines like the one in Mrs. Massa's case can tell whether a back injury is being faked or exaggerated, proponents say.
Moreover, studies in the past few years have shown what kind of people are prone to the problem and exploded myths about treatment.
All this adds up to growing objectivity about the problem, which has long been mired in a subjective bog. 

Workers with back pain "can always find doctors who will say they are totally disabled," says Kay Bryant, a nurse with Hasbro Inc., Providence, R.I. "Then they get used to not coming to work and never get out of that mind-set." Hasbro, though, sends employees with back pain to a clinic for tests on the new machines, which record exactly how patients move and how much force they exert in various directions.
Inconsistent results from repeated movements signal that the patient is magnifying symptoms.
The machines, and new therapy guidelines, "allow us to intervene and return people to work much faster," Ms. Bryant says. 

But critics, including physicians, say low-back machines can be misused, especially when doctors and technicians don't understand all the issues involved in interpreting the data that the machines churn out. "I see a lot of people buying into the use of them without really understanding them," says Leonard Matheson, a back-pain researcher in Anaheim, Calif. 

Also, juries tend to put too much weight on data from the machines, argues Patrick Gillespie, a Minneapolis lawyer who handles workers' compensation cases.
The data "have an aura of objectivity and infallibility," he says, "but in reality there is a human who administers and interprets the tests." 

Last year, Mr. Gillespie unsuccessfully tried to prevent such data from being allowed as evidence in a lawsuit.
His client, a former employee of Burlington Northern Inc., sought damages of $600,000 for a back injury.
The jury, in a Nebraska state court, awarded $121,500.
The back-pain analyzer helped prevent a larger award by showing that the worker was "magnifying symptoms," says Tom Beam, a lawyer for the company in the case. 

Such cases read like riveting thrillers to employers and insurers, because back-pain disability claims are exploding: They rose at 14 times the rate of population growth from 1977 to 1981, according to one study. 

At the same time, "there's no good evidence the incidence of back injuries has risen," says Stover H. Snook, a Harvard University back-pain specialist and a consultant to Liberty Mutual Insurance Group, which provides workers' compensation coverage.
One sign that the incidence of injury hasn't risen, he says, is that surveys from the 1950s to the present agree that roughly 80% of people are hit at some point with low-back pain.
Apparently, he adds, "there's too much treatment going on." 

In some cases, too much treatment can be counter-productive.
People with low-back pain whose doctors recommended two days in bed missed 45% fewer workdays -- with no apparent increase in pain -- than those told to rest for a week, according to a 1986 study led by Richard A. Deyo, a researcher at the Seattle Veterans Administration Medical Center.
Now many therapists try to get people moving within a day or two of the onset of back pain. 

The low-back machines have accelerated this fast-track trend. "We've even challenged surgeons {with data from one of the devices} and gotten them to lay off" recommending operations for employees with back pain, says Larry Hays, manager of claims and safety for Ingram Barge Co., Nashville, Tenn. 

Employers increasingly roll out the devices, which sell for $45,000 and up, as the heavy artillery in workers' compensation fights.
One of the best-known makers of the systems, Isotechnologies Inc., Hillsborough, N.C., says 75% of the 400 machines it has sold since introducing them in 1984 have been used in low-back-pain depositions.
Another maker, Lumex Inc. 's Cybex division, in Ronkonkoma, N.Y., even provides in its literature a list of back-pain depositions that featured its machines. 

Only 1% to 2% of back-pain patients consciously fake injury, but many more exaggerate pain, says Nicolas Walsh, a University of Texas back-pain researcher.
Determining whether subjective pain is real without the machines is notoriously difficult. "We were just baffled by one patient who seemed to have a back injury," Dr. Walsh says, "until we saw a newspaper picture of him holding up a big fish he'd caught," showing his injury was phony. 

The machines shift attention from pain to functional impairment -- usually the central issue in deciding compensation anyway.
And when used by specialists, proponents say, the devices are hard to fool. "The hallmark of symptom magnification is lack of consistency" in forces or in range and speed of movement in repeated tests, says Mr. Matheson, the Anaheim back-pain specialist.
Some people, adds Mr. Matheson, a psychologist, have "symptom magnification syndrome," a habitual exaggeration of pain "that affects how they approach life in general." He uses a hand-squeeze monitor to help identify such people -- they tend to squeeze inconsistently when asked to exert full strength over many trials, he says. 

Other technologies are helping to assess back pain, including a machine developed by scientists with Liberty Mutual Insurance and Boston University.
The device registers electrical impulses within muscles, indicating how fatigued they are.
People with more easily fatigued back muscles may be at higher risk for back pain, the researchers say. 

Physicians also are identifying nonphysical factors associated with back problems.
Smokers, especially those with hacking coughs, are at higher risk.
So are workers unhappy with their jobs. "We've found that psychosocial factors are usually underweighted" by health-care workers who handle back cases, says Dan Spengler, a Vanderbilt University doctor who studies back-pain risk factors. 

Recently, some employers have begun to incorporate such findings in pre-employment tests.
The goal is to screen out the estimated 10% to 15% of workers who account for some 70% of back-pain costs, says Stephan Deutsch, a Pawtucket, R.I., physician working with General Dynamics Corp. 's Electric Boat unit to develop a back-disability risk test.
He cautions, however, that such tests must be customized for particular jobs and extensively checked for accurate predictions before they can be validly applied in placement or hiring. 

Ranked by annual low-back compensation claims per 100 workers 

Ranked by annual low-back compensation claims per 100 workers 

Percentage of low-back compensation claims associated with each activity 

Other risk factors: Prolonged sitting, vibration, smoking, obesity. 

