.START 

The dollar was mixed after a relentless onslaught of central-bank intervention tugged the currency off intraday highs. 

Foreign-exchange traders said the market was stunned by the numerous rounds of concerted intervention, which saw some central banks selling dollars at least five times during the day.
A minimum of 12 central banks from Asia, North America and Europe sold dollars singly or in concert, following up on a harsh statement during the weekend from finance chiefs of the Group of Seven nations.
G-7 nations include the U.S., Japan, Britain, West Germany, France, Italy and Canada. 

The G-7 communique said the U.S. currency's strength was inconsistent with economic fundamentals.
The statement, combined with aggressive coordinated intervention, triggered a five-pfennig slide in the dollar Monday. 

Yesterday's sales knocked the dollar off its early Asian peaks of 1.9130 marks and 143.15 yen and dragged the U.S. currency to intraday lows of 1.8855 marks and 141.70 yen shortly before midday in New York. 

But losses that the yen and sterling chalked up against the mark buffered the dollar against those currencies.
Free of further central-bank action in the New York afternoon, the dollar recovered modestly to finish higher against the yen. 

In late afternoon New York trading, the dollar was at 1.8938 marks, down from 1.8993 marks Monday, and at 142.40 yen, up from 142.13 yen.
Sterling was at $1.6180, up from $1.6170. 

In Tokyo Wednesday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.60 yen, down from Tuesday's Tokyo close of 142.80 yen. 

Traders said Tuesday that the central banks seemed to rely on the frequency of intervention rather than size, with estimates of a modest $1.3 billion total belying the associated fanfare.
By comparison, the Bank of Japan has been reported to sell $2 billion on its own in one day's intervention. 

Shortly after the start of Asian trading the Bank of Japan began to intervene, joined later by the West German Bundesbank and the Bank of England as Asian trading crossed into the European day. 

Later, in Western European trading, the Swiss, French, Italian, Austrian, Spanish, Dutch and Belgian central banks joined the Bundesbank and the Bank of England in at least three rounds of coordinated intervention and individual forays.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Bank of Canada joined the melee after U.S. dealings got under way. 

Despite the lull in the New York afternoon, dealers say the central banks will renew their pressure on the dollar today.
Several traders said monetary authorities appear determined to force the dollar solidly under the top of the old G-7 Louvre trading range, believed to be at 1.90 marks and 140 yen. 

Prolonged weakness in the dollar will likely benefit the mark, traders said, because longer-term investors prize that currency's stability. 

The mark's attractiveness will multiply if the Bundesbank decides to raise key interest rates.
Higher domestic interest rates usually bolster the national currency by drawing money to interest-bearing investments denominated in that currency. 

The Bundesbank's central-bank council will meet on Oct. 5, and speculation has intensified that the council won't delay an expected rate increase any more. 

If central banks intend to lower the dollar for an extended period -- and this appears to be their goal -- the most effective option open to them is a realignment of interest rates, traders said.
But Japan appears likely to defer a rate boost until after a national election is called in the wake of scandal involving the ruling party, and the Fed will want to wait until scattered signs of potential inflation fade in the U.S. economy, analysts said. 

On New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery settled at $368.50 an ounce, down $1.30.
Estimated volume was a moderate 3.3 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Wednesday, gold was quoted at $368.20 an ounce. 

