.START 

Your Aug. 31 article "For Recyclers, the News Is Looking Bad" raises important questions regarding the stability of markets for recycled newsprint.
The article does not indicate, however, that communities continue to reap substantial financial benefits from recycling even when the market for recycled paper is weak. 

According to the article, Barberton, Ohio's recycling program was paid $30 a ton for recycled newspapers 15 months ago.
In July 1989, city officials were forced to pay $10 a ton to have a broker haul paper away. 

Communities throughout the country have been forced to deal with the drop in price of recycled newsprint.
Yet paying $10 a ton to a paper broker remains far more attractive than the alternative. "Tipping fees" at incinerators and landfills continue to skyrocket.
In Dutchess County, N.Y., the tipping fee at the incinerator recently rose to $88 a ton.
If county officials had chosen years ago to mount an ambitious recycling effort rather than rely largely on incineration and landfilling, they could have avoided much of the impact of rising tipping fees.
Officials elsewhere should learn from this example. 

Recycling, like other forms of solid-waste management, costs money.
But it is significantly less expensive than the alternatives, even during a period in which markets are depressed.
Government officials have never viewed garbage collection and disposal as a revenue-producing venture.
It has always been seen as a necessary service to be paid for either through taxes or fees.
For some reason, these officials often use a different standard with which to evaluate recycling programs.
They seem to hope that these programs will add revenue to municipal coffers.
Recycling is a safer and cheaper method for managing solid waste than either incineration or landfilling.
It should be viewed not as a profit center for financially strapped municipal governments but as a less-expensive alternative to incinerators and landfills. 

Larry Shapiro 

Toxics Project Counsel 

New York Public Interest Research Group 

New York 

