.START 

Avon Products Inc. Chairman James Preston told securities analysts that company's 1989 sales will be $75 million to $90 million less than projected. 

Mr. Preston said the shortfall reflects a decline in projected fourth-quarter revenue from gift, decorative and jewelry products.
Such products normally account for 50% of fourth-quarter sales in the U.S. 

Last week, Avon disappointed analysts by cutting its forecast of 1989 earnings to a range of $1.95 to $2.15 a share from an earlier estimate of $2.30 to $2.40 a share. 

"They are able to identify that it's a gift, decorative and jewelery-related problem, but they don't know exactly what went wrong," said Andrew Shore, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Inc. "It will take a quarter before they find out exactly what the problem is and then another quarter to rectify.
This means there could be another earnings disappointment between now and then." 

Mr. Shore said many of his fellow analysts were disappointed with Avon's reduced earnings forecast. "It's a never-ending saga," he commented. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Avon closed at $31.75, down 50 cents. 

Earlier this year, Avon rejected takeover bids from Amway Corp. and Minneapolis investor Irwin Jacobs.
During that period, Avon management not only projected increased earnings but stated that Avon shareholders would benefit from cost efficiencies then being implemented.
In August, Mr. Preston met with Mr. Jacobs to discuss Avon's future prospects.
Following that meeting, Mr. Jacobs said he was happy with the company's direction. 

In response to a question as to whether Mr. Jacobs's $41-a-share offer still stood, Mr. Preston replied, "There was never a concrete offer, just a letter proposing we talk." 

On the plus side, Mr. Preston said Avon had been successful in reducing corporate staff expenses from $74 million in 1988 to $61 million this year, reflecting in part the trimming of corporate staff from 808 employees to 634. 

In 1988, Avon had a loss of $404.5 million on sales of $3.06 billion, reflecting $545.6 million in losses from discontinued operations. 

