.START 

Britain's struggle to shrink its huge trade deficit was set back again, as August figures showed the third-highest monthly current-account deficit ever. 

The August current-account deficit was #2 billion ($3.23 billion), down only slightly from #2.19 billion in July.
The deficit was up from #889 million in August 1988 and was much bigger than market expectations of $1.5 billion. 

The figures pushed the London stock market sharply lower.
In London foreign-exchange trading, the pound was slightly weaker against the mark but rose against the dollar. 

The August data reinforced expectations that British banks' base interest rates will remain at 14% or increase over the next few months.
Since June 1988, the British government has raised interest rates 10 times in an attempt to stifle the demand that is sucking in imports and feeding inflation, which is running at an annual rate of 7.3%. 

Britain's merchandise imports declined #420 million in August from the previous month, to #9.77 billion.
But exports also fell, dropping #230 million to #7.48 billion. 

Economists expect imports to continue falling, but only gradually, as Britain's economy cools more slowly than the government hoped.
Meanwhile, exports loom as a long-term worry. 

After the August trade figures, previous confidence about export growth "looks very fragile," said Michael Saunders, an economist at London brokers Midland Montagu Securities Inc. "Exports need to grow faster to get us back in balance." He suggested that British companies are having trouble competing in Europe because of the country's relatively high unit-labor costs.
Shortly after the government announced the figures, Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson reiterated that interest rates will remain "at whatever level is necessary to keep on top of inflation." Mr. Lawson, in a radio interview from Washington, where he is attending the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund, said Britain's current-account deficit "will right itself" but that it is "going to take quite a little time." 

Some private economists suggested that another set of poor trade figures might prompt the government to raise interest rates again.
But Mr. Lawson is likely to resist such a politically unpopular move as long as possible, particularly as higher interest rates could raise mortgage rates and thus fuel higher inflation. 

August's #2.29 billion deficit in merchandise trade was offset slightly by a #300 million surplus in so-called invisible items, which include services, earnings from foreign investments and official transfers.
The current-account deficit reflects the merchandise-trade deficit plus the invisibles surplus.
There also was a surplus of #300 million in invisibles in July. 

So far this year, Britain's current-account deficit totals #13.87 billion, compared with an #8.54 billion deficit in the first eight months of last year.
The deficit for all of 1988 was #14.6 billion. 

Yesterday, British officials said they long have expected the current account to be one of the last economic indicators to respond to high interest rates.
In his radio interview, Mr. Lawson stressed that inflation is "on the way down." 

But private economists worry that big trade deficits ultimately could undermine confidence in sterling.
And they see little relief over the next year.
London brokerage Kleinwort Benson Securities Ltd. predicts the current-account deficit will total #18 billion to #19 billion this year and #17 billion to #18 billion in 1990. 

