.START 

Short interest in both large and small Nasdaq over-the-counter stocks rose, resulting in a 2.7% jump as of mid-September from a month earlier. 

The increase was smaller than the 4.2% rise in OTC short interest posted last month.
But while short interest rose only 1% among large OTC issues as of Sept. 15, it surged 11.8% among smaller stocks. 

The advance in OTC short interest in the latest month compares with a 1.3% decline in short interest on the New York Stock Exchange and an increase of less than 1% on the American Stock Exchange during the same period. 

Among Nasdaq issues, short interest in Acclaim Entertainment ballooned to 371,819 shares from 9,992.
The Oyster Bay, N.Y., seller of home video entertainment products sold 1.7 million shares this month as part of a secondary offering.
Yesterday, the company said it expects to report that net income for the year ended Aug. 31 as much as doubled from fiscal 1988, when it earned 28 cents a share, or $4.7 million.
The stock is off from its mid-August price of 7 5/8, closing yesterday at 6 3/4, down 1/8. 

Short interest in First Executive, a big buyer of junk bonds, rose 18% to 2.5 million shares.
The Los Angeles-based insurer could be hurt by the weakness in the junk bond market, some analysts say.
First Executive has been a big buyer of the highrisk, high-yield securities.
Summa Medical saw its short interest jump 77% to one million shares. 

Short interest in Novell, Jaguar and St. Paul Cos. declined in the latest month. 

Short sales are, in effect, bets by brokerage firms or investors that a stock's price will fall.
Such wagers are carried out by selling borrowed shares, in the expectation of replacing them later with shares that cost less than those that were sold.
Short interest is the number of shares borrowed and sold but not yet replaced.
Although a surge in short interest indicates speculation that a stock's price will fall, many analysts view a firm base of short interest as healthy, because shares that are sold short must eventually be replaced through buying.
And if the market or a specific stock starts rising, short-sellers seeking to limit their losses might rush to replace shares they've borrowed; this causes "short-covering" that can add fuel to an incipient rally. 

The National Association of Securities Dealers, which operates the Nasdaq computer system on which 5,200 OTC issues trade, compiles short interest data in two categories: the approximately two-thirds, and generally biggest, Nasdaq stocks that trade on the National Market System; and the one-third, and generally smaller, stocks that aren't a part of the system. 

As of Sept. 15, short interest in 2,391 National Market System securities totaled 185.3 million shares, compared with 183.4 million shares in 2,413 issues as of mid-August.
The total represents 2.13 days' average trading volume on the system for the reporting period, compared with 1.9 days a month earlier. 

Among 1,334 of the smaller stocks not on the National Market System, short interest totaled nearly 38 million shares, or 94% of one day's average volume.
That was up from almost 34 million shares in 1,321 issues in mid-August, which equaled 90% of a day's average volume. 

The adjacent tables show the issues in which a short interest position of at least 50,000 shares existed as of Sept. 15 or in which there was a short position change of at least 25,000 shares since mid-August (see accompanying tables -- WSJ Sept. 26, 1989). 

