.START 

Arthur Andersen & Co. and Price Waterhouse ended merger talks that would have created the biggest worldwide and U.S. accounting firm. 

Lawrence A. Weinbach, chief executive of Arthur Andersen & Co. Societe Cooperative, Andersen's world-wide organization, and Joseph Connor, chairman of Price Waterhouse World Firm, said that they scuttled the merger discussions "because differences couldn't be resolved within a realistic time frame." 

Andersen was under pressure to come up with a merger plan before its annual meeting of 1,227 U.S. partners in Dallas Oct. 18-20, while Price faced the same deadline for its annual meeting of 799 U.S. partners in Atlanta the same week. "It was just too much pressure for the two of them to solve a long list of economic problems, headed by the differences in their retirement plans," said James Emerson, publisher of Emerson's Professional Services Review, an industry newsletter. 

Several sticking points undid the proposed merger.
Under Andersen's retirement plan, which was fully funded, partners receive between $25,000 and $50,000 a year.
Price didn't prefund its plan and its partners after retirement receive about $100,000 a year.
One benefit consultant said combining the plans would produce a "hydra-headed monster" that would be difficult or impossible to administer. 

Other hurdles the two firms failed to overcome included the question of which would hold the balance of power, the great disparity in the size and strength of their consulting practices, and the fact that a merger might not gain approval of antitrust regulators. 

Another roadblock was Price's status as auditor for several major computer-hardware companies, including International Business Machines Corp., Hewlett-Packard Co., NCR Corp., and Compaq Inc. Andersen, a major computer-systems consultant, has been in joint ventures with such companies.
Accounting-profession ethics rules ban business ties with audit clients. 

"We are the premier auditor firm in the world, and we aren't going to sacrifice an audit client for some short-term commercial advantage," said Shawn F. O'Malley, chairman and senior partner of Price Waterhouse.
Mr. O'Malley said Price Waterhouse, while not always able to do huge joint-venture computer installations because of conflict of interest with its audit work, would continue to do systems-strategies, software-installation and tax-software work for clients. 

Mr. O'Malley said Price Waterhouse's consulting revenues were growing at 28% a year, compared with 20% for tax work and 5%-6% for auditing. "It's not inconceivable that consulting will wind up to be 30% of our total revenues," he said.
Currently, 20% cent of Price Waterhouse's world-wide revenue of $2.2 billion comes from consulting. 

As for Andersen, Mr. Weinbach said there is "nothing inconsistent with being the premier computer-systems firm and the premier audit and tax firm at the same time." He noted that 40% of Andersen's world-wide revenues of $2.8 billion derive from consulting, and said that share might rise to 50% in the early 1990s. 

Consulting revenue, he said, are growing at 30% a year, compared with 10% for auditing and about 15% in tax work. "We believe our audit and tax practice will remain of high quality, and size isn't as important," he said. 

Price Waterhouse is auditor of more Fortune 500 companies than any other firm.
Earlier this year, Andersen separated its huge consulting practice from the rest of the firm into a unit known as Andersen Consulting. 

This restructuring followed the defection of a number of Andersen consulting partners, who felt they were earning the bulk of the revenue for the firm and didn't have enough say in management.
Since then, Andersen has put a 15% lid on the amount of consulting revenues that would have to be shared with tax and audit partners, a ceiling that some consulting partners still resent. 

At the same time, Andersen this month required partners to agree to avoid stealing business or personnel from the firm within 18 months after leaving it. 

A party close to the negotiations said Price Waterhouse found it difficult to negotiate with Andersen because of the the separate consulting unit.
At Price, consulting is fully integrated into the firm. 

