.START 

The Soviet Union is hoping to halve its $200 billion budget deficit next year by cutting spending on defense, selling off unprofitable state companies and issuing government bonds. 

The government's draft budget, presented to Parliament yesterday, also foresees a major reorientation of foreign trade policy.
Imports of industrial machinery and equipment, metal and chemical products will be cut, while purchases of consumer goods, medical supplies and raw materials for light industry will be increased. 

Finance Minister Valentin Pavlov hinted that Soviet borrowing abroad would also be held in check.
A government newspaper disclosed last week that Soviet hard-currency debt now totals more than $46 billion, a level Mr. Pavlov said is already causing debt-service problems. 

The finance minister, who was appointed by Parliament this summer, also said Moscow is seeking to slow the growth of Soviet inflation, currently estimated by Soviet economists at 8%-10%.
The government aims to reduce the amount of money it issues to 10 billion rubles ($16.6 billion) next year from an estimated 18 billion rubles in 1989, Mr. Pavlov said. 

Ever since admitting a year ago that the country has a budget deficit, Soviet officials have been trying to find ways to reduce it.
Earlier this year, the Kremlin approved sweeping cuts in capital expenditures that are expected to narrow the deficit to 92 billion rubles by the end of this year from the 120 billion rubles currently.
But some Western analysts in Moscow believe that the plans for next year, which call for further reductions to 60 billion rubles, may be too optimistic. 

The most concrete details about forthcoming cuts were given for the military budget, which is supposed to fall to 70.9 billion rubles from 77.3 billion in 1989, or about 9% of gross national product.
Spending on military research and hardware, including tanks, combat planes and helicopters, will be cut along with military construction. 

At the same time, the nation's defense industries are expected to boost their output of consumer goods.
Dozens of defense plants across the country have already started converting their production facilities, according to Soviet media reports. 

But analysts said the government may have a tough time implementing the measures aimed at boosting state revenues, including sales of loss-making enterprises and issuing bonds.
It didn't spell out how much it hopes to raise from each, although the overall 1990 budget foresees that revenue will increase by 54.2 billion rubles. 

The Kremlin is already seeking to encourage workers at unprofitable plants to lease them from the state, but there are no indications about how successful the campaign has been and whether it can be expanded on the huge scale that Moscow evidently anticipates. 

Issuing large amounts of bonds could also prove tricky, apart from adding to the current domestic debt of 400 billion rubles.
Mr. Pavlov said the issues would create the beginnings of a capital market in the Soviet Union.
But it is unclear what incentives the government will offer to prospective Soviet buyers.
People already have large amounts of money in savings accounts because of a nationwide lack of consumer goods to spend it on.
And many bitterly remember a major bond issue in Stalin's era shortly after World War II, when people were forced to buy bonds but never received the promised interest payments. 

One possible way to overcome such problems has been aired by Soviet economist Abel Aganbegyan.
He suggested special incentives that would enable bondholders to bypass the long waiting lists for housing and cars.
Mr. Pavlov didn't indicate whether the Kremlin planned to adopt such ideas. 

