.START 

The board of the Resolution Trust Corp., using power given to it in the savings-and-loan bailout law, voted to override state laws that would block sales of insolvent thrifts to banks that want to operate them as branches. 

Separately, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. approved stiff so-called exit fees that institutions must pay to switch from the federal thrift insurance fund to the bank insurance fund.
The higher-than-expected fees, set by the Treasury Department and the FDIC, will probably force some potential investors to lower their bids for insolvent thrifts.
The action clears the way for RTC sales of some insolvent thrifts, which had been held up by uncertainty about the fees.
The RTC is the agency created to sell off or liquidate sick thrifts taken over by the government. 

The RTC board's action is intended to alleviate the RTC's problems in states such as Iowa, where state banking authorities stopped the bidding by several commercial banks for a thrift the banks wanted to convert to a branch.
There are about 20 states that restrict the opening or the number of branches, and some of the states are likely to fight the RTC board decision in court. 

"The basic purpose is to allow as many bidders as possible to bid so that the cost to the taxpayer can be reduced," said William Seidman, chairman of the FDIC and the RTC. 

The provision allows the RTC to override various state laws, including those that would prevent out-of-state acquirers from buying thrifts. 

The one-time exit fee for institutions switching to the bank insurance fund -- which requires somewhat lower annual premiums than the thrift insurance fund under the bailout law -- was set at 0.9% of deposits.
Thus, a thrift with $100 million in deposits would have to pay a hefty $900,000 to the thrift insurance fund to switch. 

In addition, the thrift would have to pay the bank insurance fund an entrance fee, which was set last week, of 0.8% of deposits.
In thrifts where many of the deposits are likely to be withdrawn after the acquisition, the fee would be based on the portion of deposits that stay in the institution after a certain period. 

The FDIC had earlier asked that there be no exit fee for sales of thrifts from the RTC.
But John Bovenzi, a top FDIC official, said the Treasury set the fee at 0.9% of deposits to make sure the thrift insurance fund is kept at a healthy level.
Part of the cost of the bailout is taken from the fund. 

To avoid the entrance and exit fees, banks have the option of converting acquired thrifts to banks but keeping the acquired unit in the thrift insurance fund -- with its higher premium payments.
But the high fees will drive down at least slightly the prices that bidders will offer for thrifts, leaving taxpayers to shoulder more of the burden. "It's a disincentive to bidders," said David Cooke, executive director of the RTC. 

