.START 

The European Community proposed more than $650 million in new aid next year to help Hungary and Poland reform their ailing economies. 

About $300 million of that would come from the EC and individual member states, while the rest would come from the U.S., Japan and other industrialized countries. 

At a meeting here of representatives of 24 industrialized countries that are working together to help Poland and Hungary, the EC Commission suggested the package as a starting point.
But an EC spokesman said the amount could be higher as several countries suggested they could eventually increase their commitments. 

The commission was put in charge of coordinating Western aid efforts for Hungary and Poland last July when the leading industrialized countries met in Paris. 

Commission President Jacques Delors and Commission Vice President Frans Andriessen said other countries should do more to help the two countries, whose situation is "very fragile." 

Hungarians and Poles "could well find their new freedoms threatened by economic disorders," the officials said. 

Representatives of the World Bank, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the Paris Club also were present at the meeting.
Those groups are helping to advise the two countries on macroeconomic policy and on ways to repay their massive foreign debts. 

The exact amounts of aid and how it would be used will be the subject of continuing discussions between the Group of 24 and the recipients.
The group called for a meeting of higher-level officials or ministers to be held by Nov.30 to discuss further details. 

The new aid proposed by the commission would be in addition to more than $275 million already pledged by the G-24 nations for emergency food aid.
The new money would be spent on emergency aid for Poland, and economic restructuring in both countries. 

Hungary and Poland both presented detailed analyses of the economic situation in their countries.
Poland's urgent situation was reflected in its request not only for emergency food supplies, but for antibiotics and other basic drugs. 

The commission's proposal is the combination of work of experts and a recent visit by Mr. Andriessen to the two countries.
It sets out five main areas for immediate action: agriculture, lowering of trade barriers, direct investment, professional training and environmental cleanup.
Most of the proposed items were mirrored in the joint statement by the Group of 24. 

Agriculture: The effort would be mostly directed at Poland, which faces food shortages this winter.
The proposed actions, including supplying machinery and pesticides, would be furnished with the goal of making Poland agriculturally self-sufficient, a goal "the country seems capable of achieving," the commission said. 

Market access: Exports from the two countries should have freer access to Western markets, requiring lower tariffs and fewer trade restrictions.
But EC officials say far-reaching measures in this regard will take time because of the effects on international trade agreements. 

Direct investment: The two countries will be eligible for secured loans from the European Investment Bank and other EC institutions.
The commission is also prepared to finance risk-capital operations and urged other countries to take similar measures. 

Professional training: The commission said the most urgent need is for professional know-how in financial services and banking.
Customs and statistics professionals also need special training, the EC said. 

Environment: The Group of 24 said it wants to help Hungary and Poland clean up heavily polluted industrial regions of the countries.
The two countries have asked for help in acquiring pollution-control technology. 

The EC's contribution would include $200 million that would be provided through the 1990 EC budget.
Although that contribution still has to be approved by the Parliament and the Council of Ministers, EC officials were confident that it could be raised. 

Both the U.S. and Japan, the two richest nations in the group, have so far been vague about just how much money they are willing to pledge.
EC officials say some countries still have a wait-and-see attitude.
But they expect stronger commitments as particular aid projects are set up. 

EC officials said that delegates to the meeting were satisfied with the coordinated effort to help the two countries, and that they would continue to work together on the problem.
The Group of 24 considers "rapid support" on the part of industrialized nations as "indispensable to answer the two countries' demands," Messrs.
Delors and Andriessen said. 

