.START 

General Electric Co. tapped William J. Sheeran, a cost-cutting and efficiency sleuth, for a new post designed to find economies of scale in its 14 key businesses. 

"We're trying to leverage some of the same concepts" that might be applied specifically to a division and apply them to the company as a whole, Mr. Sheeran said. 

The engineer, who will become vice president of corporate engineering, production and sourcing on Oct. 1, will scrutinize GE, other companies and academia to find efficiency techniques that can be implemented companywide, he said. 

Formerly general manager of the technology department for GE Electrical Distribution and Control, the 50-year-old Mr. Sheeran oversaw a four-year project to automate the department's lighting panelboard production. 

At the department's operation in Plainview, Conn., five production facilities were folded into one and the number of parts in the panelboard was reduced to 1,275 from 28,000, while the number of product configurations was expanded to more than 40,000.
Also, the order-to-ship cycle was cut to three days from three weeks. 

Previously, the corporate engineering and manufacturing operation had worked efficiencies between GE's business groups, but mostly on a trouble-shooting or consulting basis.
That operation will be folded into Mr. Sheeran's group, which he said will be looking for better ways to do things before problems crop up. 

Last year, GE had total costs and expenses of more than $35 billion.
The company's annual goal is to improve cost productivity by 6%.
The Fairfield, Conn., concern has interests in many businesses including lighting, plastics, aircraft engines, industrial products, appliances, electrical controls, medical systems, factory automation and broadcasting and financial services. 

Mr. Sheeran wouldn't discuss his strategy in the new job and said corporate headquarters didn't outline problems to be addressed.
But "the most dramatic things will be focused on the product businesses rather than services," Mr. Sheeran said. 

Sourcing -- or purchasing -- is often viewed as "under production," he said, and putting it on equal ground with manufacturing and engineering should strengthen GE's ability to streamline operations.
The general managers of GE's sourcing, technology resources and production resources operations will report to Mr. Sheeran, who in turn will report to Edward E. Hood, GE vice chairman. 

Mr. Sheeran, who has a doctorate in aerospace engineering and a master's degree in mechanical engineering from Syracuse University, has also worked in GE's fluid mechanics program. 

