.START 

Par Pharmaceutical Inc., the generic-drug maker that has been plagued by management problems and a government investigation, said it named Kenneth I. Sawyer as interim president and chief executive officer. 

A Par spokesman said a committee was continuing its search for a permanent successor for Perry Levine, Par's president, who retired.
Mr. Levine, 68 years old, announced his intention to retire in August.
The company said Mr. Levine told the board Friday that his physician advised him to retire as soon as possible.
Mr. Sawyer is under consideration for the permanent position, a spokesman said. 

Mr. Sawyer is a lawyer who Par said has "extensive experience" in the generic-drug industry.
He most recently was vice president, general counsel at Goldline Labs, a closely held generic-drug company in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 

In a statement, Mr. Sawyer said he wanted to "restore confidence that we will conduct our business in accordance with the highest ethical and professional standards." 

In an interview, Mr. Sawyer, 43, emphasized that while the titles of president and chief executive carry the designation "interim," he said, "my charge of responsibility is not to make this an interim job." While he was at Goldline, Mr. Sawyer said he worked both as general counsel and as president of one of its subsidiaries, Bioline Laboratories, so that he has experience in management, sales and marketing of a generic-drug company. 

Mr. Sawyer said he thought Par presented "an excellent challenge" because of what he called its good foundation.
Asked how he plans to achieve his stated goal of restoring confidence in Par, Mr. Sawyer said the company would continue with its independent audits, and pointed out that as far as anyone can tell, Par wasn't dealing with a safety problem. 

"This company needs to become what I call self-regulating," said Mr. Sawyer. "The best way to deal with the FDA is to do their job for them," he said. 

The Food and Drug Administration has been investigating Par as part of an inquiry into the generic-drug industry.
Par in August suspended shipments of all of its generic drugs in tablet and capsule form after some potential manufacturing problems were raised.
Par has been gradually reintroducing products to market as they clear company reviews.
The spokesman said he didn't know the percentage of products that have been reintroduced, but that it is "smaller than 50%." He said reintroducing products is a lengthy process. 

Two weeks ago, a federal judge ordered the former president of a Par subsidiary, Quad Pharmaceuticals Inc., to pay a $250,000 fine and perform 12 months of community service.
The former official, Dilip Shah, had pleaded guilty to a charge of paying an illegal gratuity of $1,000 to a former FDA branch chief who reviewed newdrug applications. 

Sentencing of Par and Quad, which both pleaded guilty to one count of paying an illegal gratuity to an FDA official, was postponed until next month.
Ashok Patel, a former Par senior vice president who pleaded guilty to giving the FDA official about $500, also will be sentenced next month. 

