.START 

Your insightful Aug. 30 page-one story regarding the decay of the U.S.'s highway system needs to be repeated widely across our country until it becomes an unavoidable demand for action. 

The trucking industry, like any other business group, is reluctant to pay an unfair share of highway construction and maintenance costs.
Still, in the past, when the allocation of user fees was structured for fairness and the truckers were shown how their share of the cost would be an excellent return on investment, they have been supportive. 

While the estimated long-term cost of bringing the system "up to standard" is a daunting amount, the U.S. cannot just write off the task as hopeless.
We need to start now. 

Edward C. Levy Jr. 

Detroit 

Your article does a good job of describing the factors responsible for our highways.
A very basic solution is an economic one: Make the trucks, which cause most of the destruction, pay their own way.
This probably would have an additional benefit of moving the freight to the railroads, which would cause less pollution than the diesels now crowding our highways.
The highways then would be safer for other traffic. 

David N. Schaaf 

Escanaba, Mich. 

Two solutions to the decaying interstate highways: (a) Tax the 80,000-pound truck at a rate 9,600 times the tax on an auto or (2) heaven forbid, get these road busters off the interstate and onto the rails. 

If one adds the $565 billion to $655 billion repair bill to the low trucking costs of the past decade or two, trucking costs don't seem so low after all. 

Paul S. Proefrock 

South Dennis, Mass. 

Your story correctly notes that much repair has to be done.
But this maintenance backlog would be reduced significantly if the federal government would release some of the billions in taxes being held hostage in the Highway Trust Fund to make the budget deficit look smaller. 

Also, we regret that the Department of Transportation saw fit to resurrect that highly suspect and theoretical canard that a legally loaded tractor-semitrailer does "as much damage to an interstate as 9,600 cars." That flawed "conclusion" is based on a 1959 study of pavement designs that proved that roads designed to fail did so, and that pavements designed to withstand anticipated traffic passed the test with flying colors. 

Further, this 30-year-old study did not include the effects of weather, materials and chemicals on roads.
There simply are too many variables to make these pavement-performance predictions reliable.
Highways are wearing out today because of use, because they are old, because they have been ignored and because they weren't properly built. 

It's time to release the billions in federal road taxes already paid and not look for new ways to gouge an industry that's already paying its fair share. 

Thomas J. Donohue 

President and CEO 

American Trucking Associations 

Alexandria, Va. 

