.START 

A surprise proposal by Iran that would revamp OPEC's production quotas stalled formal sessions and sent oil ministers back into private huddles on the plan's viability. 

The meeting is scheduled to resume this afternoon. 

The Iranian proposal brings centerstage a potentially wrenching issue that many thought the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries would sidestep at this session -- the redistribution of production rights among its 13 member nations. 

Some OPEC countries have been clamoring for what amounts to a reduction in the relative output shares of nations already pumping near capacity, and reallocating that to those with large, unused potential.
But as this meeting approached, it seemed ministers had little appetite for that job.
It was believed they'd probably only set a new fourth-quarter production ceiling to recognize rising demand and parcel out any boost on a pro-rata basis. 

Late yesterday, however, Iran unveiled its new quota proposal, after an acrimonious morning session failed to resolve the production-ceiling debate.
The Iranian proposal has support from some large producers and could win favor from a few others because it takes into account some of the widely varying differences in the production capacities of the exporters. 

But adoption is far from assured.
Among other things, it effectively means any opportunity for increased output for five members will depend on the marketplace. 

Oil markets oscillated on the day's reports from Geneva, with crude futures ending mostly higher on optimism that OPEC will reach agreement.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, West Texas Intermediate for November delivery ended at $19.53 a barrel, up seven cents. 

Iran proposed an increase in OPEC's official ceiling -- to 21.5 million barrels a day for the fourth quarter, slightly above Saudi Arabia's morning proposal of 21 million barrels a day.
OPEC's current official ceiling is 19.5 million barrels daily, but because of quota cheating, actual production is running around 22 million. 

Unlike the Saudi proposal, however, the Iranian plan calls for doling out the added production rights only partly on a pro-rata basis.
It would maintain the percentage shares of OPEC's three largest producers -- Saudi Arabia's 24.5% and Iraq's and Iran's quotas of 14.7% each. 

It would offer special allocations of 1,350,000 barrels a day to Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, chronic overproducers that have been agitating for larger shares.
Each has a current quota of slightly more than one million barrels. 

Three other countries -- Ecuador, Gabon and Qatar -- would also be due special treatment under the Iranian proposal. 

The remaining five countries -- Venezuela, Indonesia, Algeria, Nigeria and Libya -- wouldn't get the increased allotments of the others, and primarily would have to rely on higher market prices for most of their economic gains.
However, they don't currently have huge unused production capacity, and price has been increasingly important to them anyway. 

Thus, proponents of the Iranian plan argued it could improve the positions of these countries by reducing rampant quota cheating, which would in turn firm OPEC's oil prices. 

"Demand {for OPEC's oil} is very high," said Gholamreza Aghazadeh, Iran's oil minister, in an interview. "Now is the best time to solve the {quota} problems inside OPEC.
If we can solve the problems inside OPEC, the price will go up.
If we can't, the price will go down." 

Other OPEC delegates agreed the five countries could benefit from higher oil prices. "But if the market doesn't respond positively, these countries could lose both politically and economically," conceded one delegate. 

Libya's oil minister didn't seem to be impressed.
Asked by reporters if the proposal was acceptable, the official, Fawzi A. Shakshuki, replied: "The way it is submitted: No." Mr. Shakshuki has been calling for production parity with Kuwait even though some say Libya doesn't have that much output capacity. 

The Iranian plan appeared to win support from Saudi Arabia and Iraq, two Persian Gulf heavyweights with considerable capacity whose percentage shares of output would be left intact.
Also attractive to Saudi Arabia, OPEC's biggest producer, is that it might curb cheating, something the kingdom has traditionally opposed. 

Plus, the Saudi delegation has been aggressive here in promoting a 21.5-million-barrel ceiling, the same as proposed by Iran.
It only proposed a slightly lower ceiling yesterday morning in hopes of winning a compromise.
The strong role of the Saudis here has come despite the absence of their influential oil minister, Hisham Nazer, who is recuperating from major surgery.
It is understood that the minister is in constant telephone communication with the delegation. 

