.START 

What is the dark stuff we see in the sky surrounding the twinkling stars made up of?
Do black holes explode?
Why are we here?
Is our universe special and tailor-made for us?
How can you tell the difference between bosons and fermions?
Science writer John Gribbin and astronomy professor Martin Rees ask some wide-ranging questions in "Cosmic Coincidences: Dark Matter, Mankind and Anthropic Cosmology" (Bantam, 304 pages, $19.95), and even when they don't have answers, their speculations are interesting and put forth in graceful English. 

They seek to find links between the cosmic events and humankind, a discipline dubbed "anthropic cosmology." Some of the theories and cosmic curiosities described in these pages would make great plot elements for any sci-fi film.
Particularly strange is a discussion of "cosmic strings," a theory based on the speculation that the universe is held together by some sort of galactic spaghetti. 

"American Renaissance: Our Life at the Turn of the 21st Century" (St.
Martin's, 320 pages, $19.95), by Dr. Marvin Cetron and Owen Davies, presents trends the authors think will soon affect our lives in the areas of science and technology, business, society and politics.
Dr. Cetron has consulted numerous government agencies, corporations and associations on future trends; Mr. Davies is a former editor of Omni magazine.
Expect among other things: more dumps and recycling centers in your neighborhood (but also an increase in fancy restaurants), cars that last 20 years, acceptance of acupuncture, a dramatic increase in surgicenters and walk-in clinics. 

Basically, the outlook is encouraging.
Using charts, graphs and extensive economic and social studies, the authors paint a picture of a vibrant America surging into the next century, with benefits for all of us who now live with our noses to the grindstone, working for the weekend, thanking God it's Friday, making life-changing, earth-shattering decisions every day: "What shall I wear today?" "What shall I have for dinner?" "Shall I go out or watch 'Three's Company' reruns tonight?" 

Such worries pale in comparison to the terror-filled existence endured by reincarnated humans living two billions years in the future when Earth has been destroyed and competing alien races are dueling in a weird galaxy. 

This is the scary story told in A.A. Attanasio's new novel, "The Last Legends of Earth" (Doubleday, 496 pages, $18.95).
It has all the typical sci-fi devices -- galactic war, evil aliens, laser battles -- plus some amor vincit omnia thrown in.
The Rimstalker, an alien intelligence that re-animates the human race from surviving genes, subsequently uses humans as bait for the zotl, a contentious bunch of winged spiders who are at war with the Rimstalker.
Earthlings are faced with the choice of being eaten alive by zotls or having their re-created earth destroyed after the zotls have been lured and wasted by the Rimstalker.
Two re-animated humans hold the key to the survival of the human race.
There is enough gushy love stuff and high galactic adventure for fans of Harlequins and Luke Skywalker. 

A lush, grass-covered planet that remains untouched by a plague threatening the extinction of the human race is the setting for "Grass" (Doubleday, 655 pages, $19.95), a new novel by Sheri S. Tepper.
A diplomat from Earth and her family are sent to the planet Grass to find out why a virus that made the human body "devour itself as in a spasm of biological self-hatred" is non-existent there.
The unspoiled beauty of Grass hides not only the solution to the decimating plague, but some universe-shaking mysteries.
Ms. Tepper's lucidly lyrical prose is a refreshing change from the typical shoot-'em-up, save-the-universe fare. 

"Nightshade" (Atlantic Press, 276 pages, $18.95), by Jack Butler, has a vampire on Mars who is the hero of the story.
Really.
The Red Planet has been colonized in the 21st century by politicians, space cowboys and "janglers" (humans who have replaced their brains with computers).
John Shade, a vampire who happens to be a cattle rancher, is called on (more like blackmailed) to stop a revolt that would jeopardize the Martian colony.
The topsy-turvy, ever-changing plot makes "Nightshade" an interesting interplanetary romp. 

Joe Haldeman's "Buying Time" (Morrow, 300 pages, $18.95) is Ponce de Leon having a PCP flashback.
The grim reaper has been cheated on Earth in the 21st century, thanks to the Stileman Process, a medical procedure that rejuvenates the human body.
Every 10 to 12 years, though, the process has to be repeated, at a cost of a million pounds or all of one's assets, whichever is greater.
Dallas Barr, just-rejuvenated and ready to start peddling and scheming to get the million he needs for his next process, unwittingly becomes the target of a rubout by the world's most powerful men. "Buying Time" is an exciting vision of the path to the Fountain of Youth cobbled with avarice and stained with blood. 

Mr. Pritchett is a student at Dartmouth. 

