.START 

Government efforts to hammer the dollar lower shook the stock and bond markets, pushing prices down sharply. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbled 22.42 points to 2659.19, albeit in light trading.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond lost more than a point, or over $10 for every $1,000 face amount. 

Analysts said the overall declines in the financial markets are symptomatic of the relatively high prices that stocks and bonds have reached in recent months. "We're really on a razor's edge with regard to valuation," said Abby Joseph Cohen, a market strategist at Drexel Burnham Lambert.
Investors' "happy view of the dollar is being shaken, and that's reverberating through the bond and stock markets." 

The rout came after a weekend meeting of finance ministers and central bankers from the major industrialized nations.
The joint statement from the meeting declared that the dollar's recent strength is "inconsistent with longer run economic fundamentals." The central banks backed up the statement with concerted intervention beginning in Japan and continuing through the trading day in Europe and the U.S., sending the dollar spiraling downward. 

The dollar's dive spooked bond traders early in the U.S. trading session.
Bond traders said the battle to push the dollar lower seems to have heated up, and there isn't a clear view of how much lower the U.S. currency will be forced.
Fears of further dollar declines were fanned when West German Bundesbank President Karl Otto Poehl said the dollar's plunge was consistent with the intentions of the finance ministers and central bankers. 

But the fight on the currency front wasn't the only problem for bond prices.
Surprisingly strong mid-September auto sales suggested that the economy may be reaccelerating.
That would eliminate any economic incentive the Federal Reserve might have to allow interest rates to fall.
However, some analysts cautioned that the auto sales may be a temporary phenomenon as consumers scurry to purchase 1989 models before the pricier 1990 models flood dealer lots. 

In any case, the weaker bond market took its toll on stock prices.
Although trading volume was thin, the decline on the New York Stock Exchange was broadly based, with 1,031 issues declining and only 445 rising.
Drexel Burnham's Ms. Cohen said stock prices are at a sufficiently high level that they can't tolerate a rise in interest rates.
Yet she said that with the dollar declining and a flood of new debt issues about to come to market, higher interest rates seem very likely. 

"It's very, very hard to construct any kind of bullish case right now," she said. 

The Dow Jones Transportation Average took a hard hit, too.
It lost 20.09 points to 1428.17 after a Wall Street Journal story reported that Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner asked for a reduction in KLM Royal Dutch Airlines' investment in NWA Inc., the parent of Northwest Airlines.
Mr. Skinner and other government officials have expressed concern about the levels of debt and foreign influence in recent airline takeovers. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices fell in thin trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 121.1 million shares. 

Bond prices tumbled.
The yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue rose to 8.29%. 

(See related story: "Foreign Exchange: Central Banks Join Forces to Drive Currency Down" -- WSJ Sept. 26, 1989.) 

