.START 

In a startling reversal, B.A.T Industries PLC proposed a restructuring to fend off Sir James Goldsmith's #13.35 billion ($21.14 billion) takeover bid. 

The besieged British conglomerate said it plans to break itself up by spinning off or selling about #4 billion in assets.
For sale will be its U.S. retailing businesses, including its flagship Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field stores, in a transaction that could raise #1.2 billion. 

In addition, B.A.T is seeking to increase its dividend by 50% and buy back as much as 10% of its shares.
The idea is to raise the value of B.A.T shares beyond the reach of Sir James. 

Under its proposed reshaping, the big British tobacco, financial-services, retailing and paper giant would shrink itself down to two businesses: tobacco and financial services.
In the process, it would undo many of the acquisitions that over the past several years made the company Britain's sixth-largest. 

B.A.T's move, which went further than many had expected, suggests that the current wave of takeovers sweeping Europe could lead to a radical restructuring of European conglomerates.
Takeover analysts in Europe said the strong B.A.T reaction marked the first time in recent memory such a large company had undertaken a massive restructuring in response to a takeover bid. 

For the U.S., B.A.T's proposed sale of its department stores will likely increase turmoil in the retail industry by putting even more big-name retailers on the auction block. "It's the selling of America," said Peter Solomon, a New York investment banker who specializes in retailing. "Never before have so many great retail assets been for sale at one time." 

Most recently, Campeau Corp. put its crown jewel, Bloomingdale's, up for sale as a result of a serious cash crunch at Campeau.
Campeau may have to sell other stores as well, analysts have said. 

Earlier this year, L.J. Hooker Corp., owner of Bonwit Teller and B. Altman, filed for bankruptcy protection, and industry executives have speculated that one or both chains will be sold.
May Department Stores Co. has also disclosed its interest in selling its Caldor and Venture discount businesses. 

The announcement by B.A.T essentially assures that the conglomerate will be dismantled, either on its own terms or those of Sir James.
Up until yesterday, B.A.T had steadfastly denied any suggestions by the Anglo-French financier and others that it would have to take such a drastic step. 

While B.A.T's restructuring accomplishes a big chunk of Sir James's agenda and marks a striking about-face from earlier vows not to dismantle, it isn't clear if the moves will be sufficient to preserve the conglomerate's independence. 

Besides its Saks and Marshall Field stores, B.A.T also would put up for sale in the U.S. its Ivey's department-store chain and Breuners, a furniture retailer and renter. 

In addition, B.A.T would divest its big U.S. and United Kingdom paper businesses and U.K. retailing interests to existing shareholders through issues of new equity in the two businesses, which would be separately quoted on London's Stock Exchange. 

B.A.T forecast a 50% dividend increase and said it was optimistic about getting approval for its buy-back proposal and the other plans at an extraordinary shareholder meeting Oct. 19. 

Calling yesterday a "sad" day, B.A.T Chairman Patrick Sheehy said the restructuring was needed to "address concern of shareholders about the value of B.A.T businesses on the stock market compared to underlying value." He acknowledged that Sir James's intervention had put pressure on him to make this move.
Now B.A.T is "doing something about it," without making a big pay-out to Sir James and his partners, he said in an interview. 

The proposed restructuring makes the British conglomerate -- which after the move would be about two-thirds its size in annual sales and fourth-fifths its size in pre-tax profit -- "a very good and exciting business for the 1990s and beyond," Mr. Sheehy said. "It's quite clear to the market and to shareholders that the price isn't going to fall back" to the 694-pence-a-share ($10.99-a-share) level that prevailed before Sir James launched his bid in July, he contended. 

Analysts in London and New York estimated that the company's restructuring plan values each B.A.T share at between 855 pence and 926 pence, compared with the 850-pence-a-share offer launched July 11 by Sir James's bidding group, Hoylake Investments Ltd.
In London trading yesterday, B.A.T shares surged as much as 44 pence to 860 pence after the announcement but lost some of the gains in a declining market to close at 818 pence, up two pence. 

The new B.A.T strategy puts Sir James in a bind.
His Hoylake group, which includes fellow financiers Jacob Rothschild of Britain and Kerry Packer of Australia, can't effectively accelerate plans for a sweetened, largely cash bid to replace its current all-paper, highly leveraged offer while it remains uncertain of U.S. regulatory approval for a change in control of B.A.T's Farmers Group Inc. insurance unit. 

In an interview, Sir James said the B.A.T plan was a "good step forward" that he said Hoylake would support at the Oct. 19 meeting.
But he said the plan "doesn't go far enough," and left open the possibility he might mount a bid for the leaner, meaner B.A.T. 

"I don't believe there is any great synergy between tobacco and financial services and insurance in particular," he added.
In the meantime, Hoylake will press ahead with efforts to secure U.S. regulatory approval. "We say, 'Well done.
Keep going and you won't need to be restructured by other people if you go all the way.
If you don't, other people will have to do it for you. '" 

Mr. Sheehy said B.A.T hopes to complete its restructuring sometime early next year.
He said the disposal of the U.S. retailing assets would be orderly.
While declining to identify any possible buyers, he said, "We had approaches from just about everybody for just about everything." Analysts have said potential bidders for the U.S. department-store chains are May Department Stores, Dillard Department Stores Inc., Sears, Roebuck & Co. and General Cinema Corp. 

According to sources familiar with the situation, Dillard contacted Sir James several weeks ago and offered to buy the Saks chain from him if Mr. Goldsmith's bid for the company were successful. 

William Dillard, chairman and chief executive, declined to comment on that report.
However, he said, "Marshall Field, Saks and Ivey's are all desirable properties, and we would be interested in looking at all three when they are available." 

In addition, Philip B. Miller, chairman and chief executive of Marshall Field, said he intends to make "an aggressive buy-out offer" with other managers for the chain.
Saks officials declined to comment on whether they will attempt to make a management buy-out. 

Marshall Field, once an erratic performer, has experienced a revival under Mr. Miller's stewardship.
The chain, whose legendary motto, "Give the Lady What She Wants," had lost much of its meaning in the 1970s, now boasts a 14% market share in the Chicago area.
In 1988, its 24 stores posted sales of $1.02 billion. 

Arthur Martinez, group executive for retailing at B.A.T's U.S. subsidiary, said 1988 was the most profitable year in Marshall Field history.
He said Saks performed at credible levels but didn't equal the gains at Field.
He described Breuners and Ivey's as "turnaround situations but good franchises." 

Although only two months ago B.A.T Chairman Sheehy had said the conglomerate could remain independent without dismantling its empire, yesterday he said the latest restructuring move "was anticipated five years ago.
Today simply hastens the process." 

So while Sir James and Hoylake appear to have lost a battle, they may yet win the war.
On the public-relations front, B.A.T has largely accepted Sir James's controversial claim that overextended conglomerates need to "unbundle" to focus on fewer businesses.
Meanwhile, the prospect of a takeover still remains. 

Moreover, B.A.T's unusually broad response, a departure for European bids, could mean corporate raiding will produce potentially big payoffs in Europe as in the U.S. 

That's the way Sir James played it yesterday. "I consider it a victory for our ideas.
We are still in the arena and still moving forward," he said.
He added that the increase in B.A.T's share price since Hoylake first began accumulating shares has about covered its costs, estimated in the tens of millions of dollars.
Hoylake currently holds about 20 million B.A.T shares, valued at about #160 million. 

