.START 

From 1907 until the outbreak of World War I, Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque together made a revolution in art.
During that time they each worked separately in their own Paris studios, but they saw each other frequently -- for extended periods, daily when possible -- and eagerly discussed their most recent works.
In this way, the two men, so different in temperament, converged in the invention of the radical new style that came to be known as cubism. 

In a tumultuous century, cubism was the most radical and influential of all the many movements and isms in modern art.
More than any other of these styles, it marked the end of the Renaissance tradition of naturalistic image-making.
Just how this revolution came about, and what the roles of its two main inventors were, is the subject of the Museum of Modern Art's new exhibition, "Picasso and Braque: Pioneering Cubism," which will be on view until Jan. 16. 

The first thing to be said about this exhibition is that it is one of the most beautiful and moving shows the museum has mounted in recent years.
This is not only because it includes some of the most beautiful and moving art created in our century, but also because that art is presented with a rare sensitivity to its special qualities.
This is a vast show, comprising nearly 400 works, many of them cryptic and confined to a single color, but it is constantly exciting as well as challenging. 

As you go through this show, you learn a good deal about Picasso, Braque and cubism.
But the classroom element here is painless, and such potentially pedantic aspects of the overall arrangement as its rigorously chronological order and its lecturing wall panels, happily melt, as it were, into the intensity of the experience of seeing the art. 

The exhibition starts on the ground-floor galleries with Picasso's violently fractured "Demoiselles d'Avignon" of 1907, the brothel scene that generally is regarded as the beginning of the cubist adventure.
Subsequent galleries set forth the pictorial dialogue that this large painting provoked between Picasso and Braque, who when he first saw it said he felt as if he had been asked to "eat rope or drink gasoline." Braque's own work after that encounter was radically transformed, as is evident in his "Large Nude" of 1908, an important but rarely exhibited picture from a French private collection.
This show is rich in rarely seen pictures.
Just a little farther on is Picasso's "Three Women" of 1908, a powerful canvas nearly as large as the more famous "Demoiselles." Lent by the Hermitage in Leningrad, it is one of many here from Soviet museums turning generous under perestroika.
Numerous other loans from abroad and from private collections make this a unique opportunity to compare at first hand works that may never again be seen together. 

In the galleries dedicated to the works done between 1909 and 1911, the pictures leave the imitation of objective reality further and further behind, as their palette turns more resolutely monochromatic -- although every now and then Braque seems unable to restrain himself from adding a few vivid notes of color.
The nature of the dialogue between Picasso and Braque also becomes clearer as the exhibition unfolds, with some wonderfully informative juxtapositions.
The pairing of Braque's luminously transparent "Harbor in Normandy" with Picasso's blocky, stonelike "Landscape With Bridge," both from the spring of 1909, show us how different were the two men's artistic temperaments.
While Braque was a more lyrical painter who tended to emphasize light and space, Picasso was more bound to solid objects and more concerned with the sculptural logic of his forms. 

Similarly, the juxtaposition of two or more works by the same artist often reveals a lot about the development of his thinking at a given time.
The pairing of Picasso's still somewhat sculptural "Woman With a Mandolin (Fanny Tellier)," done in the spring of 1910, with his "Guitarist," which was painted just a few months later, provides an eloquent insight into the way Picasso worked toward greater abstraction at that time. 

This process reaches a culmination in the so-called analytical cubist paintings of 1910-12.
In the galleries devoted to them, the work virtually engulfs you with its mystical atmosphere.
In picture after picture the world is translated into complex ensembles of fragmentary, earth-colored signs; individual objects are barely recognizable. 

But here again, Picasso held onto remnants of the real world more strongly than did Braque.
In his 1910 portrait of the art dealer Ambroise Vollard, for example, although the space in much of the picture is fragmented almost to the point of abstraction, the subject's face stands out, clearly recognizable as a vivid portrait. 

From this pinnacle, the show continues with what might have made a fine exhibition all by itself devoted to Braque and Picasso's invention of "constructed" sculpture and collage.
It was Braque, as this show demonstrates, who apparently built the first cardboard and wood reliefs, which were constructed -- cut out and assembled -- rather than modeled or carved like traditional sculpture.
But as is evident in the earlier part of the show, although it was Braque who first made certain innovations, it was Picasso who frequently made the most of them. 

This is apparent in the rich selection of constructed sculptures and pasted paper compositions on view here.
The virtuosity, variety -- and wittiness -- of Picasso's work in these mediums are quite astounding.
The selection of works also is excellent, including as it does the seminal "Still Life With Chair Caning" of May 1912, in which Picasso first mixed the languages of painting and pasting, and "Guitar, Sheet Music, and Glass," another early collage that resonantly combines a newspaper clipping with other pasted-in fragments from the worlds of commerce and the imagination. 

It is at this point that you also reach the first and only place to sit in the whole show.
And here, whether you have strolled through rather quickly or have spent several hours really studying the treasures before you, you doubtless will want to rest your weary bones while you prepare yourself to see how bright color and more easily recognizable forms eventually worked their way back into cubist art.
At this point you probably also will promise yourself that you will come back and see this show again.
Which you should.
More than once. 

The exhibition, which is sponsored by Philip Morris Cos., will be seen only in New York.
It was conceived and installed by William Rubin, the director emeritus of the museum's department of painting and sculpture, who also wrote the informative and richly illustrated catalogue. 

