.START 

A grand jury agreed to investigate last Wednesday's crash of a USAir Group Inc. jetliner at the request of Queens, N.Y., District Attorney John J. Santucci. 

The plane, bound for Charlotte, N.C., crashed at La Guardia Airport in Queens killing two of 63 passengers. 

Mr. Santucci's decision to present the inquiry to the grand jury is unusual and could lead to criminal charges against the pilots. 

The grand-jury investigation threatens to undermine future airline-crash inquiries, warns Airline Pilots Association President Henry Duffy. "Never has anyone talked about criminal penalties in airline safety before," he said. 

It is unusual, perhaps unheard of, for local authorities to conduct a criminal investigation into an airline crash, most observers agree.
Mr. Duffy says Mr. Santucci's actions set a far-reaching and disturbing precedent.
Mr. Duffy contends that airline and airport personnel, fearful that they might be indicted, will be reluctant to cooperate with National Transportation and Saftey Board inquiries.
That lack of cooperation will delay the airline industry's, the union's and NTSB's joint effort to find out what went wrong and correct the error, Mr. Duffy said. 

"What we got here is a grandstanding D.A. who is into an area he knows nothing about," Mr. Duffy said. 

A National Transportation Safety Board spokesman says he doubts Mr. Santucci's criminal investigation undermines the NTSB's efforts.
The spokesman pointed out that last May charges of criminal recklessness were brought against the ship captain of the Exxon Valdez by Alaskan authorities when the Exxon Corp. tanker ran aground and spilled 10.9 million gallons of oil into the Prince William Sound. 

"We have seen criminal investigations conducted by local authorities at the same time as ours before," he said. 

A spokesman for the Queens district attorney said no specific targets have been named and no charges have been brought in the investigation of the La Guardia crash. 

The grand-jury investigations could lead to the indictment of Capt. Michael Martin, and co-pilot Constantine Kleissas on reckless-endangerment or negligent-homicide charges. 

The pilots' lawyer, Frederick P. Hafetz, contends Mr. Santucci has "no basis for any criminal investigation." 

