.START 

The Senate rejected a White House bid to restore cuts from fiscal 1990 appropriations for the D-5 Trident missile and the Pentagon's ambitious Strategic Defense Initiative. 

The 66-34 roll call represents a significant defeat for SDI and puts pressure on Senate negotiators to move closer to the lower authorized funding level approved by the House.
The fate of the D-5 remains unclear, but the impact of last night's vote is to let stand a Senate Appropriations Committee decision to withhold all new procurement money for the troubled weapon system. 

"SDI is a perishable commodity and it is going downhill on both sides of Congress," said Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn, who backed the restoration of funds but said he hadn't crafted the specific amendment. "It's a big pot of money," said the Georgia Democrat, "and the goals are elusive and vague." 

The administration fared better on two separate issues as the Senate rejected, 7129, an effort to withhold production funding for Northrop Corp. 's B-2 bomber, and on a 65-34 roll call, senators effectively blocked a proposal that U.S. troop strength in South Korea be cut by 3,000. 

The action came as the Senate approved major revisions adding almost $8.5 billion to a $279.6 billion spending bill funding the Pentagon through the new fiscal year beginning Sunday.
Although the modified bill represents a 2% increase above current appropriations, in judging where to spend the additional funds, the Armed Services Committee found itself in competition with the appropriations panel. 

Defense contractors lobbied alongside arms control advocates in the hallways outside the chamber, and the parliamentary situation forced conservative Republicans to choose in some cases between SDI and expenditures on space programs and conventional weapons important to interests at home. 

Among the biggest beneficiaries of the competition was McDonnell Douglas Corp., manufacturer of the Army's Apache helicopter, and almost $1.49 billion is allocated for various shipbuilding accounts, including a major initiative to expand the military's sealift capacity. 

Sufficient SDI funding is preserved to allow the space-based anti-missile program to keep pace with inflation.
But the Senate appropriations level -- $3.7 billion -- is estimated to be $600 million below the amount first authorized by the Senate this year.
Even the GOP amendment yesterday sought only to restore about half, or $298.4 million, of this cut, and similarly, the panel proposed adding back only half of $1.8 billion initially requested by the Pentagon for D-5 procurement. 

The defense debate came as the Senate gave quick approval to back-to-back fiscal 1990 bills covering U.S. foreign assistance as well as the Departments of Labor, Education, and Health and Human Services.
The action ends an impasse that has prolonged the entire appropriations process, but with just days left in the current fiscal year, Congress has no expectation of reaching agreement on the bulk of fiscal 1990 spending before the deadline Sunday. 

By a 274-152 margin, the House yesterday approved a stopgap measure to keep the government operating through Oct. 25.
This is expected to become the new deadline for resolving a host of budgetary issues complicated by the certain threat of at least a temporary across-the-board spending cut under the Gramm-Rudman deficit law. 

The nearly $14.4 billion foreign-assistance bill, approved 89-11, includes an estimated $100 million in economic aid and guarantees for Poland, and authorizes the Overseas Private Investment Corp. to begin operations in Poland and Hungary. 

The massive Labor, Education and Health and Human Services bill, adopted 81-19, allocates more than $140 billion among major social and medical programs, including a 30% increase for research and treatment activities for acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
The measure also contains what amounts to down payments on promised initiatives for child care and federal aid for elementary public-school students from lower-income families. 

The Senate action came as negotiators neared an agreement that would clear the way for lawmakers to consider a $3.1 billion anti-drug initiatve, adding $900 million to President Bush's proposals for fiscal 1990 and imposing an 0.43% cut on defense and domestic accounts.
The remaining issue involved a procedure for Senate consideration of Mr. Bush's legislative anti-crime package before Congress quits for the year. 

The anti-drug package, agreed to by Senate Democrats and the Bush administration, includes about $1 billion in new spending authority for federal prison construction, another approximately $1 billion for various treatment and prevention programs, about $806 million for federal law-enforcement and drug-interdiction agencies, and about $120 million for the federal judiciary. 

