.START 

When it comes to advertising, Circuit City Stores is no Burger King.
Its account is big, but hardly enormous.
Its chain of consumer-electronics stores isn't exactly sexy.
And it doesn't offer the same prestige, the high-profile cachet, that prompts ad agencies to pursue the fast-food and soft drink giants of the world. 

Why, then, were dozens of agencies apparently willing to go through almost anything -- countless all-nighters, thousands of dollars in unrecoverable expenses -- to win the account? 

The answer lies in agencies' increasing desperation to woo potential new clients.
As big pieces of new business become increasingly scarce, clients are finding that they can ask almost anything of agencies clamoring for their business.
And they do. 

How far will agencies go? "As far as you can imagine," says Leslie Winthrop, president of the Advertising Agency Register, which helps clients find agencies and which was involved in the early stages of the Circuit City search. "With the environment for new business, the competitiveness, agencies don't have a choice any more.
There's one-upmanship no matter what you do.
There's 10 agencies that will do more and spend more." 

Ms. Winthrop says she doesn't believe clients set out to take advantage of ad agencies, to push to see how far agencies will go. "I think they just know they can have it," she says. 

Circuit City's became just the latest in a string of heavy-handed account pitches when the company tapped WPP Group's J. Walter Thompson last week for its $20 million to $25 million account.
The company began looking for an agency in February, narrowing its list of prospective agencies from 60 to 30 to 11 to seven to five and, finally, to two.
It still couldn't make up its mind, so it paid the two agencies, Thompson and Young & Rubicam, to work for it for three months.
The entire process took eight months and at least four separate rounds of full-blown agency presentations.
While other clients have held several rounds of agency presentations, Circuit City's summer-long trial carried the process to extremes.
Greg Jones, Circuit City's assistant vice president of corporate advertising, says the trial run wasn't initially a part of the company's plans. "But in retrospect I would do it again. . . . I would recommend it" to others, he says. 

Even with the fee Circuit City paid the two finalists for their summer's work, ad executives believe that all the participants lost money on the pitch.
But all went along for the ride largely because Circuit City has emerged as one of the strongest and fastest-growing consumer electronics chains in the country.
Agencies were also encouraged because the chain spends a total of about $125 million in advertising annually -- holding out hope that the victorious agency might get more than $25 million in business.
And even if the account doesn't grow, every bit helps. 

The pitch "was done in a very fair way," insists Bert Metter, chairman of Thompson's U.S. operations, the winner. "It wasn't them taking advantage of anybody.
If {a client} goes through a search and they aren't sure, they should go a little further and do whatever it takes." 

But how fair is it, really, for any prospective client to make those kinds of all-consuming demands on an agency?
Chiat/Day/Mojo was also asked to take part in the tie-breaker, but declined. "It was like a carrot that was being held out to you.
The rules of the game just kept changing as they went along," says Jane Newman, president of the agency's New York office.
She says that while Chiat liked Circuit City management, "it definitely wasn't fair to existing clients." 

Still, most agencies are so willing to jump through hoops that perhaps it's their own fault that prospective clients demand so much of them.
Circuit City first had agencies fill out a detailed questionnaire.
Then the agencies had to fill out a more detailed questionnaire and send along short "video presentations." Then each had to give a two-hour presentation.
Then five semifinalists had to trek to Circuit City's headquarters in Richmond, Va., for another presentation. 

After all that, Circuit City declared a tie and tapped Thompson and Young & Rubicam both to work on the account until it could make up its mind.
Then, earlier this month, each had to give yet another full-blown presentation, including creative work.
After eight months of weekends and late nights, after scores of creative concepts were produced and discarded, after research was commissioned and media plans created, Thompson finally got the business. 

Throughout the entire grueling process, "We received no reluctance from any of them," says Richard Sharp, Circuit City's president and chief executive officer. 

Indeed, despite the rigorous paces Circuit City put the agencies through, other agencies clamored to be considered.
After Interpublic's Lintas unit was cut in one of the earlier rounds, executive vice president Don Peppers showed up, unannounced, at a New Jersey hotel where Circuit City executives were listening to six finalists.
He rushed in at lunchtime with pizzas and a spiel for his agency. 

The pizza caper got Lintas back into the game, but it was later cut from the group of finalists.
And while Mr. Peppers won't comment on the incident, he has only praise for Circuit City's handling of the pitch.
Like most agency executives, he knows never to criticize anyone who might someday still become a client. 

"Circuit City's process was designed to get to know an agency.
I think it's a good idea," he says. "Now, we can quibble over whether it's fair economically or not to the two agencies involved.
But this is capitalism, and you're free to turn it down if you don't like it." Besides, he points out, if trial runs "became a custom, then the cost of doing this would be automatically built into agencies' rates." 

Pioneer Throws Switch 

Pioneer Electronics (U.S.A.), Long Beach, Calif., yesterday awarded its $10 million consumer electronics account to Goodby, Berlin & Silverstein of San Francisco. 

The account had been serviced since 1985 by Saatchi & Saatchi DFS/Pacific, the Torrance, Calif.-based unit of Saatchi & Saatchi.
Michael Fidler, a Pioneer senior vice president, said the merger of Saatchi & Saatchi Compton and Dancer Fitzgerald Sample in June 1987 was a key factor in the firm's decision to name a new agency. "We didn't feel after the first two years that they provided us with the right type of account and media support we needed," Mr. Fidler said. 

For Goodby Berlin, now a $50 million shop whose clients include Royal Viking Line and the San Francisco Examiner, the account represents a major national win.
Other finalists in the search, which began in July, included the Los Angeles offices of J. Walter Thompson, a unit of WPP Group; Della Femina, McNamee WCRS; and Omnicom Group's BBDO agency. 

Mr. Fidler said Goodby Berlin's advertising will replace Pioneer's campaign, tagged "We bring the revolution home." He said he hopes the new advertising will help foster uniformity among its many product lines and update Pioneer's image as a leader in consumer electronics technology. "We're still looked at as a brand of the 1970s," he said. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

CUTTY SARK: Buckingham Wile Co., the New York-based importer of Cutty Sark scotch, is set to return to its advertising roots in November by bringing back the Cutty Sark schooner in print ads.
Don Klein, chairman of ad agency MacNamara Clapp & Klein, New York, said focus group research indicated consumers overwhelmingly associate the ship with the brand even though it hasn't been featured prominently in ads for years.
The new ads, which feature the tagline "Live a Cutty Above," replace black and white shots of partying socialites. 

