.START 

With interest rates a full percentage point or more below last spring's levels, many people are focusing on the financing of their biggest investment -- their homes. 

Figuring that the easiest way to make money is not to spend it, they're wondering if it's time to refinance their mortgages. 

"It's become a real consideration," says William G. Brennan, a partner in the accounting firm Ernst & Young. 

The average interest rate on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage in major metropolitan areas was just under 10% last week, compared with 11.22% in late March, according to Bank Rate Monitor, a North Palm Beach, Fla., newsletter.
In Washington, D.C., for example, the average rate was 9.59%. 

And rates may go still lower in the next few months.
Robert K. Heady, publisher of Bank Rate Monitor, predicts a drop of another half to three-quarters of a percentage point by March.
Not only are interest rates in general expected to dip, he says, but mortgage rates usually decline during the winter months, when demand is low. 

Refinancing can look particularly attractive to people with adjustable rate mortgages.
Some of them have seen payments rise by several hundred dollars a month, as interest rates climbed steadily over the past two years.
The increases have been especially dramatic for those who started out with low introductory, "teaser" rates. 

As a rule of thumb, a number of financial advisers say, when borrowers can get a fixed rate close to 10%, they should lock it in. "It's kind of a good rate to have over the near term," says Robert Mahoney, executive vice president of First National Bank of Boston. 

But refinancing involves more than a simple rule of thumb. "It's time consuming, and it also costs money," says Kenneth Sheridan, president of the mortgage banking unit of Southeast Banking Corp. in Miami. 

How to decide?
Find out what it would cost to refinance and what the monthly savings would be. "Shop as many institutions as you can, write down each of the costs, and make a decision based on your bottom line," says Mr. Heady. 

The biggest cost of refinancing is usually the bank's up-front fee, or "points." Each point is equal to 1% of the amount of the mortgage.
One and a half to two points is a typical fee, although a charge of three points isn't unheard of.
Thus, on a $100,000 refinancing, a homeowner can easily expect to spend $2,000 or $3,000 for points. 

But the costs don't stop there.
Lawyers' fees can add several hundred dollars -- and that's just for the bank's attorney.
Borrowers who hire lawyers to represent their own interests face an additional charge. 

It may also be necessary to get a new appraisal of the property, particularly in parts of the country where real estate values have fallen recently, as well as a title search.
Then there are miscellaneous fees for filing various documents.
Many banks also charge an application fee of $150, which sometimes is refundable if the mortgage is approved. 

It all adds up quickly. 

There are tax considerations, too.
None of these refinancing costs is immediately deductible under current tax law.
For example, points on an original mortgage are generally deductible for the tax year in which they are paid, but points incurred in refinancing must be amortized over the life of the loan. 

Tax considerations will also affect the savings a borrower can expect from refinancing.
Since a smaller mortgage payment usually means a smaller tax deduction for mortgage-interest payments, the real, after-tax savings is often less than it appears. 

Homeowners "need to run the numbers on an after-tax basis," says Timothy Kochis, a partner in the accounting firm of Deloitte, Haskins & Sells. "The spread that may have tempted you into this in the first place may not be as big as you think it is." 

Adding up all the costs and comparing them with the prospective savings, people who don't plan to remain in their home for several more years probably shouldn't even consider refinancing. "It takes at least two or maybe as many as four years to make it worth it," says Mr. Kochis. "You have to be able to justify those costs." 

The big imponderable, or course, is what's going to happen to interest rates.
Some rate-watchers say a reasonably strong economy will keep interest rates from falling further.
But others note that aside from the unusual highs of the early 1980s, rates are still several percentage points above where they have been historically and are certain to decline. 

This uncertainty makes the refinancing question especially difficult for holders of adjustable rate mortgages.
A fixed rate of about 10% may look good compared to what they're paying now, but the adjustable-rate loan could be a better deal later if interest rates fall further. "It's your decision as to how much risk you're willing to accept," says Deborah Reed, a vice president at New York's Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co.
Some people think that over the long term it may be better to keep the adjustable rate.
Research by the U.S. League of Savings Institutions shows that most holders of adjustable rate mortgages have paid significantly less in interest than they would have on fixed rate loans. 

Someone who bought a home in September 1984, for example, with a fixed rate mortgage at the average rate of 14.35%, would be paying $1,212.63 a month on a $100,000 loan.
At the same time, the discounted introductory rate on an ARM linked to the one-year Treasury bill, a commonly used index, was 11.96%.
Although the rate could rise or fall by two percentage points a year, the average monthly payment since the loan was originated has been just $899.65.
The total savings from the adjustable rate mortgage would be about $20,000 so far. 

"You have to be real unlucky for the variable rate to cost you more than the fixed," says Greg Confair, president of Sigma Financial Inc., an Allentown, Pa., investment adviser. 

Some people might even consider refinancing from one adjustable rate mortgage to another.
A lower introductory rate could cover the costs of refinancing and also lower the all-time cap, or maximum rate, on the mortgage -- usually a set number of percentage points above either the first-year or second-year rate. 

Still, many people prefer the certainty of knowing what their housing costs will be over the long term. "A lot of first-time homeowners are strapped," says Manufacturers Hanover's Ms. Reed. "If you see a fixed rate with monthly payments you can handle and (the lower payment) covers the cost of another closing, then do it." 

Those who do decide to refinance should consider ways to reduce their costs.
For example, many financial advisers agree that for a straightforward refinancing, a borrower may be able to rely on the bank's attorney. 

Also, some of the bank's fees, including the up-front points, may be negotiable. "It depends on how hungry the institution is for fees," says Mr. Kochis of Deloitte Haskin.
The lender often can help calculate the after-tax costs of refinancing. 

In the end, a lot comes down to where you think interest rates are headed, which is a hard call for professionals these days, let alone individual homeowners. "You're having to make a gamble no matter what you do," says Mr. Kochis. "It's a game you play with the lending institution.
You're trying to outwit them and they're trying to outwit you." 

When does it pay to refinance?
Find the amount on the left that's closest to what it would cost to refinance your mortgage and the amount at the bottom that's closest to what you would save each month.
The number where the cost row and the savings column intersect is approximately how many monthsit will take for refinancing to begin paying off.
Actual pay-back periods will be affected by tax considerations. 

