.START 

President Bush will offer some thoughts about LDC debt when he addresses the IMF-World Bank annual meeting in Washington today.
But he won't need to mention to the assembled bankers and finance ministers that international efforts to relieve LDC debt are in disarray.
They already know that.
If he has some fresh ideas they will be welcome, and particularly if he emphasizes the role LDC countries themselves must play in their own salvation. 

Clearly, the idea of merely throwing more money at the problem is wearing thin.
IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus has been trying to put the best face on the uncertainties surrounding whether the IMF will soon get an increase in its quotas.
Dutch Finance Minister H. Onno Ruding, chairman of the IMF's policy-making "interim committee," tried to sound optimistic Monday about a quota-increase agreement by December.
But whichever way the President swings -- and the signals have been highly ambivalent -- certain of his advisers, not to mention Congress, are skeptical of that timetable. 

There is considerable unhappiness in those circles with Mr. Camdessus, whose reputation as a manager has not been enhanced by a record level of arrearages on IMF loans and other signs of bureaucratic lethargy.
Some see the failed nostrums of the 1970s creeping back into IMF adjustment programs.
Most important, Mr. Camdessus unwisely has created the impression that he doesn't much like to cooperate with Americans. 

Then there is the rising dissatisfaction of private banks.
The President's audience today will have clearly understood what J.P. Morgan was saying last Thursday when it announced that it was sacrificing reported earnings to create a $2 billion reserve against potential LDC debt losses.
The implicit message: If sufficiently provoked, Morgan is prepared to opt out of the "concerted lending program," through which private banks cooperate with governments, the IMF and the World Bank on LDC bailouts.
Chase Manhattan and Manufacturers Hanover also have expanded reserves.
A departure by Morgan quite possibly would mark the beginning of the end of private-bank cooperation and that could put debt relief on hold. 

Finally, the World Bank itself, under former U.S. Congressman Barber Conable, shows signs of disaffection.
Departing from the usual platitudes, the World Bank's latest World Development Report says, in effect, that most of the debt problems of the LDC countries are their own fault.
They have misused the capital previously borrowed by funneling it into inefficient state enterprises or industries controlled by politically favored elites.
Don't cry for Argentina.
Just tell them to shape up. 

Now, of course, it should be acknowledged that the U.S. had a central role in creating the debt problem.
The dollar inflation of the early 1970s, combined with price controls on U.S. oil producers, generated the "petro-dollar" surpluses of OPEC nations that banks recycled into overly generous loans to the LDCs.
But the World Bank has a crucial point if it is saying that the solutions must begin in the capitals of the LDCs themselves. 

Private banks holding LDC debt have become restive in part because Nicholas Brady and his underlings at Treasury have made forgiveness a centerpiece of debt-relief efforts.
Mr. Brady first wanted to compensate the banks by giving them guarantees on the debt remaining after partial forgiveness, but the British and Germans balked on that last spring.
The U.S. later pushed through the Mexican relief program, which does have a forgiveness element.
But now bankers and finance ministers raise doubts that such a program can be repeated. 

Mexico clearly deserved relief because President Salinas had undertaken courageous political and economic reforms.
But however much justification there has been for the Mexican program, the limitations of that model have become obvious.
Reductions in debt service to be achieved through write-downs are limited.
More to the point, banks are not keen on forking up new loans while forgiving old ones. 

Mr. Camdessus has been courting the Japanese, who are today's holders of large dollar surpluses, as potential angels for the LDCs.
But while the Japanese would like to have a stronger role in IMF deliberations in return for ponying up more money, it is by no means clear that they are prepared to buy into a Franco-Japanese alliance that would undertake to solve the problems of the world economy.
They are not wild spenders. 

So where does the IMF go from here?
Inevitably, as the World Bank report suggests, it may have to shift more responsibility for solutions to debtor-nation capitals.
But in forging any actual solution, that's where most of the responsibility belongs. 

