.START 

The days of September, and the baseball magic numbers, are dwindling to a precious few, so it's timely to review some of the differences between the game's winners and losers.
Consider, for example, the first inning of Saturday afternoon's San Francisco Giants-Houston Astros game in sunny Candlestick Park here. 

Terry Puhl leads off for the Astros and slaps Rick Reuschel's first pitch into right field for a single.
Craig Biggio is credited with a hit on Reuschel's next pitch when his bunt eludes a convention of three Giant infielders.
That puts runners on first and second with none out, but Kevin Bass strikes on a 3-2 pitch and Puhl is thrown out on a halting attempt to steal third.
Glenn Davis grounds out, pitcher to first.
No runs, two hits. 

Now it's the Giants' turn.
Brett Butler walks off Mike Scott and promptly steals second base.
Robby Thompson grounds out to second, advancing Butler to third.
Butler scores on Ken Oberkfell's fly ball to right.
Kevin Mitchell also flies out.
One run, no hits. 

As Sam Snead, the golfer, said, the question isn't how, but how many.
As Roger Craig, the baseball manager, says, "What does this team do right?
Well, it wins." 

Craig manages the Giants, for whom the magic number in the National League West had dwindled to two by the close of business Sunday, so his expertise is to be sought on such matters.
His answer was no wisecrack but a simple statement of fact.
The Giants' 91 wins led the league and should provide them a post in the post-season.
Moreover, consistency has been their byword.
They haven't had a losing month this season.
Their longest losing streak has been three games.
They haven't been swept in a series, which, I guess, at least ties a record. 

Perhaps a bit of sorcery has been involved in those accomplishments, because the Giants' pitching staff has had a medical history to make Blue Cross wince.
Three of its five current starters have spent time on the disabled list and a fourth, Don Robinson, missed a turn Sunday to allow a cortisone shot to soothe an aching knee.
No fewer than 15 pitchers have started games for the team, which also might be a record for a division winner. 

"We thought we had it bad last year when 12 different guys started," notes pitching coach Norm Sherry. "Turns out we were just getting experience to handle things this season." 

But handle things the Giants have, because the pitchers who showed up had posted a 3.29 earned run average through Saturday, the NL's second best, while the hitters have whacked away at a merry clip.
The Giants lead the league in runs scored, total bases and slugging percentage, and have the league's best run differential (684 scored vs. 576 allowed). 

"We've had the kind of hitting-pitching balance that's pretty rare," acknowledges Craig, a former pitcher who in 1986 took over a team that had won 62 and lost 100 the year before and turned in four straight winning seasons, including a division crown in 1987. 

Where the Giants have lacked balance, it has been in the direction of excess.
That's in the No. 3 and 4 spots in their batting order, manned, respectively, by Will Clark and Mitchell.
Clark was batting .337 on Sunday with 22 home runs, 103 runs scored and 109 batted in.
Mitchell's numbers were .292, 47, 100 and 125.
One or the other led the league in seven offensive categories. 

While not exactly an odd couple, the two are quite different types.
Clark is a smoothed-muscled sweet swinger, Mitchell a lunger whose 5-foot-10 frame carrying 210 pounds (not counting gold chains) would fit better in a football locker room. 

Their approaches to the batsman's art also diverge.
Clark is a devoted student of game films who "dissects the pitchers," while the more-spontaneous Mitchell "stalks" them, according to Dusty Baker, the Giants' hitting coach. 

Clark, who sat out the weekend with a bruised knee from a home-plate collision Thursday, has built his numbers steadily over a four-year big league career.
Mitchell exploded into stardom: His previous best single-season homer total was 22 in 1987.
His 47 this year has been topped just twice in the team's long, New York-SF history, both by a fella named Mays. 

The Giants' big winner from the mound has been another, uh, big Giant.
He's Rick Reuschel, a pear-shaped 40-year-old whose listed weight of 240 pounds flatters him more than a bit.
It was his turn to pitch on Saturday after the Astros had clipped SF the night before.
After collecting two hits on Reuschel's first two pitches, the visitors got just five more on his next 137 and bowed, 3-1. 

For all his heft Reuschel's stock in trade is control, and his performance was vintage.
He walked two in nine innings, struck out seven and induced 11 Astros to ground out in collecting his 17th victory.
He later stiffed the press, proving again that not all fat guys are jolly.
What's he like when he loses? 

Where the Giants finessed their foe Saturday, they bludgeoned 'em on Sunday afternoon.
Mitchell hit home run No. 47 to tie the game at two in the fourth, and Thompson, a second baseman who must be stronger than he looks, turned a hit-and-run play into a three-run shot in the fifth.
The final score was 10-2. 

Some 55,000 people showed up in perfect weather (it's always perfect when I go to Candlestick) for the Giants' regular-season home finale, and had a terrific time.
They watched former pitcher Vida Blue get married on the pitcher's mound before the game, with Willie McCovey as his best man.
They cheered their portable TV sets as the football 49ers beat the Eagles in Philadelphia.
It was "fan appreciation" day, and corporate Santas passed out stuff like a cord of firewood, a ride in a helicopter and a gold-plated golf putter. 

Manager Craig expressed sadness that his team couldn't clinch the division title before the home folks, but he noted that they'll have chances to see their heroes again in the playoffs and, maybe, the World Series.
That's what fans really appreciate this time of year. 

