.START 

Northwest Airlines has agreed to a Transportation Department demand to reduce a $400 million investment by KLM Royal Dutch Airlines and remove KLM from the Northwest board, according to one person familiar with the situation. 

Los Angeles investor Alfred Checchi, who led a $3.65 billion buy-out of Northwest in July, has agreed to cut the KLM stake by $225 million, to $175 million, to ease government concerns about foreign airline influence over Northwest, the same person said. 

Representatives of Mr. Checchi and Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner still were haggling over other details within the framework of an agreement the two men apparently reached at a meeting last Friday. 

Remaining hangups over the amount of time Mr. Checchi will have to replace the KLM funds, as well as certain reporting requirements, could delay an announcement of the agreement until later this week.
Mr. Skinner is expected to make an unrelated public appearance today, however, and could conceivably make some disclosure then. 

The Northwest talks took place against a backdrop of concern by both investors and participants in the pending $6.79 billion buy-out of United Airlines parent UAL Corp. by a labor-management group financed in large part by another foreign airline, British Airways PLC. 

UAL stock rebounded by $2.50 a share to $276.50 yesterday following a total two-day decline of $12.25 Friday and Monday in reaction to reports of the Checchi-Skinner talks.
The price remains somewhat below the $300-a-share UAL buy-out, reflecting some doubt about whether it will close on schedule in late October at that price. 

Many takeover stock traders were heartened by a statement in London yesterday by British Air's chairman, Lord King, who said he is confident that the Transportation Department will approve the buy-out.
However, he and other participants in the buy-out were evidently in the dark about the particulars of the Northwest talks. 

The cutback in the KLM investment would reduce the Dutch airline's percentage of the $700 million in cash equity raised for the buy-out from 57% to 25%, the legal limit for a foreign investment in a U.S. carrier.
KLM has only a 5% voting stake in Northwest because its stake is mostly in non-voting preferred. 

British Air is putting up $750 million, 78% of the $965 million in cash equity raised for the United buy-out.
But British Air will have a much smaller voting stake of 15% because most of its investment is in non-voting preferred stock. 

British Air already is planning to sell $300 million of that preferred within two years, and could accelerate that sale to meet government concerns.
That preferred's dividend yield of 18% could be reset up to 21% to aid the sale.
The issue also includes a warrant for a 2% stake in the airline, which would cut UAL employees' share from 75% to 73%. 

One person familiar with the buy-out said, however, that if the buying group has to offer extra equity to attract investors to substitute for British Air, "it could get messy with the pilots." The pilots and management, longtime enemies, have forged a fragile alliance that could unravel in a difficult renegotiation. 

Some takeover stock traders noted yesterday that the price level of UAL stock, a 7.8% discount to the $300-a-share buy-out price, seems to be assuming either a price cut or a delay in the acquisition.
However, stock of Northwest parent NWA Inc. traded at a discount nearly that large a few weeks before Mr. Checchi completed his buy-out, amid similar fears the Transportation Department might intervene before the closing.
Instead, the agency's intervention came afterwards. 

Although Mr. Skinner is considering the national security implications of foreign airline influence over U.S. carriers, he also is concerned about the mere presence of foreign airline executives on U.S. airline boards.
Currently, KLM has one of 12 Northwest board seats, and British Air would get one of 15 UAL seats. 

As Mr. Skinner noted in a speech last week, foreign airline directors on the board of U.S. airlines could jeopardize the confidentiality of the U.S. position in bilateral negotiations over international routes and landing rights. 

