.START 

Texas Instruments Inc. said it agreed with International Business Machines Corp. to pursue large-scale manufacturing-automation projects within the electronics industry. 

The arrangement is nothing new for IBM, which has entered into more than a dozen similar agreements to develop automation technology in the past six months.
But it marks a major effort by Texas Instruments to achieve a higher profile in so-called systems integration, an industry segment growing 20% a year, according to estimates from the consulting firm Automation Research Corp. Systems integration involves making automation systems from several manufacturers work together in one factory. 

"We think it's a very good arrangement for both companies," said Andy Chatha, president of Automation Research.
IBM will gain increased market presence in an area where it has relatively limited experience, he explained, while Texas Instruments gets an opportunity to "get out of the shadows" and achieve recognition for its expertise in systems integration. 

Under the arrangement, Texas Instruments becomes one of about 16 companies that IBM keeps on file in an Atlanta data bank it calls the National Solutions Center.
The data bank acts as a high-tech dating service, matching customers' job requirements to participants' abilities, said Fred Koenig, IBM's manager of systems-integration marketing for the industrial sector.
Mr. Koenig said TI has developed particularly strong automated systems for the plant floor. 

The arrangement enables TI to meld its technical skills with IBM's marketing clout, said Jerry Vieira, TI's manager of marketing sales for manufacturing automation systems.
Moreover, TI believes the arrangement will give it an advance look at IBM's hardware developments, "allowing us to be right on the leading edge all the time," Mr. Vieira said. 

The potential payoff is significant.
Mr. Chatha, the analyst, said the U.S. market for systems-integration services totaled $2.8 billion last year and should grow to $6.4 billion by 1993.
IBM thus far has failed to be a significant player in this burgeoning market -- indeed, Automation Research ranks it 46th by sales in this area in the U.S. -- but the company clearly intends to shake up the status quo. 

