.START 

The International Monetary Fund's policy-making panel agreed to reach an accord by year end on increasing the agency's resources. 

The panel, the IMF's 22-nation interim committee, also said the fund will vigorously try to resolve the problems with member countries in arrearage to the IMF. Payments arrears, which increased by more than $1 billion in the year ended April 30, 1989, are an increasingly serious problem for the IMF. 

Even if terms for increasing the IMF's resources are worked out by Dec. 31, it could be another two years before the 152 member countries ratify their commitments, the chairman of the interim committee, H. Onno Ruding, said at a news conference yesterday. 

Mr. Ruding, who is finance minister of the Netherlands, emphasized the need to make speedy progress on the issue of expanding the fund's resources.
He acknowledged the differences of opinion among members about the proposed increase, but said he expected that an increase of between 50% and 65% in the IMF's current resources would be agreed on eventually. 

IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus is campaigning for an increase of 100% in the fund's resources, which now total about $120 billion.
He is backed by France and Japan.
The U.S. has said it is willing to consider an increase by the end of this year, but maintains that a persuasive case hasn't yet been made for an increase.
West Germany apparently favors an increase of about 70%, while Britain has proposed a 25% boost. 

The IMF, which lends its resources to member countries to compensate for short-term balance-of-payments problems, said it needs increased funding to keep pace with world economic growth and to cope with new areas of responsibility, such as supporting international debt relief.
The resources consist of member countries' quotas, which are reserves these nations place with the IMF. 

Any increase in quotas is certain to be accompanied by a reordering of the quota percentages among fund members.
The current quotas are dated and no longer reflect relative economic strengths.
For example, Britain is the second-largest shareholder, while Japan ranks fifth. 

It is widely expected that as part of any quota increase, Britain would drop to fourth place, equaling France.
Japan would move up to the second spot, ahead of West Germany. "We're willing to be on the same level as Britain," French Finance Minister Pierre Beregevoy said at a press breakfast yesterday. 

Meanwhile, the U.S., the largest contributor, wants the IMF to address its arrearage problems and also wants to see the agency's role better defined before any capital increase is set. 

The IMF's annual report for the year ended last April 30 said arrears totaled about $3.6 billion and "remain a serious problem." Of that amount, $3.5 billion was overdue for more than six months, up from $2.37 billion as of April 30, 1988. 

In a communique released yesterday, the IMF interim committee called for more action on clearing up arrears.
It urged "all members to assist the Fund in the implementation of the cooperative strategy" on the problem.
IMF officials said that although the arrearage problem is growing, it is mainly attributable to a hard core of recalcitrant countries such as Peru, Zambia and Guyana. 

The IMF argued for a cooperative approach with debtors on arrears.
But if a country won't cooperate, the fund may be forced to take more drastic measures, such as barring countries from participating in quota increases or even expelling the nation from the agency. 

