.START 

Telephone Firms Teach 

Computers to 'Hear' 

COMPUTERS are becoming good listeners -- so good, in fact, that they're taking on more of the work of telephone operators. 

Such telecommunication concerns as Ameritech, Nynex Corp. and Northern Telecom Ltd. are giving telephone-network computers the ability to "hear." With this new capability, computers can ask questions of callers, listen to the responses and route calls to the proper destinations. 

The voice-recognition technology allows telephone companies to reduce the number of operators and use the remaining operators more efficiently. 

Nynex is testing the technology at its Lawrence, Mass., station, where operators intercept and relay thousands of calls from residents in Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont. 

With this system, a person who dials a number that has been disconnected or changed would be linked to the computer, which would ask for the number dialed, "hear" the answer, then switch the call to the proper recording. 

Northern Telecom recently installed a voice-recognition system on an Ameritech operator-services switch in Grand Rapids, Mich.
Now, whenever a person makes a collect call, a computer instructs the caller to say his or her name and wait for charges to be accepted.
Next, the computer dials the number, announces the caller's name and asks: "Will you pay for the call?" If the answer is "yes," the computer connects the call.
If the response is "no," the computer tells the caller of the refusal. 

Computers use a process called "dynamic time warping" to understand voice commands.
The system breaks up a sound into hundreds of segments and assigns numbers to them.
The computer compares the segments to a master pattern, developed from thousands of different voices, and then acts on the command. 

Voice recognition has some limitations, though.
For instance, the technology isn't sophisticated enough to recognize unusual accents.
Moreover, some people still don't like talking to a machine, forcing them to stay on the line until a human operator eventually picks up the call. 

Radio Device Keeps 

Close Tabs on Vehicles 

NEW RADIO technology could discourage auto theft and help motorists in distress. 

A Pacific Telesis Group subsidiary and North American Teletrac's International Teletrac Systems unit have developed a "radio-location" instrument that combines paging, cellular radio and computer mapping technologies to track motor vehicles. 

When installed in a vehicle, the device transmits radio signals through a network of radio antenna towers to a central computer that calculates the location of the vehicle to within 100 feet.
The device, however, can't locate vehicles that are beyond the range of the radio antennas. 

To work properly, the technology requires costly networks of radio antenna towers and sophisticated computers. 

Police would be able to trace stolen vehicles more easily with the device, and stranded drivers could use the service to signal for help.
In addition, transportation and utility companies could keep a close eye on their trucks. 

The service is expected to be available commercially in Los Angeles in mid-1990 and soon after that in other major cities. 

Video Microscopes Fill 

Void at Some Hospitals 

SO-CALLED SMART microscopes could help inner city hospitals cope with a shortage of medical experts. 

The instruments, developed by Corabi International Telemetries Inc. in Alexandria, Va., can send images of a patient's pathology specimen to medical specialists miles away.
Corabi attached high-resolution video cameras to motorized microscopes that record, say, a tissue sample and instantaneously transmit the image to medical experts through an optical-fiber telephone network. 

Physicians view the specimen on television monitors that produce images clear enough for an immediate diagnosis to be made, Corabi says.
Doctors also can scan the specimen with a remote-control device that moves a microscope. 

The microscope's cost: $48,000 to $50,000, about $10,000 more than the price tag on an ordinary diagnostic microscope.
This fall, the system is scheduled to be installed at 10 hospitals in the Washington D.C., area. 

Bringing High Tech 

To the Dinosaur Age 

SCIENTISTS at Oak Ridge National Laboratory are hunting for dinosaurs with microphones. 

Oak Ridge researcher Alan Witten of Martin Marietta Corp. 's Energy Systems unit has developed an acoustic technique for creating high-resolution sonic images of buried objects. 

The technique was developed to pinpoint buried hazardous waste, but now paleontologists also hope it will help them unearth the bones of the longest dinosaur ever discovered -- a 110-foot long, 50-ton beast found three years ago in New Mexico. 

Microphones planted at various depths around the site measure sound waves as they travel through the ground and bone.
Data transformed into pictures tell searchers where to dig. 

The technology could cut the time needed to unearth the dinosaur from 10 years to about two. 

But the technology does have a few drawbacks.
The microphones have to be placed well below the buried object.
If the microphone is too shallow, scientists won't get an accurate reading, says Mr. Witten.
Therefore, researchers need to know roughly where the object is located. 

