.START 

Auto makers may have forestalled a steep sales slump in the 1989 model year, but they paid an enormous price. 

Using huge incentives to lure buyers into showrooms, auto makers turned what could have been a near-recession in the just-ended model year into the fifth-best in history.
Between October 1988 and September 30, 1989, U.S. consumers bought about 15.1 million cars, vans and light trucks.
That only slightly trailed the sales total of 15.3 million vehicles in the 1988 model year. 

But to an extent never before seen in the auto industry, manufacturers rolled out rebates and cut-rate financing to lure consumers into showrooms.
Detroit's Big Three alone spent about $8 billion discounting their products in the model year, analysts estimate, or an average of $900 off the price of every Big Three car and truck sold in the U.S. 

In July, August and September alone the Big Three handed out an estimated $2.4 billion to attract sales -- or nearly as much as the industry spent on "incentives" during an entire year just four years ago.
Incentives of that scope are "like Congress legislating a tax cut that only could be used on car sales," says Scott Merlis, auto analyst with Morgan Stanley & Co. "That's a powerful economic force and easily the most money the auto industry has ever doled out." 

Without such giveaways, the industry would have been sorely pinched.
Chrysler Corp. officials told analysts last month that factory incentives produced sales of one million more vehicles than the industry would have recorded had it stuck with the incentive levels of the previous year.
So without the extra push, sales would have dropped about 8% instead of the 1.4% decline that actually occurred. 

A sales decline of 10% to 12% is typical of auto recessions not triggered by an energy crisis. 

Late September sales continued the upbeat pattern begun in early August, when consumers got word of hefty price increases on 1990 model vehicles, and started responding to sales incentives.
Sales of North American-made cars and trucks increased 8.7% during the last 10 days of the month.
Domestic car sales increased a solid 6.1% from a year earlier, while domestic truck sales jumped 13.4%. 

The seasonally adjusted annual sales pace for domestic cars alone, based on a Commerce Department formula, was a healthy 8.1 million vehicles.
That is well above the 7.5 million rate from a year earlier, but not as strong as the 8.4 million rate from the previous week. 

The late September car-sales surge benefited General Motors Corp. the most.
The No. 1 auto maker was the most aggressive of the Big Three with discounts at the end of the model year -- a tactic that helped GM in its dogfight with Ford Motor Co. in the pickup truck market.
GM's domestic truck sales surged 45% in late September, while Ford's dropped 9%. 

GM's domestic car sales rose 13.7%, while Ford's increased a more modest 6%.
Chrysler, meanwhile, posted a 12.6% drop in domestic car sales, but a 6% increase in domestic truck sales. 

GM's strength at the end of September wasn't enough, however, to keep the company's share of U.S. car sales for the 1989 model year from sliding to 35.5%, from 35.7% a year earlier.
GM has lost about 10 points of car-market share during the last decade, and reversing that trend is the company's top priority. 

But GM could take some comfort from its gains in the rapidly growing light truck market.
Its share of this market, which includes minivans and Jeep-like vehicles, rose to 35.7% in the 1989 model year from 33.2% a year earlier.
That allowed GM to slightly boost its share of the total vehicle market, to 35.5% compared with 35% in the 1988 model year. 

"The whole model year was in a turnaround phase," said GM President Robert C. Stempel. "We were delighted with September.
Now we'll see how the 1990s start out." 

Ford, meanwhile, boosted its share of U.S. car sales to 22.2% from 21.3% in the prior model year -- continuing a string of recent increases.
Ford did slip a bit, however, in the light truck market, to 30.7% from 31.1%. 

Chrysler's share of U.S. car sales dropped to 10.5% from 11.3%, and its share of truck sales held steady at 20.5%. 

Japanese auto makers, as a group, gained car-market share during the 1989 model year, mainly at the expense of European and Korean companies instead of Detroit.
The Japanese share of the car market increased to 24.9% from 23.5%, while the cumulative car-market share of Detroit's Big Three slipped slightly to 68.2% from 68.3%. 

The heavy reliance on rebates and low-interest financing in the 1989 model year is likely to take a big bite out of Big Three profits.
Automotive analyst David Healy is predicting that the price cutting and slower production could reduce third-quarter earnings for the Big Three to about half the year-earlier level. 

Still, auto makers are likely to lean on incentives more in the 1990 model year because they're concerned about sales slipping even further.
Robert A. Lutz, president of Chrysler Motors, recently predicted sales will drop to just 14.2 million vehicles next year.
Some "may accuse us of being the resident pessimists again," Mr. Lutz said. "We prefer the term realists." 

"There's little to motivate people to come see the 1990 models," says Jim Marsh, a Las Vegas car dealer. "There's very little, if any product changes.
Prices are higher and people are waiting to see if the factories will ante up more incentives." 

Although 1990 models officially went on sale only Monday, many of them already carry incentives.
And auto makers are pushing hard to clear out unsold 1989 models.
Sterling Motor Cars, a unit of Britain's Rover Group PLC, recently put incentives as high as $7,000 on 1989 model cars that carry sticker prices as low as $24,350. 

except tourist-delivery sales of imported models. 25 a year earlier.
Percentage differences based on daily sales rate rather than sales volume. 

period. 9 a year earlier.
Percentage differences based on daily sales rate rather than sales volume. 

