.START 

Victor K. Kiam's Sept. 11 editorial-page article, "Fortress Europe 1992?
Don't Hold Your Breath," expresses the idea that 1992 is not going to be a big change in Europe.
In fact, there have been many articles in the U.S. press about this, but in Europe 1992 is largely ignored.
Why this difference?
Because most Americans do not understand that the Common Market already exists.
The only barrier to trade is the time wasted at borders by the paper work required for transferring future value-added tax payments to the state to which it will be due.
In practical terms, there will be two main changes in 1992. 

One will be the ability to transport spare parts or "rushed" small shipments across state lines (or inactive borders).
The other will be the ability for architects, dentists, physicians, etc. to practice anywhere within Europe. 

These changes will not alter much the way Peugeot or Volkswagen do business.
A common currency, desirable as it is, will not exist by 1992. 

Incidentally, "Fortress Europe" as the term is most often used refers to the threat of Europe building trade business around itself, not to the completion of the integration within Europe. 

Dominique Gignoux 

President 

Data Measurement Corp. 

Gaithersburg, Md. 

Europe's repeated historical effort for unification by Alexander, the Caesars, Charlemagne, Napoleon and beyond is now catalyzed by unprecedented world economic realities.
This is clearly perceived by the man-in-the-European-street, not only by political leaders.
Economic necessity drives Europe (as indeed it is driving Eastern Europe), and will issue by 1992 in an economy larger than that of the U.S. and Japan combined. 

Assuming Mr. Kiam is not being coy, he would be well-advised to do some homework.
Given the 14% duty on shipped (or assembled) as opposed to European-based manufactured products, Mr. Kiam's electric shavers will not meet the competition.
This is only one land mine that awaits the innocent abroad. 

Does Mr. Kiam want to shave or be shaved? 

Karl Malvenius 

President 

European Investment Banking Inc. 

Portland, Ore. 

