.START 

The stock market soared to a record high in a flurry of optimistic buying.
The dollar also rallied sharply, pulling bond prices higher. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average jumped 40.84 points to 2754.56 in an advance that began in early trading.
The industrials surpassed the previous record of 2752.09, set Sept. 1, in the closing minutes.
Trading volume improved notably from previous anemic levels. 

Central bank intervention against the dollar ebbed, and the currency received an extra push upward from an attempted coup in Panama.
The stronger U.S. currency bolstered long-term bond prices. 

The stock market rally caught some experts by surprise.
Many had been looking for a "correction" in stock prices, especially as third-quarter earnings disappointments materialize.
But money managers apparently decided that the outlook for stock prices was better than they had believed in recent weeks. 

"The correction is over," said Peter Canelo, chief market strategist at Bear Stearns. "The market has faked out a lot of people who are still waiting for the correction, but the fact is it's been happening since early August." 

Mr. Canelo pointed out that stock prices had held up well in recent weeks despite various "crises," including problems in the junk bond market, concerted international efforts to drive the dollar lower, and prospects that third-quarter earnings of some big companies won't meet expectations. 

"When you have a market that holds up well through these crises and alleged crises and only goes down 3%, then it's about to go up," he said. 

Several analysts suggested that worse-than-expected quarterly earnings aren't necessarily bearish.
They reason that lower earnings may help prompt the Federal Reserve to cut short-term interest rates, which in turn would boost corporate earnings next year. 

But some pessimists remain unrepentant.
A.C. Moore, director of research at Argus Research in New York, said money managers haven't yet been bombarded by a stream of bad economic reports that he expects to begin flowing soon.
If, as he expects, the economy slips into a recession during the current quarter, he predicts the Federal Reserve won't be able to cut interest rates fast enough to offset plunging earnings. 

"The key is the economic downturn," he said. "If we see that start to occur in the fourth quarter, I don't think the stock market can weather it at these price levels." 

The dollar's strength yesterday cheered the dollar bulls.
As central bank intervention against the dollar finally waned, the dollar bounced higher.
The dollar bulls had argued that the central banks' week-long selling spree artificially depressed the dollar's value, and that when the sales stopped the U.S. currency would recover much of its lost ground. 

The attempted coup against Panama's Gen. Noriega gave the dollar an extra kick yesterday as some investors bought the currency in a flight to quality.
But traders said any such effect is likely to be short-lived. 

However, the dollar rose more sharply against the Japanese yen than against the West German mark.
Many traders are expecting the West German central bank to raise key interest rates at least half a percentage point on Thursday.
Higher interest rates abroad tend to make the dollar less attractive to foreign investors. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices rallied in active trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 182.6 million shares.
Advancing issues on the Big Board were ahead of decliners 996 to 509. 

The dollar strengthened.
In late New York trading the currency was quoted at 1.8873 marks and 141.25 yen, compared with 1.8793 marks and 139.68 yen Monday. 

Bond prices rose.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue gained more than half a point, or more than $5 for each $1,000 of face amount.
The yield on the issue slipped to 8.16%. 

