.START 

Although he says he would like to have a family one day, Giuseppe Cirillo, 36, isn't quite ready yet.
Known as Doctor Seduction and proud of it, he doesn't think that teaching men how to pick up women is the sort of job that makes him an ideal candidate for matrimony. 

According to Mr. Cirillo, a Neapolitan by birth and a Roman by adoption, Italian men may make good lovers, but they've still got a lot to learn about how to handle the first approach. "We are overinsistent and aggressive, we charge in heavily and leave no room for the other person." 

Convinced of his own expertise, Mr. Cirillo, who studied law before becoming a psychologist, and now a sexologist, opened schools last year in Rome and Milan where he teaches insecure Latin lovers the art of "corteggiamento" (courtship) and "seduzione" (seduction).
He is currently visiting the U.S. in the hope of opening further Schools in the Art of Seduction in New York, Los Angeles and Miami. 

He is aware, of course, that American ways are very different from those of his native peninsula.
Where Italian men tend to pester or cajole, Americans are usually more direct. "Styles vary greatly, of course, between cities and social groups, but on the whole American men are more pragmatic and less romantic.
They use drink and the group approach to boost their confidence and as an excuse for being turned down." 

It's not pickup methods and techniques that he's teaching, Mr. Cirillo stresses.
Before turning to sexology, he worked for several years with juvenile delinquents, and analyzes his newfound profession in humanistic terms.
The word seduction, for instance, is a headache because, in English, it is perceived exclusively in narrowly erotic terms.
And that's not at all the way he wants to be understood. 

In his eagerness to express his linguistic doubts to American experts, Mr. Cirillo wrote to dictionary editors at Random House and Webster's.
In his mind, he explained, seduction means the ability to communicate with another person, and is not solely restricted to the quest for sexual encounters.
He wonders if people are not still using Dante's 13th-century definition of seduction as something sinful and corrupt. "There's something crazy about our society.
As our technical means of communication develop, people have a harder and harder time just talking to one another." It was while watching his compatriots on the street, on buses, in restaurants and other public places that Mr. Cirillo realized that he might have something to offer in the art of breaking the ice.
With his hypnotic brown gaze, the balding Mr. Cirillo admits that he rarely gets the brushoff when he strikes up a conversation with a stranger.
The same could not be said of the people, mostly men, he is in the habit of observing. "They always come up with the same stereotyped phrases, things like 'I think we've met somewhere before, ' or 'you're the most beautiful woman I've ever seen. '" 

The true recipe for success, he explains, is all in the eyes, yours and those of the person you want to speak to. "You have to size up a stranger's mood and state of mind at a glance, and then make sure you're on the right wavelength when you introduce yourself." Every situation is different, and a true seducer should be able to draw on the rich range of his own feelings.
Mr. Cirillo describes himself as a "gypsy of the soul," someone who can easily discard one emotion for the next. 

The problem about making the first move is that attractive women are the victims of constant solicitation -- between 25 to 55 approaches every day from the moment they step out the door in the morning until they get home at night, according to a survey Mr. Cirillo carried out in six Italian towns.
This may cover anything from meaningful glances or whispered comments to being pinched or fondled on the bus.
This summer Mr. Cirillo left bulletins in leading hotels in Rome and Milan for the enlightenment of female tourists.
Beware of the men who follow you, he warns.
Steer clear of the phonies and simperers.
Learn how to tell the strutting "machos" from the friendly men who just want a chat and a little friendship. 

At the end of the first year of formal instruction, Mr. Cirillo has trained 38 candidates out of a waiting list of 400.
Ranging in age from 19 to 52, his students have included the timid as well as those who wanted to become less aggressive, adolescents brought along by their mothers who were worried that their sons hadn't found girlfriends yet, businessmen intent on making a good first impression on their clients, and other men, and a few women, who felt comfortable as would-be lovers but not quite original enough in their opening gambits. 

The course is packaged into 14 evening classes, two-hour sessions given either individually or in small groups, for a cost, per person, of 500,000 Italian liras ($400).
The first few lessons take place in Mr. Cirillo's Rome or Milan offices where students are taught the theory of seduction, and such tricks as how to decode facial expressions. "Most of the people who join the course don't like themselves.
They have the wrong body language and they speak in a monotone.
I try to build up their confidence by helping them discover their own voice, their own charismatic powers, however limited." 

The next step is to put the theory into practice.
This may be done in the street, at a bus stop (in Milan, where it rains more often, Mr. Cirillo favors subway stations) or in a discotheque.
First time around, Mr. Cirillo might choose an empty club and ask one of his assistants to play the part of a woman on a night out. "We'll try some role playing.
The student might go up to her and say, 'you're beautiful, ' or something stupid like that.
I'll make him try again and again until he finds the right words and tone.
It might be 'your smile reminds me of something from my past, ' anything original and sincere." 

The first flight from the nest might take place in a packed disco where the student has to test his newly acquired charm under the paternal eye of Mr. Cirillo, who stands in the background watching every move, and provides the post-mortem analysis.
A certificate concludes the course, guaranteeing the former apprentice's right to the title of seducer in the broadest sense of the term.
Some may imagine themselves as future smooth-speaking Casanovas, but most people are simply concerned about how to make friends. "The real victory," concludes Mr. Cirillo, "is not to be afraid to communicate." 

Ms. Grauman is a free-lance writer based in Brussels. 

