.START 

First come the cheers and joyful tears, in scenes almost as familiar as they are moving: East German refugees -- tens of thousands of them in the past few weeks alone -- expressing their relief after crossing into West Germany. 

A wave of about 7,000 rumbled in Sunday on "freedom trains" from Poland and Czechoslovakia.
And some 10,000 more were heading west last night after the East German and Czechoslovak governments yielded a second time on the emigration rights of East Germans residing in and around the West German embassy in Prague. 

As the exodus goes on, though, the euphoria is subsiding for many of the more than 100,000 East Germans who have arrived in West Germany this year.
For in the process of rebuilding their lives, they are finding that adapting to Western life is seldom easy or predictable, especially after living under the rigid control of a Communist state.
Besides having to cope with such problems as scarce and expensive housing, the refugees are confronted by a wide array of cultural differences. 

"It isn't until you first come over that you realize that the only thing you really have in common is the language," says Andreas Wolf, a dentistry student from Dresden who works helping new arrivals to understand the ways of capitalism. 

While the vast migration is bringing the people of the two Germanys together, it is driving the two states apart.
West German officials welcome the refugees and speak cautiously of German reunification, which would mean the end of the East German regime.
East Berlin, already furious over Bonn's open encouragement of East Germany's fledgling reform movement, vilifies its neighbor's intentions and brands the refugees traitors and criminals. 

East Berlin earlier accused Bonn of "playing with fire" by not evicting the refugees from its embassy in Prague.
The tension reached a breaking point yesterday after a throng of desperate East Germans broke through Czechoslovak police barriers to scale the embassy's fence, many sustaining injuries in the ensuing scuffle.
Even as it agreed to allow those in the compound to emigrate, East Germany's troubled leadership suspended all visa-free travel to Czechoslovakia until further notice -- a sign of the harder line it's likely to take after the country's 40th anniversary celebration this weekend. 

For West Germany, the influx of newcomers poses significant problems.
Although most of the East Germans have found work immediately, the 30,000 or so who haven't are an added burden on West Germany's welfare budget.
The heightened competition for jobs has stirred resentment among some West Germans.
And authorities worry that among the torrent of refugees are spies who could compromise security for years. 

But on balance, East Germany's loss appears to be West Germany's gain.
The influx is bringing young, able workers, who are greatly needed in a country where labor is in short supply and 15% of the 61 million inhabitants are 65 or older.
Bonn estimates that by the year 2000, the new workers and consumers will be contributing as much as 154 billion Deutsche marks ($82 billion) to West Germany's annual gross national product. 

Some of the refugees are professionals; some are clerks; most are factory workers, skilled and unskilled.
About half are housewives and children.
What follows is a look at how several East German immigrants are adjusting, and at the effects they are having on their new home -- a Germany that, after 40 years of national division, has become an alien land. 

"Finding work isn't a problem -- I've already had several offers this week alone," says Lutz Matthies, a 42-year-old engineer who arrived on Sept. 11, with his wife and 19-year-old son, by way of Hungary.
He is considering accepting a job with MAN Roland AG, a maker of printing equipment in Offenbach. 

"But finding a place to live is the big problem," says Mr. Matthies, who has been staying with his sister in Wiesbaden. "I just can't accept paying DM1,200 {about $636} a month for a small two-room apartment," the best he has been able to find so far. 

It's a widespread problem.
In response to an ad seeking housing in the Burgsteinfurt newspaper, Guenter Becker, another immigrant, didn't receive a single phone call. "I knew it would be difficult to get housing," says Mr. Becker, who has a lead on a job but for two months has been unsuccessful in finding housing. "This is ridiculous.
I've tried every way I know to find a house, but there's nothing there." Currently, he is living with friends. 

For employers such as Alfred Venneboerger, the situation is a Catch-22.
Mr. Venneboerger owns a construction company in Coesfeld, a small town in northern West Germany near the Dutch border.
He stands to capitalize on the West German government's order for one million new rent-subsidized housing units over the next three years.
He needs more skilled workers, and there are plenty of those among the East German immigrants. 

The catch is that before he can hire the workers to build the housing, he has to have the housing to house the workers. 

"I could hire 10 people today if I could find them," says Mr. Venneboerger, a hulking man with a mason's huge, rough hands. "They aren't interested unless I can offer them housing." 

Mr. Venneboerger has hired one East German who arrived three weeks ago.
The builder found a furnished apartment for the worker and his family, but the DM850-a-month rent is a heavy strain on the worker's DM2,800 monthly wages. "We have to find a better solution for him soon," Mr. Venneboerger says. 

Although about two million people are unemployed in West Germany, there are several hundred thousand unfilled jobs for skilled workers.
The East German immigrants often have qualifications that West Germany's unemployed lack.
Auto maker Opel AG, for instance, says that one-third of the 1,000 workers it has hired since January are East Germans and ethnic Germans from elsewhere in the Soviet bloc. 

At MAN Roland, says personnel officer Claus Mueller, "we don't have the situation of four people applying for one opening, but one person applying for four openings." Mr. Mueller says his company has a chronic shortage of 150 to 200 workers. 

Mr. Wolf, the dentistry student, heads a regional self-help center for refugees in the Frankfurt area.
Despite his four years in West Germany, he acknowledges that he, too, could use a few more lessons.
He says that even now he isn't fully integrated and that most of his friends are still East German immigrants. 

"You have to completely reorient yourself to become self-reliant, responsible for your own future," he says. 

At one of Mr. Wolf's recent counseling sessions, most of the dozen refugees sitting around the table draw comfort from the familiar East German dialects and from stories of common problems. 

For many, adjusting to new freedoms is the biggest hurdle.
Although they can now speak freely, few want to give their names when it is announced that a reporter is present.
The candid, lighthearted gathering chills suddenly, and one man growls: "The press isn't being helpful.
Almost every one of us has families and friends back home, and there could be reprisals." 

For the most part, the group is concerned with everyday issues.
West Germany's housing crunch, financial aid and the need for social clubs for homesick youngsters are the major concerns.
Some also left their school and vocational certificates behind, making proof of their qualifications difficult.
One burly master furnace installer had the foresight to photograph his work documents and bring the undeveloped film with him.
He thus avoided arousing suspicion when leaving for a "vacation" in Hungary. 

A government social worker arrives to offer a lesson on home finance and the rules of a free housing market. "Your highest priority here," she advises, "is to pay your rent.
Everything else comes second.
It isn't like the DDR here.
If you miss three months' rent, the next thing you know the police are outside and you could be evicted." 

Perhaps the most valuable service people such as Mr. Wolf can render is to help refugees make sense of the perplexing variety of state and federal aid programs.
Refugees are handed DM200 in "welcome money" when they cross into West Germany.
Then, depending on family size and former salary, they are entitled to as much as DM2,000 a month in jobless support. 

They also get as much as DM5,000 in cash compensation for household goods abandoned in the East and as much as DM6,000 in low-interest loans to purchase new furniture.
All are eligible for state-subsidized child support and medical coverage, as well as "integration aid" -- money for travel to visit relatives or for job interviews. 

Even with such an extensive safety net, some never make the adjustment.
Hans Gumpel lives in a shelter for the homeless on a menacing Frankfurt sidestreet.
Under Bonn's policy of purchasing the freedom of political prisoners, the 34-year-old former miner was deported from East Germany midway through a five-year sentence for "anti-state agitation." In the eight years since, he has bummed around West Germany, drifting in and out of prison and from job to job. 

"Over there, we never learned to make our own way, to run our own lives," he says. "From the beginning, your life is organized and controlled by others.
The state always made sure you had a job and a roof over your head." Now he is waiting to begin a job-training program. 

For Dieter Steinmetz, the yearning for those left behind was too much.
On Aug. 8, he and his brother Joerg were reunited in Karlsruhe with their sister Sabine, who had immigrated years earlier.
But only 10 days later, Joerg was waving good-bye as his older brother's train pulled out, taking him back to his wife and children in East Germany. 

"It was a difficult moment," Joerg Steinmetz says, tears welling in his eyes. "We were very close.
I don't know when we'll see each other again.
Who knows if the state will permit it?" 

Most of the new immigrants, though, are finding plenty of ways to relish their new freedom.
Rolf, a 27-year-old engineer who asked that his last name not be given, says that after seven months in West Germany he is still amazed every time he goes grocery shopping. 

"When I come in here, I think I'm dreaming," he says, selecting apples at a local supermarket. "Such a store, if it ever existed in East Germany, would be sold out immediately." The seemingly limitless choices wear him out, he says. 

Rolf and other long-deprived immigrants from the East are on a spending spree, injecting new life into West Germany's stagnant consumer sector.
For most of this decade, West German retailers have complained about a declining population and tightfisted customers. 

But now, economists estimate that the new arrivals will add some DM100 billion to consumer spending on goods and services over the next four years.
Over the next decade or so, West Germany's GNP could be 3% higher each year than it otherwise would have been, and the influx of youthful workers is expected to add DM33 billion to the federal pension system by 2005. 

Rolf and his family are certainly doing their part.
They arrived with just four suitcases and had to buy a lot to equip their three-bedroom apartment.
Rolf says he has spent about DM10,000 on a used car, furniture, kitchen cabinets, a washing machine, a refrigerator and a stove. 

To pay for it all, he borrowed DM7,000 from the federal government at a reduced interest rate.
The loan is to be repaid over three years through payroll deductions from the DM3,500 he makes each month as a machinist at Bayer AG's chemical works in Leverkusen. 

The good life doesn't stop there.
After just three months on the job, Rolf is entitled to a month's vacation, and the family will take part of it soon at the seashore. 

Rolf says he can spend his money however he wants -- to "get ahead," as he puts it.
In East Germany, "money was irrelevant," he says. "All the nice things were saved for export.
It didn't matter how hard you worked, you never reaped any benefits." 

Of course, not all the East German immigrants are spending with such gusto.
Thomas Keul lives with his wife and their infant in a space no larger than a small hotel room, sharing a shower with 17 other rooms.
His rent comes to only DM235 a month in the state-subsidized apartment house, and he plans to stay at least a year to save before moving on to something better.
As an electrical maintenance man, he takes home nearly DM2,300 a month.
So far, his only big purchase has been a used Ford. 

"We came here feeling extremely optimistic," says Mr. Keul, 27. "We still feel that way, but now with a touch of realism.
You just have to save your money as much as possible.
For us, this isn't a vacation where you spend all you can." 

