.START 

Eric G. Johnson is in an even tougher position than most sons who follow in their fathers' footsteps: In his case, he must turn around Johnson Products Inc. in the wake of an unusual divorce settlement in which his father lost control of the firm. 

The 38-year-old Mr. Johnson immediately promised to be more focused on the bottom line at the beleaguered manufacturer of cosmetics and hair-care products for black consumers.
He says he will be less involved in community work than his father, George E. Johnson, who ceded a majority stake in the company to his mother, Joan B. Johnson, as part of the divorce settlement Monday. 

The elder Mr. Johnson, 62, a symbol of black pride on this city's South Side, has been active in everything from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to the International African Chamber of Commerce. "I won't have that kind of time in the next couple of years," says the younger Mr. Johnson. 

His main challenge will be to keep the company competitive, with more new products and operating efficiencies.
Since being named president in December, he has trimmed employment to 190 from 255, introduced two product lines and helped usher in three profitable quarters in a row after a loss of $3.8 million, or 94 cents a share, in the year ended Aug. 31, 1988. 

His cost-cutting management style isn't likely to make him as popular as his father in the black community. "We're not a social organization that has memberships.
My main goal is to be operating a profitable business, and to build up employment as business merits it," he says. 

The younger Mr. Johnson stopped short of criticizing his father, who will remain a consultant after ceding control.
Such a lowprofile link represents a big change for the elder Mr. Johnson, the high school dropout who founded the company with his wife in 1954.
He took the company public in 1971, and by 1976, the company had captured 80% of the hair-relaxer market, where annual sales now total about $200 million.
But Johnson has stumbled considerably since then, and its market share has dropped to 15%, his son says. 

The younger Mr. Johnson started working part-time in his father's plant at the age of eight, wiping excess hair cream from jars.
In high school he sold hair products in drugstores.
By 1972, he had bachelor's degrees in management and finance from Babson College and returned to the company as a salesman for three months. "But everyone looked at me as just the chairman's son.
They wouldn't let me grow up, so I left for the biggest consumer-products company I could find." He sold Crest toothpaste for Procter & Gamble Co. 

When he returned to Johnson in 1977, a veteran of the drugstore trenches, the company's decline had begun.
The Federal Trade Commission cracked down on hair straighteners made by Johnson and others for containing lye.
The FTC ordered special warning labels.
While some competitors quickly introduced new products without lye and stalled on complying with the FTC, Johnson stood pat and simply put on the labels.
Sales haven't regained momentum since, and they've eroded from $40.9 million in 1983 to $29.1 million in 

But Johnson's recent introduction of Ultra Sheen Supreme, a premium hair relaxer and Soft Touch conditioners have helped the company regain profitability.
In the nine months ended May 31, it had net income of $1.9 million, or 48 cents a share, on sales of $20.9 million. 

The younger Mr. Johnson says he's confident the company can continue its turnaround: "I know this business and I'm the hands-on type.
If a capping machine breaks down in the plant, I'll be right down to see that it's fixed," he says. 

