.START 

Two decades after automated teller machines started popping up in the U.S., most still dispense only cash. 

But some of them are starting to learn new tricks. 

ATMs can now issue rail passes in Portland, Ore., gift certificates in Tacoma, Wash., postage stamps in Pittsburgh and grocery coupons in the Midwest. 

For ATM users -- generally a busy, upscale bunch, according to surveys -- the new features mean the convenience of 24-hour cash dispensing may be extended to other items.
The banks, for their part, hope the programs will attract new customers and extract fees from those who keep their accounts elsewhere. 

With some 75,000 or more ATMs now woven into regional and national networks, "We see a lot of potential for using ATMs for other things," says John Love, publisher of Bank Network News. "This is a superhighway; it's been built.
All {the banks} are trying to do is find new vehicles to run on it." 

Banks are just beginning to experiment with non-cash transactions, and marketers say it's too early to tell which ones will catch on.
In some cases, the new twists are reminiscent of short-lived promotional gimmicks in earlier years, when some banks offered freebies to overcome customer resistance to the machines.
And no one is predicting that adding coupons to ATM menus will mark a major breakthrough in the electronic banking revolution, which has already proved to be a much more gradual phenomenon than some futurists had predicted. 

Many banks once hoped ATMs would replace human tellers, producing big cost savings.
That didn't happen.
But lots of customers liked having the machines available in a pinch, and banks rushed to install them rather than risk losing their competitive edge. 

ATM use has grown steadily over the years, with Americans now using them for an estimated five billion transactions a year.
Even so, the machines continue to cost many banks a bundle.
Speer & Associates, an Atlanta-based consulting firm, reckons that ATMs cost U.S. banks more than $3 billion last year. 

Having tied their systems into ever-expanding networks during the past few years, however, banks have at least positioned themselves to recoup more of their costs.
The networks make it possible for customers to use ATM cards from one bank at other banks' machines -- "foreign transactions," in industry jargon.
The bank and the network that handle the transaction collect a fee from the customer's bank, which usually passes those costs on to the customer. 

In Portland, Ore., Willamette Savings & Loan Association issues monthly bus and rail passes on ATM receipt paper.
For the service, it collects a commission from the metropolitan transit agency.
And when customers of other banks use Willamette machines to buy the passes, Willamette gets a network exchange fee. 

Western Savings, Phoenix, Ariz., offers discount movie tickets through its machines.
ATMs at Equibank, Pittsburgh, double as postage-stamp vending machines.
Seafirst Bank, Seattle, last month began distributing gift certificates through its machines at a new shopping mall in Tacoma.
And TCF Bank, Minneapolis, plans to start issuing coupons through ATMs in grocery and convenience stores this month. 

Mr. Love estimates that ATMs now generate $1 billion in annual fees -- a stream of revenue "that didn't exist in 1984," when the trend toward charging customers for ATM transactions began to take hold.
Most of the money now comes from foreign-transaction fees, which average 60 cents a transaction.
But some also comes from in-house transaction fees charged to customers who don't keep a certain minimum balance in their accounts -- a practice being adopted by an increasing number of banks. 

Some industry specialists say that for banks the heightened visibility stemming from unusual ATM offerings may be at least as important as the extra fees. "The driving force behind most all" such programs "is the pressure for financial institutions to differentiate themselves from the competition," says Robert Moll, a financial-services specialist at the consulting firm of Arthur D. Little Inc. 

Marketers outside the banks are also starting to pick up on the possibilities. 

Houston Advertising, a Boston-based ad agency, recently set up a subsidiary to bring retailers and ATM networks together in coupon-distribution programs.
The retailers pay the agency to set up the promotion, and the banks benefit from additional transaction fees and publicity for their networks. 

As part of the service, the agency will buy print and radio ads promoting the bank and each month's participating retailers.
Peg Fitzpatrick, head of the new subsidiary, says the program hopes to attract retailers willing to provide coupons with relatively large discounts on big-ticket items like refrigerators.
That way, the potential savings will easily surpass the fees that ATM card holders are charged for foreign transactions. 

Advocates of such programs argue that distributing coupons through ATMs offers advantages over direct mail, newspaper inserts and other methods. "There's a lot of clutter out there with coupons," says Bruce Fall, a regional marketing manager for Campbell Soup Co.
In a recent two-month trial program, Campbell distributed coupons for selected products through ATMs of National Bank of Commerce, Memphis, Tenn. "We were getting coupons dispensed with money to a captive audience," many of whom used the bank's ATMs in Kroger supermarkets, says Mr. Fall. "It's a very impulse-related means to get people to buy your product." 

While results for the test program haven't been tabulated, Mr. Fall says sales of the selected products appear to have risen fourfold or more during the week when each was featured.
And because the program was closely coordinated with Kroger, the stores were able to keep enough inventory on hand -- a problem that often arises with other coupon promotions, he says. 

One potential stumbling block for some banks: Not all ATMs can handle extra items easily.
National Bank of Commerce, for example, has only two bill dispensers in its machines, so it yanked the $10 bills and used that slot for coupons during the Campbell's trial.
But issuing only $20 denominations "was a negative," says John LeCave, the bank's director of marketing.
If, as expected, the bank goes ahead with a permanent program in January, it will have to pay to have extra dispensers installed. 

Companies that could participate in the coupon program include airlines, hotels and other businesses that serve the "more mobile, better-educated, on-the-go" customers who tend to use ATMs heavily, Mr. LeCave says. 

The growth of networks has given rise to other new services, such as the point-of-sale systems that have spread to several states.
The systems enable shoppers to pay for groceries, gasoline or other goods with their ATM cards, automatically transferring money from their bank accounts to the stores'. 

And ATM transaction volume may get a big boost in the next few years, as the U.S. government moves toward distributing federal benefits through ATM networks.
In a one-year experiment set to start Nov. 1, recipients of Supplemental Security Income in certain Baltimore neighborhoods will be able to collect their benefits by using specially issued ATM cards.
The Treasury Department reckons the cost of electronic delivery at 18 cents a transaction, compared with the 50 cents it costs the government to issue a check, according to John Galligan, program manager for electronic benefits services. 

