.START 

{First of three articles on going public.} 

Roger M. Buoy took his company public several months ago and had to make a painful disclosure: his $180,000 salary. 

"The day before, even my mother didn't know my salary," says Mr. Buoy, president of Mindscape Inc., a maker of computer games. "The next day, everybody knew." 

Mr. Buoy's real embarrassment occurred, however, when Mindscape's stock plunged from the initial $10 a share to 75 cents. (It closed at $1.625 yesterday.) "I went through absolute purgatory," he recalls. "What we really needed was encouragement, but I spent many hours on the phone with shareholders who just wanted to vent their hostility." 

Such are the vicissitudes of selling stock to the public.
It is the dream of many entrepreneurs, surely -- almost a rite of passage in American business life.
It provides a badge of status, a source of cheap capital, a means of putting a value on the founder's fortune and a perfect prelude to acquiring other companies. 

But going public carries risks.
In an era of hostile takeovers, it means a potential loss of control of the enterprise.
It is expensive and time-consuming.
More than anything, going public means that a once-private company must conduct much of its business in the open, and if business turns down, as in Mindscape's case, the whole world is watching and booing -- or so it seems.
Even when things go well, the newly public company has to disclose much that was previously secret. 

Many private companies feel the tug of these conflicting forces.
For a time, after the 1987 stock market crash, the new-issue market was a non-issue; the market for initial public offerings was nearly dead.
Today, there's a revival of sorts.
Stock prices are up, and stocks of some new issues are way up.
The temptation is great, especially for a solid, growth-minded company. 

Is it a good idea to take the plunge? 

Yes, probably, if an endless stream of new capital will be required to keep the business growing, specialists say.
Otherwise, as an increasing number of small companies are concluding, going public may be something best avoided.
In fact, finding alternative sources of money is becoming a cottage industry on Wall Street. 

"The mystique of going public is gone," says Michael Connolly, president of Leperq Capital Partners, the New York arm of a large French merchant bank. "There are lots of other ways to raise money." 

Among the alternatives are spinoffs of existing business units, private placements of debt or stock, joint ventures and installment sales of the company.
These techniques may mark the dawn of a more sophisticated era in the financing of small business, even as they complicate the difficult choices facing entrepreneurs. 

Cliff Samara, a New York computer software entrepreneur, has typically ambivalent feelings.
Sitting in his modest Manhattan office, he ticks off a list of pros and cons of going public.
Then he shakes his head and says, "It's exactly 50-50." 

Mr. Samara's company, SRS Network Inc., is 12 years old, profitable and a two-time member of Inc. magazine's list of the 500 fastest-growing companies.
It has annual revenue of about $12 million, but it needs capital to grow -- and from a source other than commercial bankers. 

"I need to get the damned bankers off my back," Mr. Samara says. "When I want to raise money, the banker wants personal guarantees -- my house, my car, everything." He says commercial banks are very traditional and have trouble appreciating a company whose assets consist mostly of human beings. "They understand Chrysler or Ford, but a company like us?
They don't see any inventory." 

Yet SRS needs money from somewhere.
The competition in its niche, computer systems integration, is bigger and well-financed.
One of its biggest rivals, Computer Task Group Inc., recently sold a 20% stake to International Business Machines Corp., prompting Mr. Samara to ask, "What can they do that we can't do?" His answer: Computer Task Group can throw more people at a problem. 

So Mr. Samara wants to build his company from $12 million a year in sales to $100 million and to expand the staff.
He could sell about 50% of the company in a private placement for perhaps $3 million, he says, but that would be too little capital for too much loss of control.
Or he could take the company public, but in that case, he estimates, he would have to spend about one-quarter of his time and energy dealing with shareholders and regulators. 

Going public, he has concluded, is probably inevitable.
But timing is everything.
He pauses for effect, then says, "We will sell no stock before its time." 

For some companies the time is never right, specialists say.
Too many businesses go public -- or sell out completely -- for the wrong reasons.
Prominent among these are raising enough money to buy out dissident shareholders.
The alternative forms of raising capital are designed to resolve such situations while keeping the company private and in the control of the founder. 

"What he's really after is how to satisfy the needs of all shareholders -- active and inactive, dissidents or dependable -- without selling or going public," says Francois de Visscher, managing director of Smith Barney Harris Upham & Co.
By doing a private recapitalization, for example, business owners can raise enough cash to buy out a dissident shareholder. 

Alternative sources of funding also can help a fast-growing high-tech company postpone a public offering, sometimes for years.
Some companies have found ways to raise $100 million or more without ceding control and without the trauma of taking the company public. 

Orbital Sciences Corp., a Fairfax, Va., maker of outer-space equipment, has raised $125 million in private equity capital in the past seven years.
Some $75 million has come from individuals, limited partnerships and venture capitalists.
More recently, the company sold $32 million of its stock to Hercules Corp., a chemical and aerospace giant with which it has a satellite-launch joint venture. 

One great advantage of such financing is that management retains working control of the company, so Orbital can plow much of its profit into research.
That would be difficult if the company went public, because of Wall Street's demand for quarterly earnings growth.
On the other hand, within the next year, some early investors will probably be clamoring to cash out, which may pressure Orbital to go public, says David Thompson, president. 

Private investors often want to cash in their investments after a few years, especially when a company's sales start to grow.
This is the problem facing Ronald Wisner, president of Wisner Classic Manufacturing Co., a Marion, Mass., maker of expensive wood-encased cameras. 

The five-year-old company has 35 private shareholders, many of them local individuals.
They have kicked in a total of about $200,000.
Today, Wisner's sales are rising, but the company is "break-even or a little worse," says Mr. Wisner.
Several of the shareholders want out. 

Their restlessness couldn't come at a worse time, Mr. Wisner says.
The company has more orders than it can fill, but it is undercapitalized.
So Mr. Wisner is considering selling stock to the public -- or selling the company. 

"We don't have enough machines, or enough employees, and we never have enough inventory," he says. "We're always juggling cash." Among the many stumbling blocks to raising money, however, is a pending lawsuit between Mr. Wisner's company and a competitor. 

Whether a stock offering is in the best interest of Mr. Wisner or his shareholders is unanswerable.
His company is probably too small and fragile to raise much cash, and expenses involved in a full-blown stock offering can exceed $500,000, which is way beyond his reach. 

In contrast, other companies have gone public and reaped benefits that would be hard for them to match as private entities.
One such company is Pioneer Federal Savings Bank, a healthy thrift in Lynnwood, Wash., that went public this spring. 

The initial offering, at $11 to $14 a share, was oversubscribed.
The stock has climbed since (closing at $32 yesterday), which could greatly help the company in its long-term ambition to acquire other thrifts. 

More immediately, the offering is allowing Pioneer Federal to compete better.
It faces intense competition from two other thrifts in the Seattle area.
The fight for talented executives is keen, and one competitor already offers stock options.
By going public, Pioneer Federal has made it much easier to reward key employees with stock options; 34 of 200 employees are in the company's stock-option program. 

Says Don Laufenberg, senior vice president, finance, "We have to ask the question, 'Are we getting the best people? ' The competition has people who are extremely, highly motivated.
We need to compete." 

performed 

