.START 

Imagine that you and every American had an identification number assigned to you by a private company.
An Orwellian fantasy?
Perhaps, but such a system already exists for American businesses. 

In 1962, Dun & Bradstreet began assigning a different nine-digit number to each company in its credit-services data base.
Subsidiaries and branch offices of large companies have separate numbers and their parents' numbers.
D&B also will supply numbers for companies' internal customer files. 

The "Dun's number," as it is commonly known, has evolved into a nationally recognized corporate I.D., something almost like a Social Security number for businesses. "Every industry has uses for it," says James Bernstein, a business-development supervisor for Quill, a Chicago-based direct marketer of office products.
With D&B's encouragement, many companies use their Dun's number on purchase orders and invoices.
Even the U.S. government has encouraged its use by requiring contractors to include their Dun's number on contracts or with their bids. 

The Dun's number gives Dun & Bradstreet a big competitive advantage in the sale of "business-to-business" marketing information such as mailing lists.
Companies can easily process D&B data and merge it with their files thanks to the Dun's number. 

"It is very expensive from a processing point" to incorporate data from another vendor, says James Boylan, marketing-data chief for Bellcore, the research and development concern owned by the seven "Baby Bell" phone companies.
The Dun's number, he says, encourages customers to stick with D&B because its system is incompatible with other data vendors' offerings. 

Not surprisingly, Dun & Bradstreet jealously guards its valuable franchise from rivals.
Earlier this year, the Direct Marketing Association approached D&B about making the Dun's number an industry standard, hoping to let D&B competitors incorporate the numbering system in their own data bases.
The trade group argued that such a move would be highly beneficial to the direct-mail industry.
If every data vendor could assign Dun's numbers to its files, direct marketers could easily weed out duplicate names from mailing lists bought from different vendors, avoiding the expense of duplicate mailings.
While systems exist for purging duplicate names, they are less efficient. 

But Dun & Bradstreet said no, according to an official of the trade group, Ann Zeller.
A D&B spokesman says he doesn't have any knowledge of the trade group's request. 

(See related story: "Credibility Gap: Dun's Credit Reports, Vital Tool of Business, Can Be Off the Mark --- Company Ratings, Too High or Too Low, Often Anger and Frustrate Customers --- Estimates and 'Guesstimates'" -- WSJ Oct. 5, 1989) 

