.START 

THE HOUSE VOTED to repeal the catastrophic health-care program. 

Heeding senior citizens' complaints about the cost of the plan, the chamber voted 358-67 to repeal the Medicare Catastrophic Care Act, enacted 14 months ago.
The House also rejected a proposal to maintain a less expensive, stripped-down version of the program, which provided expanded hospital and medical benefits as well as new drug coverage for 33 million elderly and disabled citizens.
The plan is financed solely by its beneficiaries. 

The House's rejection makes it likely that the Senate also will repeal the catastrophic-care benefits and the unpopular income surtax that financed them. 

EAST GERMANS BEGAN LEAVING Prague aboard trains to the West. 

As police sealed off the U.S. Embassy in East Berlin to stop would-be emigres from entering, trains carrying thousands of refugees left for West Germany from Czechoslovakia.
The departure had been delayed while East German police moved to prevent mobs from joining the exodus.
Refugees jammed Western embassies, swam rivers and lined railroad tracks in at least four Soviet bloc nations in a bid to catch what could be the last "freedom trains" to the West. 

Bonn's Foreign Minister Genscher said West Germany's embassies would remain open and he rejected allegations of trying to destabilize East Germany. 

SECURITY FORCES ARRESTED three members of Noriega's high command. 

The arrests, announced in a "war communique" on national radio one day after a failed coup attempt, could mean the plotting involved more than low-level officers.
The Panamanian military chief again blamed the U.S. for the revolt as he toured the site of the uprising.
The communique said 10 rebels were killed in the fighting, and a Noriega aide said the general had been held hostage for about five hours by the disloyal forces. 

Secretary of State Baker said the Bush administration retained the option of a military strike to topple Noriega's regime on its "own timetable." 

A Lebanese hijacker was sentenced by a U.S. judge in Washington to 30 years in prison for commandeering a Jordanian airliner in Beirut in 1985 with two Americans aboard.
Fawaz Younis, who was lured into U.S. custody by the FBI in 1987, was convicted last March.
He was the first person tried under a 1984 anti-terrorism law. 

The Bush administration proposed a $200 million grant for Poland as the U.S. contribution to a possible $1 billion international stabilization fund.
The White House also confirmed that Bush will send a delegation to Warsaw "within the next few weeks" to help Poland's government plan the best uses for the money. 

A U.S. judge in San Francisco dismissed the core of a major "comparable worth" lawsuit, a claim that California underpaid thousands of women in predominantly female state job categories.
The judge ruled that the state's employees' association had failed to prove deliberate sex discrimination in salaries. 

A jury in Los Angeles recommended death in the gas chamber for Richard Ramirez, the "Night Stalker" serial killer who terrorized Southern California in 1985.
Ramirez was convicted by the same jury last month of 13 murders and 30 related felonies.
He is to be formally sentenced Nov. 7. 

Mexican President Salinas addressed a joint session of Congress and said his nation intends "to eradicate drug trafficking at its very roots." Salinas, on a five-day state visit to Washington, also urged greater access by Mexico to U.S. steel and textile markets and better treatment for Mexicans crossing the border in search of jobs. 

New Jersey seized control of Jersey City's 28,000-student school system.
The move, considered the largest state takeover of an urban school district, ended a five-year legal battle.
Officials cited political intrusion in hiring practices and failure to provide a safe environment for students. 

The Navy said a sailor aboard the aircraft carrier USS Midway has been convicted of attempting to sell classified data to a Soviet agent in Japan.
Airman Recruit James Wilmouth, 21, was sentenced to 35 years in prison after a court martial. 

Yugoslavia's Premier Markovic called for a multiparty system as a solution for the country's mounting economic and political problems.
He also accused conservative Communist party members of blocking his restructuring plans.
Yugolsavia has been beset by a high inflation rate and foreign debt as well as labor and ethnic unrest. 

Bush urged Zaire's President Mobutu to settle his differences with Angolan rebel leader Jonas Savimbi amid reports that Zaire has disrupted U.S. shipments of arms to the guerrillas.
The president met with Mobutu in an effort to bolster a truce between the rebels and Angola's government that was mediated by Mobutu's regime. 

The Bogota government prepared to send another alleged drug trafficker to the U.S. following a decision Tuesday by Colombia's high court upholding President Barco's decree allowing such extradition.
The court, however, overturned his order allowing confiscation of suspects' property. 

The jury at Jim Bakker's trial opened deliberations, attempting to decide whether the TV evangelist diverted nearly $4 million from his PTL ministry.
He is charged with wire and mail fraud and conspiracy. 

Died: Secretariat, 19, winner in 1973 of horse racing's Triple Crown, in Paris, Ky., destroyed because of a hoof ailment. 

