.START 

Call it the other drug war. 

Don't expect to see this one on the evening news, for most of the fighting is hidden from public view.
The battles nonetheless affect every American doctor, a raft of popular medicines, and countless patients and medical insurance companies. 

This is the drug industry war, a bitter clash between such pharmaceutical powerhouses as Pfizer Inc. and dozens of corporate small fry that make and sell the less-expensive, generic versions of the big companies' drugs. 

While the two camps have competed aggressively for years, lately the fight has turned ferocious -- and often damaging to the public.
The big companies have underwritten scientific studies damning the safety of generic drugs and have used them to frighten state bureaucrats and lawmakers into restricting generic drug use.
They have also paid doctors and publicists to spread unsubstantiated tales of ill effects caused by generic medicines.
Recently, federal regulators called several of these campaigns "false and misleading." 

But many of the generic makers give as good as they get, lobbying states to mandate use of their lower-cost products.
Lawsuits challenging brand-name drug patents abound.
Company budgets for lawyers and lobbyists sometimes exceed research and development costs.
And as current highly publicized disclosures from a congressional investigation show, a few executives of generics companies have bribed federal officials while others cheated on applications to win federal approval of their drugs. 

There is even evidence the government's current probe into generics -- which, notably, was initially sparked by complaints from generics-maker Mylan Laboratories Inc. -- has been further fueled by information supplied by the brand-name companies.
At the very least, the probe has intensified this hidden drug war. 

"The sharks are surfacing," says William Haddad, chairman of privately owned Danbury Pharmacal Inc. 

As head of the Generic Pharmaceutical Industry Association, Mr. Haddad is a veteran of past industry skirmishes.
He is convinced that brand-name companies and others hostile to generic drugs are unfairly exploiting the scandal. 

In August, pharmaceutical company representatives passed out a sheaf of articles about the scandal to members of the New Jersey senate.
They were hoping to torpedo a measure the senate was considering to facilitate the substitution of generic drugs for brand names.
And they succeeded. 

In the packet was a cover letter to each state senator from the New Jersey Health Products Council, a consortium that includes such major drug makers as Merck & Co., Johnson & Johnson, Ciba-Geigy Corp. and Squibb Corp.
The letter said, "There can be major complications when drugs made by different companies are switched, especially for our senior citizens who often take a number of different medications." (The Food and Drug Administration says there is no scientific evidence to back this contention.) 

"We felt we had votes to pass the bill," says Melanie Willoughby, a lobbyist for the pharmacy industry, which would have benefited from the measure. "But all morning senators came up to me quoting from the letter and the articles and saying things like 'I didn't know this. ' " 

The generics industry fought back in kind.
When reporters called Mr. Haddad in September asking for comment about recent manufacturing problems uncovered at generics firms, he countered by directing them to an unpublicized FDA report criticizing manufacturing practices at Eli Lilly & Co., a major brand-name drug maker.
Subsequent news reports about Lilly triggered a major review of the company's plants world-wide by federal investigators. 

When the press reported an incident involving the recall of a generic epilepsy drug, Mr. Haddad's trade group countered by sending reporters a list of 10 recalls involving brand-name drugs in 1988 and 1989. "Bill is an old-fashioned political streetfighter, and that's why we have him on our side," says an executive at one generics company. 

While much of the squabbling may appear unseemly and petty, the financial stakes are huge.
Between 1991 and 1995, patents will expire on brand-name prescription drugs with an estimated $10 billion in annual sales.
Generics firms that can snatch a share of that booty can flourish, at the expense of the pharmaceutical giants. (Ironically, several big drug makers have divisions that sell generic drugs.
Sales from those units, however, are only a fraction of the companies' total revenue.) One generics maker, Chase Chemical Corp. of Newark, N.J., is seeking to market a version of Pfizer's blood-pressure drug Procardia, a hugely profitable product with about $400 million in yearly sales.
Procardia will account for nearly 15% of Pfizer's expected $736 million in profit this year, securities analysts estimate.
The FDA has cleared Chase to sell a generic copy of the drug, but Pfizer has filed a patent-infringement suit against Chase and tied it up in court. 

Or consider Warner-Lambert Co., which successfully lobbied with Congress last year for a special law extending patent protection for its anti-cholesterol drug, Lopid.
The extension to 1993 effectively delayed generic competition for four years, and was so important to the company that Joseph Williams, the concern's chairman and chief executive, made 28 trips to Washington over 20 months to talk to 60 representatives and senators.
The drug is expected to generate about $300 million in sales for Warner-Lambert this year.
The company said it deserves the extension because it had plowed so much into research. 

Little wonder, then, that brand-name makers have provided federal investigators many of the leads in the current probe of generics.
The firm now known as SmithKline Beecham PLC has been especially aggressive in trying to knock out competition to its hypertension drug Dyazide.
In 1987, the FDA approved two generic versions, one made by Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. and another by Vitarine Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Both companies have been principal targets of the generics investigation by a subcommittee chaired by Rep. John Dingell, the Michigan Democrat. 

In 1988, SmithKline complained to the FDA that, contrary to what Bolar said, Bolar's product wasn't equivalent to Dyazide.
As a result, an FDA inspection report says, the agency examined samples of Bolar's test product.
During the inspection this spring, the FDA received a second complaint from SmithKline via Rep. Dingell's subcommittee.
It charged that Bolar's product didn't contain proper amounts of the drug's active ingredients. 

In a letter to FDA commissioner Frank Young in June, the subcommittee acknowledged that SmithKline had provided it with test studies of both the Bolar and Vitarine products.
Subsequently, the FDA found that, in fact, Vitarine had cheated by substituting SmithKline's drug for its own when it applied for (and received) FDA approval.
The FDA pulled the drug from the market.
The FDA probe also found that Bolar hadn't followed proper procedure when it received FDA approval for its version.
The agency didn't ban Bolar's product but said that until new studies are completed, it isn't considered interchangeable with Dyazide.
But the FDA isn't contending Bolar's drug isn't safe and effective. 

SmithKline isn't the only company to exploit congressional interest in Bolar.
Warner-Lambert sent the FDA and the House investigators a study it had funded questioning the quality of Bolar's version of Dilantin, an anti-epilepsy drug sold by Warner-Lambert's Parke-Davis division. "We figured with all that's going on, the FDA might find our study of interest," a Warner-Lambert official says.
Carl Peck, a top FDA staffer, says the agency quickly agreed to review the Warner-Lambert study, noting that "any questions about an anti-convulsive drug receive prompt attention." 

A review of the study failed to find specific problems with Bolar's product.
But the review has triggered a separate FDA probe of Bolar's original application for the drug.
Rep. Dingell has said that, based on the Warner-Lambert complaint and other facts, the subcommittee has "no confidence" that generic anti-epileptic drugs are safe. 

There is evidence suggesting that big drug makers have used close ties to the FDA to block release of some generics.
One generics maker, Barr Laboratories Inc. of Pomona, N.Y., asserts that American Home Products Corp. 's Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories has persuaded the FDA to delay release of Barr's copy of the estrogen drug Premarin.
Premarin, which is made by Wyeth-Ayerst, treats symptoms of menopause and helps prevent osteoporosis, a weakening of the bones. 

In early 1988, Barr received two letters from the FDA indicating the agency was about to let the company sell a generic version of Premarin. "We thought we had a winner," says Larry Fox, a Barr lawyer. 

But the FDA put the approval on hold in June of that year.
As it turns out, Wyeth-Ayerst had persuaded the FDA to change the agency's guidelines for approving copies of drugs like Premarin.
Wyeth-Ayerst insisted that determining whether Barr's drug was "bioequivalent" -- released in the body similarly to the way Premarin is -- should be measured by blood tests rather than urine tests, as originally prescribed by the FDA. 

Peter H. Rheinstein, director of the FDA's office of drug standards, confirms in a sworn statement that Barr's apparent approval is being held up because of Wyeth-Ayerst's argument.
Dr. Rheinstein's affidavit is filed with the federal court in Washington where Barr is suing the FDA, alleging that the agency leaked confidential information about Barr's application to Wyeth-Ayerst. 

"They {Wyeth-Ayerst} don't have the right to establish standards of the U.S. government," says Mr. Fox. 

Some of the most heated tiffs in the industry result from claims by some brand-name companies that switching patients to generic drugs can cause health problems.
Ciba-Geigy, the U.S. unit of Swiss drug maker Ciba-Geigy Ltd., has used this tactic in trying to protect its anti-epilepsy drug Tegretol.
Its maneuvering raised the ire of the FDA, which called one company campaign an attempt to "influence government decisions" based on "misleading and unsupported allegations." 

An FDA investigation found that Ciba-Geigy paid a marketing firm to drum up mailgrams from doctors and pharmacists that were sent to officials in California and other states.
At the time, Ciba-Geigy was arguing that the states shouldn't encourage use of the generic drugs by Medicaid recipients, and, particularly, that generic anti-epilepsy drugs shouldn't be substituted for brand-name ones.
The mailgrams appeared as if they were sent by individuals, but were actually sent by Targetted Communications Corp., of McLean, Va., which had contacted the health professionals, asked if their names could be used and then typed in their names at the bottom of the mailgrams.
One mailgram said, for instance, that switching the products "could cause increased seizures." 

But the FDA says there isn't any evidence to back such a claim.
Moreover, in a letter reprimanding the company in April, the FDA said it doubts "these individual pharmacists had any such data." 

Ciba-Geigy's campaigns often include lobbying support from the Epilepsy Institute, a patient-advocacy organization.
The Institute has issued statements claiming that it has "anecdotal reports" of patients who had seizures after switching to a generic, but investigations by the FDA and others have failed to verify the problems.
Meanwhile, the Institute acknowledges it receives "educational" funding from Ciba-Geigy and other brand-name drug makers.
A San Francisco chapter which lobbied for the California law said Ciba-Geigy gave it a $20,000 educational grant this year. 

In Summit, N.J., a spokeswoman for Ciba-Geigy says, "We have anecdotal data to back our claim that switching does cause seizures among a small population of sensitive people." 

Schering-Plough Corp., Madison, N.J., also has waged aggressive "anti-switching" campaigns that have upset the FDA. Schering sells a special version of the asthma drug theopylline, under the brand name Theo-Dur, and has claimed in marketing materials that substituting any product for Theo-Dur is dangerous. 

In a letter to Schering's chairman, Robert Luciano, the FDA said "your firm has employed falsehoods, misrepresentations, and innuendo on a continuing basis and in the absence of any valid scientific data, in an effort to convince the medical and pharmaceutical communities that Theo-Dur is superior to all alternative . . . theophylline products." 

In a response to the FDA in March, Schering said it would revise some of its practices to conform with FDA guidelines. 

This sort of conflict, and other battles in the industry, are expected to escalate in coming years as more generics come on the market and more patents on brand-name drugs expire.
Already, the number of prescriptions written each year has flattened out, so a growing number of drug companies are chasing a static amount of business. 

Moreover, state and private health care officials have tasted the chief benefit of using generics -- their relative low cost -- and, if anything, will only be looking for new ways to use the non-brand drugs.
Thomas Culkin, an official with the health department in New Jersey, for example, says his Medicaid program saved $11 million in 1988 by substituting generics for brand-name drugs. "Smart economics dictates we use more generics," he says. 

