.START 

Gunthrop-Warren Printing Inc. was a solid, upstanding company last December, according to Dun & Bradstreet Corp.
A credit report it issued that month said the commercial printing company was in "good financial condition" and gave it a top rating. 

Twenty-nine days later, Gunthrop-Warren Printing was forced into bankruptcy proceedings by angry creditors with long-overdue bills. 

Mountain-Hi Surplus & Sales Co. was also solid, another Dun & Bradstreet credit report said.
Based on that rating, commercial lender Heller Financial Inc. lent Mountain-Hi $32,000 in August 1988 to buy inventory. 

Six weeks later, Mountain-Hi defaulted.
The lender couldn't find the woman whom the credit report listed as Mountain-Hi's owner.
U.S. postal inspectors found her, however -- exposing a scheme that had bamboozled several companies out of about $1 million. 

Surprising?
Not to many customers of Dun & Bradstreet, the information giant familiarly known as D&B.
Dun & Bradstreet credit reports, they assert, often contain information that is inaccurate, outdated or skimpy.
Like Gunthrop-Warren and Mountain-Hi, many a rickety company has received an attractive credit rating from Dun & Bradstreet.
At the same time, companies complain, D&B has given poor ratings to some that deserved better. 

The complaints raise fundamental questions about a product whose importance to American business is difficult to overestimate.
Though little known to the general public, D&B reports play a critical role in daily commerce.
The company provides information on the creditworthiness of 9.5 million companies.
D&B's customers use the reports thousands of times a day to help them decide whether to lend money to another company or sell to it on credit.
Many such business decisions are based almost entirely on the information in D&B credit reports.
As a result, inaccuracies can have severe repercussions on both the subjects and users of D&B reports. 

Dun & Bradstreet unwaveringly rejects any suggestion that there are broad problems with the quality of its credit data.
The company's theme is "Quality First." During a lengthy interview and tour of D&B's operations, top officials of its credit-services business repeatedly emphasized the completeness, timeliness and accuracy of D&B credit reports. 

"There are a lot of safeguards" to weed out flaws, says Patrick C. Sommers, executive vice president of credit services. "We are reinvesting every gain that we make . . . into quality." Mr. Sommers says that any quality problems that might have existed years ago are now behind the company. 

Because D&B maintains reports on so many companies, it is of course inevitable that some inaccuracies will occur.
But a five-month investigation by this newspaper, involving company documents and interviews with numerous customers and former employees, indicates that widespread problems have continued at least until the recent past.
Moreover, the investigation indicates that the quality problems are in large part a result of internal D&B practices that encourage employees to prepare large numbers of reports quickly. 

Former D&B credit reporters tell how they were expected to meet unrealistic production quotas that made the preparation of accurate reports extremely difficult.
Struggling to complete as many as 20 reports a day, reporters have sometimes simply regurgitated information provided by companies, without questioning its accuracy.
Where hard information, particularly financial data, was unavailable or skimpy, some ex-employees say, they made their own estimates, often based on flimsy evidence.
And in a few cases, D&B reporters have fabricated information. 

"It was literally impossible to do a good job on any of the reports," says Owen Phillips, a reporter in D&B's Lancaster, Pa., office until last fall. 

(All former employees quoted in this story, including Mr. Phillips, say they left the company on good terms.
This newspaper attempted to interview several current D&B reporters, but they declined.
Some indicated they had been instructed not to talk with the media.
D&B won't comment on reasons former employees left, and it says company policy prohibits current employees from talking to the press without authorization.) 

Former employees assert that some managers were aware of the problems but tolerated them because of financial concerns.
They describe Dun & Bradstreet as a company almost obsessively concerned with attaining ambitious financial goals.
Vicky Hicks, who worked as a D&B reporter for six years until June 1988, says her managers told her not to be overly concerned about the quality of her reports on many companies, particularly smaller ones.
The reason?
Those reports, she says she was told, were infrequently requested and didn't generate much revenue for the corporation. 

Dun & Bradstreet's sales culture has prompted other complaints from customers.
In March, this newspaper reported on widespread allegations that the company misled many customers into purchasing more credit data services than they needed.
In June, D&B agreed to settle several suits related to its sales practices for $18 million without admitting or denying the charges.
An investigation by U.S. Postal inspectors is continuing. 

The problems are an uncommon blemish on one of the most venerable of U.S. companies.
Founded in 1841, Dun & Bradstreet swiftly set to building a reputation for reliability and thoroughness.
An early credit report on a grocer, for example, even noted a rat hole in the shop that "would bear looking into." The report was prepared by Abraham Lincoln, one of four D&B reporters who later became a U.S. president. (The others were Grant, McKinley and Cleveland.) 

D&B still has many admirers who regard its services as indispensable and its faults as tolerable. "For the massive number of names it reports on, it is a good service," says Russell J. Hart, an executive vice president at Republic Factors Corp., a major source of financing in the retailing and garment industries.
Joe Mullen, a New York private investigator, describes D&B's wide range of services as being "like 28 flavors of ice cream." 

D&B has, in fact, a virtual monopoly on the sale of commercial credit data.
While TRW Inc. and a few other companies also sell commercial credit data, D&B controls 90% of the market.
Most of the company's customers have little choice but to use its services. 

At the same time, they have little recourse when problems arise.
Courts have generally held D&B isn't liable for errors.
While there are federal and state laws governing companies that sell credit data on individuals, D&B is largely unregulated. 

As a result, it perhaps isn't surprising that the subject of Dun & Bradstreet makes many executives seethe.
Many small businessmen are particularly angry, viewing the company as an arrogant Big Brother.
Perry Pinion, a D&B credit reporter in Greenville, N.C., and Richmond, Va., before quitting last year, estimates that 75% of the firms he called for data were hostile to D&B and told him to "drop dead." 

D&B reports on small businesses are "dangerous to both those who seek them out, as well as to the fragile reputations of growing, small companies," Joseph Arlauskas wrote to the company after errors appeared in reports on Arlauskas Inc., a Gloucester, Va., general contractor he partly owns. 

The reports vary widely in how much they contain.
A complete one has data such as sales and assets, a brief corporate history and the names and about two decades of background on each officer.
A full report also has a credit history that shows whether the company is behind on its bills, whether it has ever had bad debt placed for collection, and whether it has ever been refused credit.
Based on the credit history and financial data, among other factors, D&B assigns a credit rating. 

Gathering the Data 

A large amount of the information is collected by D&B reporters; ideally, it is based largely on interviews with top officials of the subject company.
Other D&B employees stake out bankruptcy courts and public agencies, from which, this year, they will collect an estimated 2.6 million pieces of information. 

In general, another group of employees assembles the credit histories, based on interviews with trade references, information mailed in by creditors, or computer tapes of accounts provided by creditors.
D&B estimates it will collect 120 million separate payment records this year. 

Substantial numbers of D&B reports are prepared at "ticket centers" in Lancaster, Pa., Tucson, Ariz., Greensboro, N.C., and other relatively low-cost cities.
Reporters at the ticket centers are often recent college graduates hired for modest salaries and then given three months' training.
D&B began setting up the centers in the early 1980s, ex-employees say, to reduce the cost of preparing reports that aren't big sellers. 

"There was a very big concern that costs were getting out of control," recalls Ruth Boley, a vice president of the data-gathering operations until late 1986. 

While D&B does have reporters who visit companies in person, those at the ticket centers do all their work by phone.
Former employees describe these centers as a kind of high-technology sweatshop where reporters had to hustle to, in a literal sense, score points. 

For example, reporters could score 50 points for landing an interview with management.
Reporters' scores were tallied monthly and measured against the goals set by management.
Pay, promotions and bonuses depended on meeting the goals, several ex-reporters say. "If you didn't make production, you weren't eligible for anything," recalls Ms. Hicks. 

D&B says reporters are expected to meet productivity guidelines, which it won't disclose, but it denies former reporters' assertions they were expected to do a certain number of reports a day.
It also says bonuses are based on the quality of reporters' work, not their productivity. 

Suspect Information 

D&B reporters generally didn't make any attempt to verify information provided by companies, ex-reporters say.
Nor, they say, were they supposed to.
D&B asserts in a disclaimer on all its reports that it won't be held responsible for the accuracy of information.
But in their haste to meet production goals, some former reporters say, they would accept information even when they knew it was suspect. 

"Sometimes you could just tell companies were exaggerating," says Wendee Maniago, who quit the Lancaster office in March.
She says she recalls, for example, that small laundries would routinely tell her they had receivables of thousands of dollars but no accounts payable. 

When D&B called Robert F. Naples & Associates Inc. last January, Mr. Naples says, he told the reporter that projected sales were $20 million.
A sharp reporter would have questioned this, Mr. Naples suggests, because he also indicated that his company, which buys and sells power plant gear, has only four employees. 

In fact, Mr. Naples says in several interviews, his company had sales of no more than $1 million in its March fiscal year and under the best of circumstances can generate no more than $5 million.
But he says that when he got a sample copy of his D&B report, the $20 million sales figure appeared.
He says disdainfully that he was proving the point that D&B "will publish anything you give them." 

Dun & Bradstreet says reporters are expected to, and do, question information they find suspect.
Moreover, the company says it is introducing an improved quality-control system that will catch exaggerations like Mr. Naples's.
The system is designed, among other things, to question data that fall outside industry norms calculated by D&B. 

But it isn't clear how well such monitoring will work.
D&B says the reporter who talked to Mr. Naples did raise a question about the sales figure with her manager, but D&B published it anyway after concluding it was possible for the business to generate sales of that size. 

Taking a Guess? 

Reporters, at least in the past, have been free to make their own "guesstimates" for companies not providing complete financial statements.
In 1982, a Denver construction firm called Sunward Corp. and two units sued D&B, claiming that inaccurate credit reports were creating the perception Sunward was failing.
A 1983 trial in Denver federal court revealed that a D&B reporter had used estimates, assumptions and "guesstimates" to prepare financial statements that grossly understated the size of the Sunward enterprises.
The reports, for example, put total sales at less than $1 million when they actually exceeded $29 million. 

Sunward had refused to cooperate with D&B when it originally sought data.
Nonetheless, it was awarded $3.8 million at trial; after an appeals court ordered a retrial, Sunward and D&B settled out of court two years ago. 

"Guesstimates" about company data are "dead and gone in Dun & Bradstreet," D&B's attorney said at the trial.
And in recent interviews, D&B officials also say that reporters aren't allowed to estimate financial data.
But some former reporters say the practice continued after the Sunward case. "You filled in the blanks with whatever it took to make the bottom line add up," says Mr. Phillips, who was a reporter until a year ago. "I can remember being told by my manager to do that sort of thing if that is what it took." 

Some customers complain that Dun & Bradstreet sometimes assigns a favorable rating to a company even though the report itself shows it woefully behind on its bills. "You look at it and say, my God, how can they assign these ratings?" says Mel Langer, a senior vice president at Heller Financial, the U.S. commercial lending arm of Japan's Fuji Bank Ltd.
In August 1988, Mr. Langer complained in a letter to John P. Kunz, then president of D&B's credit services operations, about a report on WB Thomas Installation.
D&B had rated the Huntington Beach, Calif., floor-covering contractor favorably.
But the same report showed it had bills as much as six months overdue. 

In a similar peculiarity, D&B's report last December on Gunthrop-Warren Printing, which was based largely on an interview with the company, indicated it had financial strength of as much as $10 million.
But on the very same page, the report said the company was up to three months late on some bills, and others had been turned over to collectors. 

Mrs. Maniago, the former reporter in Lancaster, says inconsistencies between ratings and payment records weren't unusual.
In fact, she says, reporters sometimes assigned a rating before the report was sent on to co-workers whose job was to prepare the credit history. "It was kind of backwards," Mrs. Maniago admits. 

D&B officials concede that reports can be internally inconsistent, but they attribute the problem to the fact that payment information is updated more often than ratings.
It says it is installing a monitoring system that will prompt reporters to review ratings when new payment information becomes available. 

Some customers also gripe that D&B is like the consultant who borrows your watch to tell you what time it is.
Reporters are encouraged to turn to the subscriber as a source of the very data the subscriber has requested from D&B.
For example, a customer might request a report on a company that refuses to provide trade references.
The solution?
In a June 1988 memo, the manager of the Lancaster office urged reporters to "call back the subscriber. 90% of the time, they will have some credit application to give you names of trade references." 

D&B officials acknowledge that customers are one of the firm's most important sources, especially on new businesses or for original reports. 

The problem with that, say some customers, is that D&B sometimes doesn't bother to verify the data. "If they don't have a report on the business, they will take information you gave them and send it back to you on a form without investigating it," says Robert E. Martin, credit manager of Blackstone Co., an East Brunswick, N.J., building-products firm. 

Production demands also provide an incentive for some reporters to tell subscribers that a company simply can't be located, some former employees say.
To file a so-called "unable to locate" report, they say, a reporter had only to find two outside sources, such as the Post Office or telephone company, that didn't know the subject's whereabouts. 

Such reports are problematic.
A customer ordering a report on a company has to pay for it even if it comes back marked "unable to locate" and provides no information.
The subject of the report can suffer too, since a potential creditor is less likely to extend credit to a firm that Dun & Bradstreet says it can't locate.
But former D&B reporters say that, while they could get poorer scores for filing incomplete reports on firms they found, they didn't lose any points if they marked the firm "unable to locate." 

Unwarranted "UTL" reports apparently are difficult to police and are a longstanding problem.
Five years ago, an internal audit of the Charlotte, N.C., office easily found five of 20 companies that had been listed as not possible to locate, a copy of the audit shows.
More recently, in the Lancaster ticket center, the volume of UTL reports swelled so large that the office manager warned reporters in a October 1988 memo to cut back. 

D&B's Mr. Sommers says the company is working to reduce the number of unable-to-locate reports.
Procedures put in place 18 months ago have reduced them by 36%, he says.
He adds that UTLs aren't necessarily bad since they help some D&B customers spot phony companies. 

New Data and Old 

Stale information is another common customer complaint.
Reports that are requested two or more times a year are revised annually and the rest are revised as needed, the company says.
But many reports contain more outdated information, customers say. 

Last July, a Georgia-Pacific Corp. Midwest distribution division ordered a D&B report on Falb Construction, a Columbiana, Ohio, construction supply concern that was seeking a line of credit.
D&B rated the company highly, says Jeff Yarnell, credit manager for the Georgia-Pacific operation, but the rating was based on a two-year-old financial statement.
As a result, Mr. Yarnell says, Falb got a smaller credit line than the $25,000 it would have gotten if the D&B report had contained fresher data.
He says D&B's information is so often outdated that his division has "realized that it isn't prudent to be making decisions on D&B ratings." 

D&B's Mr. Sommers says the Falb report was "on the outer limits of what is acceptable standards" for timeliness.
He says D&B "has made tremendous progress" in collecting and maintaining fresh financial statements through an effort called the "statement timeliness program." 

Perhaps most troubling is evidence that some D&B reporters have fabricated data outright over the years.
Several years ago, an employee in the Millburn, N.J., office was found to have been making up scores of bank references, according to a former manager.
In mid-1988, D&B also discovered that a reporter in Lancaster had falsified reports.
In Greensboro, a reporter hadn't even produced reports that he had recorded on a log as being completed.
In each case, D&B fired the employee. 

D&B says that, given the size of its work force and the type of work, such incidents are bound to happen from time to time. "Whenever we find it, they're gone," Mr. Sommers says.
The company declines to provide details on such firings. 

A former manager in the Toledo, Ohio, ticket office was dismissed after a particularly troubling instance of falsification, according to several former employees in Ohio.
The manager had prepared at least one report on a nonexistent company, says David Ringenbach, a Toledo employee who resigned in May.
Reports were also written on affiliated dummy companies, according to him.
The reports apparently helped the phony companies to buy merchandise on credit, he adds. 

Dun & Bradstreet says the former manager is no longer with the company but declines to discuss the incident.
The person couldn't be reached for comment. 

D&B, in fact, is a popular instrument of swindlers.
In a June 1988 memo to its reporters, the company said it had recently uncovered "many instances of fraudulent report writing on businesses that simply don't exist." 

Says William P. Callahan, a private investigator: "You have a lot of con men -- the Robert Vescos of the world -- who go out of their way to have D&B do a report." 

Mountain-Hi Surplus appears to have been such a case.
The D&B report describes it as a five-year-old diversified wholesaler with estimated "financial strength" of as much as $500,000.
The source of the information: Mountain-Hi itself.
D&B merely "regurgitated" the information, none of which was true, says Patrick Carr, a U.S. postal inspector who investigated the company.
Last July, Mountain-Hi's owner, Laura Pugh, pleaded guilty in federal court in Denver to a conspiracy charge. 

Verification Process 

D&B says that its own monitoring systems spotted the problem and that D&B subsequently warned customers. "We saved a lot of people a lot of money," says Mr. Sommers.
But according to Mr. Carr, several creditors, including Heller Financial, suffered losses. 

D&B does strive to monitor the accuracy of its reports.
Each local office has a "verifier" who checks a sample of each reporter's work.
D&B also sends teams of auditors unannounced to local offices at least once a year.
Finally, its computer monitoring systems perform thousands of quality checks. 

But there are weaknesses in the defenses.
Although D&B officials say verification samples are statistically valid, former reporters say verifiers in the local offices check only a handful of the hundreds each reporter prepares monthly.
Four years ago, an internal audit of D&B's Tampa, Fla., office determined that the local verifier often confirmed nothing more than that the reporter had, in fact, contacted the subject company. 

Even the audits can be compromised, says Stephen Feigenbaum, a former reporter in Cleveland.
In an interview, he said he was once told by his manager to take home some reports because of a pending audit, leaving better-prepared ones to be seen by the auditor.
D&B says it investigated this matter after being contacted by the Journal, and denies the incident ever took place. 

A couple of years ago D&B instituted a computer system called Delta to help measure reporters' performance.
In addition, Delta "kicks out an automatic sample of every reporter's work, and those reports are read by hand by the data quality department," says the system's designer, Angus Carroll. 

Since 1986, Dun & Bradstreet also has sent copies of reports on companies to the companies for review.
But a company seeing wrong information about itself on a report can have a frustrating time setting the record straight. 

Cedric Blazer, president of Zenith Cutter Co., a Rockford, Ill., manufacturer of industrial blades, says a 1988 report on his company indicated falsely that Zenith was late on a bill.
When he protested, D&B went back to the creditor, and then amended the report when no proof was forthcoming.
But D&B refused to give Mr. Blazer the name of the creditor. 

Frustrated, Zenith sued in Illinois state court late last year against "John Doe Corp." -- the anonymous source -- allowing it to subpoena D&B records.
The court case cost Zenith $2,500 in legal fees. "These guys, because of their size, really don't respond to anybody," says Mr. Blazer. 

Mr. Arlauskas, the part-owner of the Gloucester, Va., general contracting company, offers several months of phone records, correspondence and other documentation of his attempts to have D&B correct inaccurate information it distributed about his company.
D&B still hasn't corrected its report, Mr. Arlauskas says. 

D&B officials say they tried for about two years to satisfy Mr. Arlauskas.
It appears that he "is not real thrilled about the fact that Dun & Bradstreet is publishing anything on his business," Mr. Sommers says. "There are people out there who . . . are never going to agree that we have a right to publish information, and we are never going to totally resolve it." 

Like many other small businessmen, Mr. Arlauskas had refused to cooperate with D&B when it sought information.
So it might seem as though the inaccuracies are his own fault.
But Mr. Arlauskas says he had good reason for not cooperating.
He says that D&B often sells its information to direct marketers and others. 

W. David Thompson, president of Spectrum Research Inc., an El Segundo, Calif., space research and development company, says he learned last December that D&B had sold his company's name and phone number when he began receiving phone solicitations from various groups.
One company in Memphis promised a 1989 Nissan pickup truck for only $89.50 if he would only order a box of magic markers with his company name printed on them. 

"I was absolutely dumbfounded and sickened that a reputable firm . . . would stoop to selling lists of names of companies that you gathered in the name of credit and financial reporting to telemarketing and 'boiler room' organizations," Mr. Thompson complained in a letter to D&B. 

Dun & Bradstreet says companies can request to have their names removed from mailing lists sold by D&B. 

D&B has in some cases supplied reporters with scripts to help them deal with uncooperative companies.
Family-owned businesses that clam up should be told that the information D&B wants "does not represent your family secrets," suggests an internal memo received by Mr. Phillips, the former reporter.
To companies holding back because they got an unfavorable rating in the past, the memo suggests saying, "Dun & Bradstreet doesn't give bad ratings." 

No Regulation 

D&B and other concerns that sell commercial credit data are basically unregulated.
The Fair Credit Reporting Act applies only to companies selling credit data on individuals.
It gives consumers the right to correct information in their reports or submit a statement that must be included in the reports. 

Ten years ago, a Senate committee held hearings at which many small businessmen complained about Dun & Bradstreet.
One told how a rival had interfered with his business by getting D&B to publish false information on him.
But D&B's position that regulation was unnecessary prevailed, and Congress hasn't taken up the issue since. 

Aggrieved companies can, of course, take D&B to court.
One notable case concluded in 1985, when the Supreme Court upheld a $350,000 libel judgment favoring Greenmoss Builders Inc. of Vermont.
D&B had published a report that falsely said the company had filed for bankruptcy. 

But such judgments are relatively rare.
Generally, U.S. business credit-reporting agencies such as D&B enjoy a qualified legal privilege to make ordinary errors.
In any case, D&B's contracts with subscribers purport to free it of liability for erroneous data. 

A few companies are dropping D&B, limiting their use of the service or seeking out data from suppliers who specialize in particular industries.
But such moves aren't likely to have much effect given D&B's monopoly position.
Last year, Blackstone Co. canceled its $13,000-a-year contract with D&B because of complaints about quality.
But Mr. Martin, the company's credit manager, doesn't pretend the move will prompt consternation at D&B headquarters.
The information giant, he admits, "will survive nicely" without him. 

million 

