.START 

Disappointing sales are forcing Sears, Roebuck & Co. to adopt new ways to drum up business without abandoning its seven-month-old pricing strategy. 

The nation's largest retailer is expected to report today that sales at its U.S. stores open at least a year declined in September for the third month in a row.
Analysts say that means third-quarter profit at Sears, whose Allstate insurance unit was hurt by Hurricane Hugo, could fall below last year's restated $305 million, or 80 cents a share.
The outlook for the important fourth quarter, analysts say, isn't rosy either. 

Now, with the critical Christmas shopping season approaching, Sears is highlighting more special deals in its advertising and stores and planning to revive such gimmicks as its "O% financing" deal that defers finance charges on certain big-ticket purchases.
Indeed, one of three more financing deals scheduled for this year will start next week. 

Thomas E. Morris, Sears's vice president, marketing, maintained that Sears isn't retreating from its new pricing strategy or changing its promotional plan for the year.
However, he acknowledged, that "each month, we're able to fine tune the presentation and tell the value-story better and create some more urgency." 

Under the new strategy, adopted in March, Sears set new prices that were somewhere between its old "regular" and "sale" prices.
The company said it would resort far less often to slashing prices to attract shoppers.
However, it said it would continue to run traditional specials such as end-of-the-season clearances and those resulting from one-time deals cut with suppliers. 

Sears predicted at the time that, after an initial surge triggered by an advertising blitz in March, sales wouldn't be affected at all.
Instead, the company was counting on the addition of name-brand merchandise during the next two years in flashier departments it calls "power formats" to boost its sales growth.
But the transition hasn't gone as smoothly as Sears had hoped.
Competitors such as K mart Corp. also cut prices aggressively.
And consumer demand for appliances, electronic items and other durable goods softened just when Sears was installing Brand Central departments, the first of its so-called power formats, in its stores.
The departments, now in about half of Sears's 825 stores, feature national brands of appliances and electronic goods along with Sears's Kenmore and LXI house brands. 

Sales so far are "below where we want them to be," Mr. Morris acknowledged.
But, he added: "I'm not terribly disappointed.
I would be if we were not sticking to the strategy and if we were saying, 'We've got to cut the prices. '" 

Nevertheless, Sears is trying excitement -- generating promotions that aren't quite sales.
Its recent weekly advertising circulars feature more specials more prominently, with the latest touting on the cover Sears's "lowest price in three years" on a special-edition mattress.
Industry sources expect Sears to offer even more special deals, especially on appliances and electronic goods. 

Sears also plans to run three more "O% financing" deals this year as a way to help stimulate traffic.
Twice since March, Sears has offered to defer financing charges on certain big-ticket purchases. 

The company also plans to advertise heavily -- especially on television -- during the fourth quarter, industry sources said. 

For the third quarter, Sears might earn as little as 75 cents a share, according to analysts who have reduced their estimates recently.
These analysts said Sears's Allstate unit, like other insurance companies, will be hurt by Hurricane Hugo and could have to pay claims totaling as much as 20 cents a share. 

Sears's core U.S. retailing business, however, could be "slightly in the red" in the third quarter, compared with last year's anemic showing of $11.8 million, according to Bernard Sosnick of Deutsche Bank Group. 

