.START 

For months, Nissan Motor Co. 's luxury division has been running oddball advertising showing rocks, pussy-willow buds and fences.
Yesterday, in the former summer mansion of the Dodge auto family, Nissan showed the cars. 

Nissan formally unveiled the Infiniti Q45 and M30 models to the automotive press, and promised a new advertising blitz as the cars prepare to hit the showrooms.
On Nov. 5, three days before the initial 50 Infiniti dealers open their doors, Infiniti will run three special 60-second commercials on all three major television networks. 

Will these show the cars?
William Bruce, the head man at Infiniti, won't say, explaining that he wants to keep the world in "suspense." Meanwhile, in the 30 markets where the car will debut, Infiniti will air local commercials that end with a grainy, shadowy image of the Q45 in the background.
But the national advertising, at least until Nov. 5, will skip the car and show such scenes as a churning white-water river, with a baritone voice in the background declaring: "When the engine revs, you can feel it in your chest." 

All this will be part of a "$60 million-plus" advertising effort in Infiniti's first year, says Mr. Bruce.
That will result in an enormous amount of ad spending per car, although it's impossible to say just how much because Infiniti won't forecast sales.
Besides the advertising, Infiniti will help to set up its dealers in the luxury used-car business, selling models such as Ferrari, Jaguar and Mercedes-Benz.
The idea, says Mr. Bruce, is to help keep Infiniti dealers financially healthy by providing additional revenue until a market in used Infiniti cars develops. 

Infiniti's launch will follow by nearly two months the debut of Toyota Motor Corp. 's luxury division, Lexus.
Both divisions have two models priced about the same.
The Infiniti Q45 sedan carries a sticker price of $38,000, compared with $35,000 for the Lexus LS400.
And the Infiniti M30 coupe will sell for $23,500, compared with $21,050 for the Lexus ES250.
Both Infiniti and Lexus, say automotive experts, represent a real threat to European luxury cars, whose price tags have soared in recent years. 

Infiniti and Lexus aren't exactly carbon copies, however.
The Infiniti Q45, with its long, sloping lines, looks somewhat like a Jaguar, in contrast to the Lexus LS400, which has been called a Mercedes-Benz knockoff.
And the Q45's higher base price includes some equipment that is optional on the LS400, such as a sunroof, leather interior and power seats. 

In contrast to Infiniti's oblique advertising, Lexus's commercials are practical recitations of the cars' values. 

"The customers are spending between $20,000 and $40,000, and for them to make a purchase decision they have to be able to see the car and know about the product," says J. Davis Illingworth, Lexus's chief. 

But behind Infiniti's dreamy ads are some down-to-earth plans for kick-starting sales.
In addition to spending a bundle on advertising, Infiniti has aggressive plans to bolster its dealer network. 

Already, Infiniti has a plan to allow qualified customers to purchase its cars without having to make a down-payment.
The Infiniti credit department will be open seven days a week.
And Infiniti has rolled out a low-rate leasing plan to take advantage of the growing number of well-heeled customers who would rather rent a luxury car than own one.
Infiniti expects as much as 50% of its Q45 customers will lease their cars, Mr. Bruce says. 

Dealers will also get more direct subsidies.
Infiniti says it will give each dealer up to $120,000 during the division's first year of operation to offset start-up costs such as buying land and building facilities. 

Infiniti also wants to make sure its dealers don't have to start from scratch in the search for customers, Mr. Bruce says.
The company has a list of 150,000 "serious prospects," culled mostly from responses to the 24-hour toll free number listed in its print advertising.
Dealers will receive the names of potential buyers who live in their area. 

