.START 

One consequence of the Princeton/Newport RICO case is that the Justice Department has issued new guidelines to prevent any such prosecution ever again.
Shirley Peterson, assistant attorney general in the tax division, issued the memorandum amending the U.S. Attorneys Manual in July, but it's just now reaching the public.
The memo tells federal prosecutors not to try another Princeton/Newport by bringing RICO or mail fraud charges based on alleged tax violations. 

The memo says that unless there are the "exceptional circumstances" of a tax shelter that victimizes third parties, prosecutors abuse their power when they bring RICO or mail fraud charges masquerading as tax charges.
The memo says "It is the position of the Tax Division that Congress intended that tax crimes be charged as tax crimes" and not something else. "Tax offenses are not predicates for RICO offenses -- a deliberate congressional decision -- and charging a tax offense as a mail fraud charge could be viewed as circumventing congressional intent." 

This is a very rare substantive addition to prosecutorial guidelines for tax cases.
Its basic rationale is the same one that limits to fewer than 1,500 the annual number of criminal tax cases.
This is that tax law is so complex and the potential for prosecutorial abuse so great -- who hasn't made some technical error in filling out a tax form? -- that some central authority in the Justice Department must closely supervise which cases are brought and why.
The vague RICO and mail fraud laws give prosecutors too much discretion to bring quasi-tax cases. 

While the technically worded memo doesn't refer to any specific abuse, the new rules are almost certainly a response to the Princeton/Newport case.
The major prior abuse was when Rudolph Giuliani, the former U.S. Attorney in Manhattan, in 1984 RICOed oil trader Marc Rich essentially on tax grounds.
Tax experts at Justice were wary of Mr. Giuliani's RICOing of Princeton/Newport, but acquiesced.
Previous guidelines prohibited "a proposed RICO indictment that contains as predicates mail fraud charges concerning federal tax evasion or related violations" unless the tax division at Justice agrees. 

Prosecutorial guidelines are effective only when Justice is willing and able to enforce them.
James Mann, deputy assistant attorney general in the tax division at the time Mr. Giuliani brought the Princeton/Newport indictment, says he "can't recall any similar criminal prosecution" and warns that even the new memo limiting prosecutorial discretion may not bring much comfort. "Regardless of what the guidelines provide, the tax division does not have the bureaucratic clout to stand up against the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York," he says. 

The question now is whether Mr. Giuliani's successor as U.S. Attorney in Manhattan, Otto Obermaier, will decide that prosecutorial discretion includes following Justice directives in cases already brought.
He takes over a U.S. Attorneys Office knowing that its supervisors in Washington now agree that it twisted RICO to elevate complex civil tax issues into allegations of "fraud" and racketeering. 

