.START 

No wonder more people aren't philanthropists. 

The University of Utah courted James L. Sorenson, a wealthy Salt Lake City entrepreneur and inventor of medical devices, for six years, trying to bring him into the area's "philanthropic fraternity." Last June the school snagged him, and proudly announced an endowment of 250,000 shares, or $15.25 million of Abbott Laboratories stock, which Mr. Sorenson had acquired in a business transaction. 

"It was a joyous celebration," remembers J. Michael Mattsson, university vice president for development. "It was the largest gift in the history of the state." 

But the joy turned bitter amid rumors that swept through the student body and faculty.
One story had it that medical-school diplomas would no longer read "University of Utah" but simply "Sorenson Medical School." Another fear was that Mr. Sorenson was demanding unprecedented control over research grants and endowed professorships. 

Not so, says Mr. Mattsson.
True, the university was going to rename the medical school and medical center, which would become the J.L. Sorenson School of Medicine of the University of Utah, and the J.L. Sorenson Medical Center.
But diplomas would still read "University of Utah," with the Sorenson name inscribed well below that.
And only "the courtesy" of an advisory role was accorded Mr. Sorenson when selecting grant recipients, no more than is usually accorded benefactors. 

Students and faculty weren't mollified.
Protests and petitions mounted.
Critics said renaming the medical school would negate the efforts of the many people who had worked to build it.
A few observers say there was even an undercurrent of resentment against Mr. Sorenson, whom some viewed as nouveau riche. 

An annoyed Mr. Sorenson finally asked that the gift be given back, saying in an open letter that it was "too much {for the school} to handle." In September the school voted to return the stock, which had swelled in value to $16.5 million. 

The spurned benefactor finds it all "disappointing, distressing," says John Ward, Mr. Sorenson's spokesman. "I spend my life trying to help people get money," Mr. Ward says. "This is the first time I've had to fight to give it away." The orphaned endowment, he adds, is still up for grabs. 

