.START 

Mexican Bandit: "We are the 'federales'.
You know, the mounted police. 

Humphrey Bogart: "If you're the police, where are your badges? 

Bandit: "Badges?
We ain't got no badges.
We don't need no badges.
I don't have to show you any stinkin' badges]" 

This exchange from the classic Western "Treasure of the Sierra Madre" has become the model for today's aggressive federal prosecutors, who have discovered that RICO means they can win convictions without bothering to prove any substantive underlying crime.
In the Princeton/Newport case now on appeal, defendants argued that their tax-driven securities sales were legal and indeed commonplace, but prosecutors assured the jury, "You don't need a fancy tax law expert because common sense tells you it's fraudulent, it's phony." In other words: "Tax laws?
We ain't got no tax laws.
We don't have to show you any stinkin' tax laws]" 

A review of several thousand pages of the trial transcript shows that the jury could well have convicted the securities officials under RICO without concluding that the defendants violated any specific tax law.
The extraordinarily vague wording of RICO deprived the jurors of any clear rule of law under which to judge the case.
There were only fleeting references to the actual tax law the defendants allegedly violated -- thus committing RICO's "mail fraud" and "wire fraud." In short, RICO may well have deprived the defendants of a fair trial. 

RICO was key because instead of prosecuting what would have been an extraordinarily complex tax case, the U.S. Attorney's Office replaced detailed analysis of the underlying tax law with vague allegations of "sleaze." The prosecutors understandably preferred RICO to trying to prove mind-numbing tax issues. 

At issue were 59 end-of-the-year trades Princeton/Newport made during 1984 and 1985 in which the firm sold and then repurchased securities.
The trades were designed to avoid a wrinkle in the tax code -- now corrected -- that might have caused some investors to owe more in taxes.
The problem was that the firm's convertible hedge trades could inadvertently create long-term capital losses and short-term capital gains, so the idea was to lock in short-term losses by selling securities, then buying them back later at about the same price.
Princeton/Newport said the trades were standard, legal tax reduction; the prosecutors said they were fraud amounting to racketeering. 

The highly complex laws on these trades come down to the question of whether such tax trades involve some amount of real economic activity and not a pure tax sham.
During the trial, Princeton/Newport argued that precedents indicated that if there was a risk, even a remote one, that Princeton/Newport would not get the securities back at about the same price then there was what the tax laws refer to as "economic substance." Or as James Sutton Regan, the firm's managing general partner, put it recently, "It was always in my mind that if you bought and sold securities within the context of the market it was okay." 

Ironically, the first witness the prosecution called seemed to establish that there was economic substance to the trades.
Ann Varalli, a trader at what is now S.G. Warburg, described how she used to be on the other side of Princeton/Newport trades.
She said that Princeton/Newport "never asked me" to do anything improper, that there was no discussion about buying stock back at the same price and no agreement to adjust the price back if the market had moved.
A defense lawyer thought this testimony an "atomic bomb" in the face of the prosecution. 

The defendants had hoped to call Donald Alexander, a former commissioner of the IRS, to explain the relevant tax law.
They also wanted to call Boris Bittker, an emeritus law professor at Yale, and perhaps the top academic expert on complex financial tax issues.
The prosecutors managed to keep both experts off the stand. 

Prof.
Bittker came to the courtroom to testify that the Princeton/Newport officials not only committed no tax crimes, but that the firm's tax treatment of the trades was reasonable and appropriate.
In an affidavit, he gave several reasons why the trades had economic substance.
There was "actual economic gain or loss" on the trades because the market value of securities had changed.
He noted that taxpayers routinely trade at year's end to lock in "recognition" of gain or loss purely for tax reasons.
He cited how-to publications on legal tax avoidance with titles such as "Year-End Tax Tactics" and "Taxpayer's Guide to Investment Strategies." 

Prof.
Bittker also cited a proposed regulation under tax code Section 1058 clarifying that to be a non-taxable securities loan, as the prosecutors characterized these trades, certain technical requirements had to be met.
The Princeton/Newport trades did not meet the test, so the trades presumably gave rise to losses and gains.
Defense lawyers also wanted his testimony to show that since the trades were reasonable there was no intent to break the tax laws, a requirement in criminal tax cases. 

But the jury never got to hear any of Prof.
Bittker's reasoning or that of former IRS Commissioner Alexander.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Neil Cartusciello complained their views of tax law "are going to provide almost an alternative charge" to the jury than the one the prosecution planned to propose.
His paradoxical objection was that it might confuse the jury to have experts say that the Princeton/Newport trades were reasonable.
The fact that this was a "fraud"-based RICO case may have somehow contributed to the judge's decision to deny the testimony; testimony on reasonable interpretations of the tax code is common in tax cases. 

Defense attorney Theodore Wells argued in vain that a clear explanation to the jury is all the more urgent "as our society becomes more complex and our prosecuting authorities decide to really create new types of regulatory offenses which create more complexity such that we get away from the old-fashioned types of crimes that everybody can understand." 

In its summation to the jury, the prosecution added insult to the injury of suppressing tax testimony.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Mark Hansen urged the jury not to consider the technical tax laws but to convict with this appeal: "Doesn't it feel wrong?
Doesn't it sound sleazy?
If it sounds sleazy, it's because it is sleazy.
Your common sense tells you that." Mr. Hansen invoked the Iran-Contra affair, reminded the jury that these were wealthy defendants and concluded, "In the world of being a sleaze, ladies and gentlemen, these defendants made their own rules." 

Jurors interviewed after the trial said they were persuaded not by any arguments about the tax code, but by the sleaze argument.
The most damaging evidence came from tapes Princeton/Newport had made of its trades, which the government seized in its raid on the firm.
The discussions between traders included "You're a sleazebag" and jokes about going to jail.
These tapes may, however, say more about Wall Street's saucy conversational style and gallows humor than anything else, especially the intricacies of tax law. 

RICO's racketeering language invites over-broad arguments from prosecutors who have only to prove "fraud," an inherently vague charge that here didn't require a careful parsing of the tax code.
Criminal laws are supposed to be clear enough that people know with some precision what behavior is permitted and what behavior is prohibited.
This is one reason there are so few criminal tax cases as opposed to civil cases.
One special danger of vague laws is that they leave people at risk of arbitrary prosecution. 

And, indeed, this case looks like prosecutors scouring the criminal code for some crime to accuse certain people of instead of the more proper prosecutorial function of observing crimes and searching out the wrongdoers.
For one thing, despite the use of RICO, Princeton/Newport was not some Mafia-tainted money launderer.
Until RICO's threat of a $23.8 million pre-trial asset seizure scared investors away, forcing Princeton/Newport into liquidation months before trial, the firm was one of the country's most successful investment operations. 

Its investors, including the Harvard University endowment, earned average returns of nearly 20%.
The strategy was to buy convertible securities, typically ones that were thinly traded and under-researched.
The firm hedged using a complex computer formula that would find profitable straddles in, say, shorting the stock, buying a call and selling a put.
A Forbes article in 1986 describing Princeton/Newport's options arbitrage was headlined "Simple?
Yes.
Easy?
No." 

The firm's managing general partner, Mr. Regan, was a Dartmouth classmate of Robert Freeman, the former Goldman Sachs arbitrageur.
Princeton/Newport had traded with Drexel Burnham Lambert and its Michael Milken several years ago.
Prosecutors at first suspected that Princeton/Newport had traded inside information with Mr. Freeman and illegally parked securities for Mr. Milken to hide their ownership.
When Princeton/Newport officials said they didn't know of any illegal activity by Mr. Freeman or anyone else, the government responded brutally.
Before trial, defense lawyers complained that prosecutors were trying to "bludgeon and coerce people to implicate others" in some bigger crime and had told them, "If you cooperate, fine.
If you don't we are going to roll right over you." 

But the Justice Department's own guidelines ban using RICO as a rubber hose to coerce testimony.
The guidelines also frown on racketeering charges based on tax charges.
A new memorandum to prosecutors issued after the Princeton/Newport case makes clear that the Justice Department will at least never again approve RICO cases based on these kinds of tax charges. 

Sentencing is scheduled for Nov. 6, but the appeals are already filing in.
One key argument is the vagueness of RICO, a problem that Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia and three other justices agreed in a case last term could make the entire statute unconstitutional.
Justice Scalia likened the broad wording of RICO to saying "Life is a fountain." 

Princeton/Newport lawyers point out that what is vague for Supreme Court justices must be a total haze to a jury. "Courts with the finest education and training in the law have often labored unsuccessfully to comprehend RICO," they argue, so "it is fanciful to hope that a jury of laypersons could understand the statute and apply it based on instructions that necessarily use technical language and unfamiliar terms of art." 

Mr. Crovitz is assistant editor of the Journal's editorial page. 

