.START 

In this delightful and ebulliently written mixture of family history and autobiography, "Memories and Adventures" (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 272 pages, $19.95), Winston S. Churchill, the grandson of Sir Winston Churchill, takes readers on a brief tour of 20th-century Churchilliana.
Mr. Churchill's personal exploits include a five-week trip piloting a single-engine plane with a friend from Oxford around the perimeter of Africa and back to Oxford, reporting on the Six Day and Vietnam Wars, and campaigning for Parliament. 

In many respects, the memories he shares with us are even more engaging than the adventures, including descriptions of his encounters with some of the most important figures in public life in our time.
Like his father and grandfather before him, Mr. Churchill is an accomplished journalist with an unfailing eye for the telling anecdote.
His early training, incidentally, included a stint on this paper. 

"Memories and Adventures" begins with the author's birth in October 1940 at Chequers, the prime minister's official country residence.
His grandfather had just been made prime minister for the first time, and the Nazi blitz against London was in full force.
Mr. Churchill quotes copiously from family correspondence, presenting at once a more easy-going and more intimate sketch of the Churchill clan than we have hitherto had. 

Sir Winston quite naturally emerges as the protagonist of the book's early chapters.
Everything Mr. Churchill relates about his grandfather reinforces our image of the great statesman as a man of extraordinary wit, energy, courage and unfailing grace under pressure.
For all his devotion to public life, he also appears as a passionately domestic man, deeply committed to home and family. 

But if Sir Winston provides the historical center of Mr. Churchill's recollections, his father, Randolph, is in many ways the book's main character.
It cannot have been easy growing up as Randolph Churchill's son. "Life with Father was likely to be tempestuous," Mr. Churchill remarks with studied understatement.
Like Sir Winston, Randolph was a prodigious drinker and smoker; unlike him, he was also impulsive, quick-tempered and grandly irresponsible.
It is amusing to learn that he believed a train should always be given "a sporting chance" of getting away, but then we do not have to count on catching the train with him.
Mr. Churchill recalls being often deposited in the outer hall at London's swank White's Club when he was a small boy while his father "finished his drink." "How long," he recalls asking himself, "could it take to finish one drink?" 

Randolph inevitably quarreled with his friends, not infrequently waking late after a long and bibulous night to find that what he remembered as a "jolly row" was intolerable abuse to his house guests, who had packed and left in a rage.
When he was 53 years old, his doctors suspected cancer and operated to remove part of one lung.
The tissue was benign, but the episode prompted his erstwhile friend Evelyn Waugh to remark that it was a "typical triumph of modern science to find the only part of Randolph that was not malignant and remove it." 

Yet as Mr. Churchill makes clear, his father was also possessed of great charms and enthusiasm.
He met his future wife, Pamela Digby, on a blind date in 1939 when he was 28 and she was 19.
With an impetuousness that was characteristic of Randolph (and also perhaps of those precarious months before the war), the couple were married three weeks later.
Almost everyone was against the match, partly because Pamela was so young, partly because they had known each other so briefly.
Winston Churchill was the exception. "Nonsense]" he replied when people raised objections: "All you need to be married are champagne, a box of cigars and a double bed]" 

Alas, this was one instance in which Sir Winston's instincts failed him.
Except for producing young Winston, the marriage was a short-lived disaster.
During their brief honeymoon, before he was whisked off to the war, Randolph would read long passages from Gibbon's "Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" in bed to his young bride, stopping occasionally to ask, "Are you listening?" When she assured him she was, he demanded, "Well, what was the last sentence?" Randolph was also hopelessly improvident.
At a time when the newlyweds were spending 52 pounds a year on rent, he lost 850 in two nights, gambling on his troopship.
Pamela had to sell all her wedding presents in order to begin paying off the debt.
Not surprisingly, the marriage soon ended in divorce. 

Mr. Churchill manages to present even these unhappy events in the most agreeable way, without bitterness but also without sentimentality.
Only rarely does his judgment desert him.
His swooning over "the Kennedy 'joie de vivre'" when he visited JFK and Robert Kennedy in 1963 no doubt will strike many as comically misplaced, as will his evocation of the "instinctive warmth and friendliness of New Yorkers." Apart from such lapses, "Memories and Adventures" is an engrossing book, entirely worthy of a Churchill's pen. 

Mr. Kimball is the managing editor of the New Criterion. 

