.START 

Stock of USX Corp. surged $2.50 a share to $38.75 on heavy volume of 12.7 million shares amid reports that investor Carl Icahn is raising his 11.4% stake to put pressure on USX to restructure and buy back stock. 

Many stock traders were betting that Mr. Icahn was adding to his USX stake because Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. told customers it bought more than two million shares for one or more clients Tuesday.
Shearson didn't identify the clients, and its executives wouldn't comment. 

In addition, a report in USA Today by Dan Dorfman said that Mr. Icahn was buying stock because he is dissatisfied with USX's action announced Monday in putting the energy reserves of Texas Oil & Gas Corp. up for sale. 

Stock traders believe Mr. Icahn wants to pressure the Pittsburgh-based energy and steel company to pursue a more aggressive program of asset sales and stock buy-backs that would boost the value of his stock.
USX shares have lagged the market this year.
Sooner or later, they believe, he would like to get out at a profit. 

Mr. Icahn couldn't be reached for comment on the reports.
If he has bought more than 1% of USX stock, or 2.6 million shares, he must amend a declaration of his holdings within the next few days.
If he does, it would be the first such amendment since he acquired 29.3 million shares three years ago for $650 million, or $22.20 a share. 

Shortly after amassing his stake from Aug. 7 to Oct. 6 of that year, Mr. Icahn made a $7.19 billion, $31-a-share proposal to buy the company.
But he abandoned the effort after USX redeemed a series of guaranteed notes that he said boosted the cost of a bid. 

Mr. Icahn later developed a friendly relationship with USX Chairman David Roderick and remained a passive investor in the company during his separate pursuit of Texaco Inc. that began in late 1987 and ended last June when he sold his stock for $2.07 billion in a surprise move. 

After Texaco, traders speculated Mr. Icahn's next move might be against USX, where Mr. Roderick retired June 1 and was succeeded by Charles A. Corry.
However, after an initial speculative surge that fell short of the $40 level, the stock retreated to the middle to low 30s until Monday's announcement of the energy sale. 

Much of yesterday's USX stock volume seemed to represent traders trying to ride Mr. Icahn's coattails.
Average daily volume is 1.2 million shares.
On Monday, USX rose $1.75 to $34.875 on 2.8 million shares.
On Tuesday, it rose $1.375 to $36.25 on 5.3 million shares, with much of the buying attributed to Mr. Icahn. 

Traders were quick to believe Shearson was buying for Mr. Icahn on Tuesday because Shearson arranged the sale of his Texaco stock in a block trade with two other firms.
Some traders said much of yesterday's buying was concentrated among one or two other brokers, suggesting Mr. Icahn had shifted his order. 

Mr. Icahn has a war chest of roughly $2.5 billion in cash in addition to his USX holdings.
That could help finance a bid to put new pressure on Mr. Corry.
However, recent weakness in the junk-bond market, Mr. Icahn's historic financing source, could undercut that threat.
With 257 million shares outstanding, a $50-a-share bid for USX would cost about $12.9 billion.
Analysts value the company at $35 to $60 a share. 

Some traders also cautioned that Mr. Icahn might be buying stock to boost the price temporarily before negotiating a sale of his shares.
Shortly before he arranged the sale of his Texaco shares, the price had run up on rumors that he was about to launch some new hostile move against Texaco. 

Although Mr. Icahn is said to favor splitting the company into its energy and steel components, some analysts say that could pose tax problems.
Currently, about $2 billion in past steel losses can be used to shelter energy profits. 

USX has in the past four years repeatedly studied a split-up.
But that would also repudiate the logic that brought its two businesses together.
USX purchased Marathon Oil in 1982 to help weather downturns in the steel industry, and boosted its energy bet in 1986 by buying Texas Oil & Gas. 

USX, which declined to comment on its stock activity, says it plans to reduce debt and buy back stock after the Texas Oil & Gas reserve sale.
Frederick Leuffer, energy analyst at C.J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc., said USX could use an estimated $1.5 billion in proceeds to buy back stock at $40 a share or more without diluting earnings. 

Another analyst, John Tumazos of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp., noted that any buyer of USX would have to assume $5.8 billion in debt plus billions more in other liabilities, such as retiree health-care expenses.
Selling the steel business could also be difficult, he said, because per-ton profits are declining. 

One person familiar with the lengthy standoff between Mr. Icahn and USX speculated that Mr. Icahn may want to force the company to take as many restructuring steps as he can, take the credit, and then exit by selling his stock.
Mr. Icahn, he said, can keep the pressure on by creating "tremendous story flow and energy and concepts," while still keeping the company guessing about his exact intentions. 

