.START 

SHEARSON LEHMAN HUTTON INC. expects shares of Ratners Group PLC to outperform the British stock market within the next six to 18 months, and recommends its purchase.
In Monday's edition, it was reported that Shearson recommended selling the stock. 

(See: "Heard on the Street: British Market Is Expected to Remain Flat Near-Term as Analysts Seek Defensive Stocks" -- WSJ Oct. 2, 1989) 

Diplomats and environmentalists began work in Geneva on an international treaty to limit "greenhouse" gases. 

The working group of the U.N.-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is mapping out an agreement that could influence everything from how people heat their homes to the size of their car. "It's the first time governments have come together to discuss elements of a convention on climate change," Daniel Lashof, a senior environmentalist at the U.S.-based Natural Resources Defense Council, said. 

The treaty could freeze or cut emissions of carbon dioxide.
By trapping Earth's heat in the upper atmosphere, carbon dioxide is thought to be responsible for half of the greenhouse effect, or global warming. 

Also being considered by the working group is the inexpensive transfer of technology and resources to developing countries to enable them to cut their greenhouse-gas pollution. 

The Tehran Times recommended that the Iranian government sell off some of the country's state-owned factories to the private sector.
The newspaper said many state-owned industries "have not been able to produce significant tangible results. . . . It may be worth turning things over to the private sector as an experiment." But the daily cautioned that privatization should take place "under proper government supervision in order to override malpractices of any kind, corruption and greed that the profit motive sometimes sadly lends itself to." 

Japan's Sharp Corp. has launched a joint-venture company with Bharat Forge Ltd., India's largest forge maker, to produce videocassette recorders and color televisions in India.
The diversified Indian company has been producing color televisions since 1986 using electronic parts provided by Sharp.
The joint venture, called Kalyani Sharp India Ltd., is located in Pune, Maharashtra, southeast of Bombay.
Sharp contributed 40% of the venture's total capitalization of 30 million rupees ($1.8 million), while another 40% came from Bharat Forge.
Twenty percent was placed by publicly subscribed shares. 

Heineken N.V. is studying how it might reorganize its Dutch beer operations, Heineken Nederland B.V., in order to adapt to changing market trends and tightening competition in the European brewing industry.
A spokesman for Heineken Nederland cited changing consumer tastes in beer, especially a growing demand for imported varieties and for low- or non-alcohol beers, as altering the dynamics of the Dutch domestic beer market, which has been stagnant in recent years.
A spokeswoman at Heineken's headquarters said the company's subsidiaries elsewhere in the world won't be affected by changes at the Dutch unit. 

Venezuela will supply Nicaragua with about a half-million gallons of gasoline to enable the Nicaraguan government to meet transport personnel involved in general elections scheduled for February 1990, the OPEC News Agency said.
The agency quoted Venezuelan Oil Minister Celestino Armas as saying the transaction would be a "strictly commercial operation." Venezuelan petroleum supplies to Nicaragua are normally made under the San Jose oil program of petroleum aid to poor Latin American nations. 

A survey done by the Gallup Organization for American Express Co. classifies leisure travelers from the U.K., West Germany, the U.S. and Japan as Adventurers, Indulgers, Dreamers, Worriers and Economizers. 

The study involved more than 4,000 adults who spent at least one night in paid lodging in the past year.
It found that Adventurers -- people who are eager to have new experiences and don't need pampering -- account for nearly 25% of all travelers, and almost half of all West Germans.
They are the most frequent travelers, better educated and more affluent than others in their countries. 

Indulgers, another affluent group that travels more as a reward than for the experience, account for 43% of Britons and 27% of Americans.
Economizers, the largest group in Japan with 28% of the survey group there, are older, take an average of two trips a year, are 53% male and have an extremely low sense of adventure. "Worriers," accounting for 13% of Americans, 14% of Japanese and 15% of Britons, don't think travel is very important and, in fact, must overcome considerable anxiety to enjoy it. 

The Dreamers group accounted for 24% of Britons and Japanese.
This group as a whole is fascinated by travel and talks about it a lot.
The group has modest income and education levels, is 55% female and 43% over the age of 50. 

Switzerland, which has the highest per capita AIDS rate in Europe, registered its 1,000th case of the disease last month, the federal public health department said.
It said 509 people had died since contracting the disease. . . . Cambodia appealed for international help to repair parts of the Angkor temples complex, one of Asia's most spectacular monuments.
The 12th-century complex was damaged by a violent storm a month ago. 

