.START 

A federal judge dismissed a crucial claim in a major sex-discrimination case that threatened to cost the state of California billions of dollars in lost wages for thousands of past and current state women employees. 

The decision also is a further setback for proponents of "comparable worth" -- the notion that jobs dominated by women should demand salaries that are equal to those paid for jobs dominated by men, whenever similar responsibilities are involved.
Recent legal decisions in other cases have made it increasingly difficult for women to win such suits. 

The decision yesterday by San Francisco federal Judge Marilyn Patel essentially rejected what some had considered a backdoor attack on disparate wage patterns by focusing on historic discrimination patterns. 

The suit was filed in 1984 by the California State Employees' Association on behalf of an estimated 60,000 past and present secretaries, clerks, nurses and others in predominantly female state jobs.
The suit contended that those jobs had been deliberately underpaid for decades because the employees were women.
The state denied discrimination and said any differences in pay scales reflected market rates. 

The state employees sought to prove that California had a history of discriminating against them dating to the 1930s.
But Judge Patel ruled that the evidence failed to document deliberate and systematic bias. 

Judge Patel said she would consider arguments that state policies had the effect of illegally holding down wages for women, in the absence of discriminatory intent. 

But such suits have proven increasingly difficult for plaintiffs.
Last June, for instance, the U.S. Supreme Court cast doubt whether statistical evidence alone, for instance, was sufficient to establish employment discrimination. 

The state employees' group said it was "shocked and disappointed" at the decision by Judge Patel, a former lawyer for the National Organization for Women. "We certainly cannot believe that sex discrimination was eliminated in 1937, nor that it has been eliminated to this day," said Margaret Dean, the association's president. 

The group said it was considering whether to appeal. 

Christopher Waddell, chief counsel for the state Department of Personnel Administration, said the decision was "very significant in terms of the future of the lawsuit.
A major element has been laid to rest." 

Comparable worth has been on the ropes legally for several years.
In 1985, for instance, the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, based in San Francisco, held that lower pay for female-dominated jobs based on prevailing market levels was legal, overturning a lower-court decision that had awarded $400 million in lost pay to female employees in Washington state. 

"The basic concept of comparable worth has been very dormant over the last few years, because the underlying theory that there is an entitlement to comparable worth has never been bought by the courts generally," said Victor Schachter, a San Francisco labor lawyer. 

Much of the evidence that the employees' group offered of deliberate discrimination came from the 1930s, when the state pay system was overhauled and some staffers were quoted as saying that sex should influence salary levels. 

But the judge determined that such comments never reflected the formal policy of the state at the time.
She noted that salaries in female-dominated jobs were then lower than in some male-dominated jobs, but still matched pay for similar jobs in the private sector. 

The judge said: "Plaintiffs' 'smoking guns' never held ammunition." 

