.START 

The Federal Aviation Administration, concerned about a crash and other incidents involving USAir flights, is taking a close look at whether the airline's merger with Piedmont Airlines may be hurting flight-crew performance. 

The FAA, according to agency officials, is scrutinizing three recent incidents.
The most serious occurred Sept. 20, when USAir Flight 5050 crashed into New York's East River, killing two passengers. 

In its review, the agency is focusing on changes made in the wake of the merger to the carrier's training programs, operations manual and checklist procedures. "We wanted to make sure all the changes proposed were carried out correctly," an FAA official said. 

A spokesman for USAir, a subsidiary of USAir Group Inc., said the FAA review is "completely routine" in the aftermath of an accident. 

The review comes as the FAA nears completion of an extensive review of federal pilot-training and checking rules.
The agency is planning several changes, and, among other things, is considering whether to write new rules to prevent the pairing of inexperienced captains and co-pilots. 

The crew-pairing issue is stirring interest among safety investigators because Flight 5050's co-pilot, who apparently was at the controls at the beginning of the takeoff, had little experience in the Boeing 737 aircraft.
The captain had extensive experience in 737s as a co-pilot, but had logged fewer than 150 hours as a captain. 

Currently, the FAA doesn't have any rules governing the pairing of crew members, although in 1988 it recommended that airlines adopt procedures that would prevent the pairing of inexperienced crew members on the same flight.
The National Transportation Safety Board has for some time wanted the FAA to put out rules on the issue, and FAA Administrator James Busey plans to consider the possibility in coming weeks.
An FAA official said that the crew of Flight 5050 would have met the guidelines recommended in 1988. 

In any case, the FAA is likely to propose in the next few months the increased monitoring and training of co-pilots during "initial operating experience" -- their first flights at the controls on planes with passengers. 

In addition, the agency will propose that cockpit resource management -- a training regimen that emphasizes teamwork and good cockpit communications -- be made mandatory at all airlines.
And it also is likely to propose that commuter-airline pilots be required to meet the same standards as pilots on major airlines. 

The FAA's review of USAir began last week and is scheduled to be completed tomorrow.
Three FAA officials are looking at whether changes in cockpit procedures or pilot training following the merger may have contributed to the incidents. 

Besides the Flight 5050 accident, the agency is looking at a mishap in which a plane's landing gear struck power lines while approaching Kansas City International Airport, and an incident in New England in which a plane slid off the runway. 

