.START 

Credit reports are Dun & Bradstreet's oldest product, but they are only one part of a vast information-gathering empire that touches nearly every aspect of American commerce. 

Chances are, D&B knows how many bottles of bleach your local supermarket stocks.
It knows what television shows Americans are watching.
It monitors hundreds of corporate and municipal bond offerings.
One of its almost 30 divisions even ferrets out the most promising spots for striking oil. 

Such voluminous knowledge makes Dun & Bradstreet one of the country's most influential companies.
Though its customers are almost exclusively businesses, D&B penetrates American life far beyond the corporate world, playing a major role in business decisions that weigh profoundly on mass culture and the mass consumer market. 

For example, TV shows live or die based on audience ratings prepared by D&B's A.C. Nielsen subsidiary.
David Poltrack, CBS Inc. 's top researcher, notes that Nielsen ratings are the measure by which "$10 billion in national advertising is placed on cable TV, network TV and national syndication." Another $10 billion is placed in local markets based on the measurement of viewership of local programming, he adds. 

Sales information collected by Nielsen Marketing Research plays a major role in the marketing of groceries, health and beauty aids and other packaged goods.
The cents-off coupons used by shoppers are processed by a Dun & Bradstreet operation, Nielsen's Manufacturers Coupon Control Center, which reimburses retailers and bills the packaged-goods marketers who issue the coupons.
Last year, D&B processed more than 100 million coupons for Campbell Soup Co. alone. 

In doctors' offices, pharmacies and the warehouses of pharmaceutical makers, D&B's IMS International unit counts prescriptions filled and the drugs that are prescribed.
Through its Petroleum Information Corp. unit, D&B gathers drilling and production information needed for oil exploration.
For the magazine industry, Neodata Service, another unit, maintains files that hold the names of more than 58 million subscribers, produces address labels for each one and handles mailings.
D&B also issues regular surveys of business sentiment -- the latest of which is reported in this newspaper today. 

And there is more.
The Donnelley Directory unit publishes and compiles Yellow Pages and other directories for dozens of phone companies for which it also sells advertising.
D&B's Dataquest is one of the top three suppliers of data in the high-technology area, influencing the future prices and features of office copiers and other equipment. 

D&B's Moody's Investors Service, known primarily as a debt-rating company, annually supplies more than 15 million different pieces of information on more than 22,000 companies world-wide and 28,000 local and state governments and their securities. 

In many of these markets, Dun & Bradstreet has a dominant position.
Nielsen, for example, is the principal source of national audience ratings for television.
IMS International, bought last year for $1.66 billion, has an overwhelming share of the pharmaceutical data market both in the U.S. and abroad.
Moody's has only one major competitor, McGraw-Hill's Standard & Poor's. 

Nielsen's dominance concerns many.
Broadcasters have for years questioned whether its audience sample is truly representative.
Of course, much of the criticism comes from the major networks, which Nielsen ratings show to be losing viewers. 

Despite D&B's moves into other data markets, credit services remain a major part of the company, and D&B continues to consolidate its position in the credit area.
Last year, for example, it paid $140 million for American Credit Indemnity, the nation's biggest business-credit insurance company.
D&B also is a leading collector of bad debt through Dun & Bradstreet Receivables Management Services. 

Finally, Dun & Bradstreet is becoming an increasingly important player in the international arena.
Last year, more than 30% of its $4.27 billion in revenue came from abroad.
Foreign operations include Datastream International, a London-based supplier of data on European companies and securities, credit reports on seven million foreign companies, and the foreign operations of Nielsen Marketing Research. 

(See related story: "Credibility Gap: Dun's Credit Reports, Vital Tool of Business, Can Be Off the Mark --- Company Ratings, Too High or Too Low, Often Anger and Frustrate Customers --- Estimates and 'Guesstimates'" -- WSJ Oct. 5, 1989) 

