.START 

It was a sight to curl Lenin's toes. 

Pinned to the wall of a large reception room in the Soviet Embassy here, not far from a heroic portrait of the father of Soviet communism himself, hung a poster heralding the arrival in Washington of the Moscow Circus.
At the bottom in bold print was a line smacking unequivocally of free enterprise: "Brought to you by Snuggle." 

Snuggle is a fabric softener manufactured by Lever Bros.
Co. 

Vladimir Lenin, meet Steven Leber.
Mr. Leber, a 47-year-old, Brooklyn-born, rock 'n' roll impresario, has launched a new career promoting the Soviet Union to the U.S. and the U.S. back to the U.S.S.R. Billboarding the name of a laundry product inside the Soviet Embassy is just one of the tricks he uses in trying to blend Soviet "perestroika" with American public-relations "chutzpah." 

Two years ago, Mr. Leber snagged exclusive rights to promote the Moscow Circus in North America.
Two other Leber efforts are in their infancy.
One is a joint venture with a Soviet collective to manage the overseas affairs of Soviet professional athletes.
The other is a proposed world tour of Kremlin museum treasures, including the crown jewels of the Russian czars.
The jewel tour requires approval from the highest levels of Soviet bureaucracy. 

"I've asked for permission.
This is as good as King Tut," Mr. Leber says, referring to the highly publicized tour of Egyptian antiquities. 

Mr. Leber is one of a cadre of American entrepreneurs trying to cash in on the climate of economic liberalism sweeping the Soviet Union.
While industrialists such as Armand Hammer, consumer products giants such as PepsiCo Inc. and grain dealers have done business with the Soviets for years, President Mikhail Gorbachev's policy of perestroika, or economic restructuring, has opened opportunities not only for Soviet entrepreneurs but for small businesses in the capitalist world.
In Alaska, veteran bush pilot Jim Rowe runs charter flights across the Bering Strait, benefiting from a two-way surge in visitors between Alaska and the nearby Magadan region in the Soviet Union's far northeast.
In Kezar Falls, Maine, family farmers Peter Hagerty and Martha Tracy buy wool from the Soviet Union, blend it 50-50 with their own wool and sell the yarn to knitting stores under the label "Peace Fleece." The four-year-old business is turning a small profit and the entrepreneurs are about to sign a joint venture agreement with a Moscow cooperative to export the yarn to the Soviet Union. 

In negotiating with the Soviets, the U.S. entrepreneurs rely mainly on their Yankee know-how.
Mr. Leber is applying skills learned as a pop-music promoter.
While enrolled at Boston's Northeastern University, he booked rock 'n' roll acts for some 100 colleges.
He sold the business to the William Morris talent agency and ended up heading that firm's music division.
As head of his own firm in the 1970s, Mr. Leber produced two hit musicals, "Jesus Christ Superstar" and a nostalgic review of Beatles music called "Beatlemania," and managed several rock musicians. 

"In 1987, I went to Moscow to look at some Russian rock groups," he recalls. "I wasn't enthralled.
I said, 'What else have you got? '" 

What they had was a huge circus industry, thousands of acts scattered throughout the nation.
Mr. Leber saw a parallel with his experience with the Rolling Stones, Def Leppard and other rock groups. "I knew how to tour with a lot of trucks." 

Negotiating with Soyuzgoscirk, the state circus administration, he won the right to promote a composite group of these acts under the title Moscow Circus by guaranteeing the Soviets receipts of $250,000 a week for a 20-week tour of 17 U.S. and Canadian cities, plus a 50-50 net profit split. 

Offering to divide the profits, Mr. Leber says, "was the biggest mistake I ever made because all of a sudden I had hundreds of Soviets looking at my books. 'Why did you spend this?
Why do you have to advertise? '" 

But the circus tour that ended last January drew two million spectators.
Mr. Leber says he grossed $16 million, thanks in part to a sponsorship fee of "over seven figures" paid by Lever Bros., a unit of the Anglo-Dutch Unilever conglomerate. "I made a lot of money and created a lot of good will," he says. 

Suddenly, Soviet circus performers were hot.
Madison Square Garden's management signed up the stars of Mr. Leber's original troupe, an aerial ballet corps called the Flying Cranes.
Mr. Leber won the aerialists back with a higher bid.
To head off the threat of competing Soviet circuses touring the U.S., he organized a second Moscow Circus company.
The two companies open 40-week tours next month in Houston and Milwaukee.
American Express Co. has replaced Lever Bros. as corporate sponsor and is underwriting the appearance of both troupes with an "over seven-figure" fee, Mr. Leber says. 

He says it costs about $500,000 a week to keep a Soviet circus on the road.
Weekly receipts from tickets and merchandise on last year's tour averaged $900,000.
Mr. Leber says he's counting on the increasing interest by Americans in all things Soviet to boost average weekly receipts this time to the $1.2 million level. 

Mr. Leber has worked to keep smooth relations with the Soviets.
When the Soviet Embassy said it would like its horses to perform at the coming Washington Horse Show, Mr. Leber promised to fly horses and Cossack riders from British Columbia, where the circus will be performing. 

And there are memories dear to a promoter's heart, such as Soviet Ambassador Yuri Dubinin posing in front of the Soviet Embassy last October holding a toy bear furnished by Mr. Leber.
The cuddly bear was a conspicuous play on the Soviets' national symbol and their renowned trained circus bears and, not incidentally, the trademark of Snuggle fabric softener. 

"One of the greatest coups of my life," Mr. Leber says. 

