.START 

Alexander Solzhenitsyn's "Gulag Archipelago." George Orwell's "1984." Thanks to glasnost, most of the books that Soviet censors long banned are being widely published here now, causing rejoicing among the Soviet reading public.
But not everything has changed in Soviet publishing.
At least one international best seller still is almost impossible to get: the Bible. 

Despite a new official tolerance of religion that has sparked a nationwide church revival, the Book of Books is in terribly short supply.
When the Russian Orthodox Church published 100,000 copies last year to mark its millennium, they sold out immediately.
On the distinctly un-Christian black market, they go for $100 apiece and more, if they are on sale at all. 

So it isn't perhaps surprising that one of the biggest hits with the public at the Moscow Book Fair this month was an American stand run by the Evangelical Christian Publishers Association.
Muscovites lined up in the hundreds to get one of the 10,000 copies of the New Testament, translated into Russian from the original Greek, that the association was handing out free of charge. 

"The Bible, like no other book when it is not available to the people, creates a spiritual hunger," said a rather overwhelmed Doug Ross, executive director of the ECPA. Mr. Ross was full of praise for the Soviet police who helped control the crowds.
But even they couldn't prevent some people from using unorthodox methods, including theft, to satiate their spiritual hunger. 

"One man in the line suddenly grabbed a carton full of Bibles and ran away," said John Van Diest, a publisher from Meltnomah Press, who was manning the association's stall at the time. 

The rush for Bibles and some of the other Christian literature on the ECPA stand is a sure sign of the change in intellectual climate brought about by Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.
His talk about the priority of common human values over class struggle has paved the way for a revival of interest in theology and religious philosophy in general, and the history of the Russian Orthodox Church in particular. 

Even among people who aren't especially religious, it now is in vogue to lament the decline of the nation's morals and pour scorn on the Marxist-Leninist view of religion as the opium of the people. 

"What perfect scoundrels we have been] Born soon after the Great October Revolution, we have not only known absolutely nothing about the culture of human relations, but also despised any manifestation of this culture as bourgeois trash," one reader wrote recently to Literaturnaya Gazeta, the weekly newspaper of the Soviet intelligentsia. "We are completely ignorant of religion.
Religion has occupied an important place in human history for a long time and it is foolish to pretend that it hasn't." 

David Samoilov, a well-known Russian poet, says, "When we were deprived of {religion} and the truth stopped being solemn and moralizing, we merely stopped listening." 

Given such popular sentiment, the Soviet state, which used to mock religion if it talked about it at all, has been forced to change its tune somewhat.
At a secondary school in Moscow, teen-agers can now for the first time take classes in the history of religion.
And state publishers recently have issued several scholarly books on Christianity by both Soviet and Western authors that are less hostile and ideological in tone than in the past. 

But the Bible is a different matter.
The Orthodox Church's Moscow Patriarchy is planning to issue an additional 50,000 copies by the end of this year for dioceses, monasteries and religious schools, but that will barely scratch the surface of the demand.
The West is helping, making use of liberalized import rules to supply more than one million copies in the past year.
But the dire shortage continues. 

"Society loses much because of this," says Daniil Granin, an influential writer who heads the Soviet Charity Fund.
He believes every family should have a Bible at home, and is impatient for Soviet publishers to fill the gap. 

Such demands are falling on deaf ears in a nation where all the publishers are still controlled by a government that officially preaches atheism.
Progress Publishers, which organized the book fair, didn't seem to mind ECPA handing out its literary manna.
But Soviet publishers aren't about to follow suit. 

Indeed, their only plans for cashing in on the boom in religion consist of issuing a six- or seven-volume collection of "scientific translations" of some books from the Old and New Testaments.
These promise to be similar to ones in the past that quote passages from the Scriptures only to denigrate them in vicious commentaries next to the texts.
Such books quote Lenin as saying "God's name is invoked as an instrument of exploitation by priests, landlords and the bourgeoisie," or allege that the Vatican is filled with CIA spooks. 

Some 200,000 copies of the editions will be printed by Politizdat, twice the number of Bibles put out by the Moscow Patriarchy last year for the millennium. 

Continuing awkward relations between church and state are also causing other publishing oddities.
The Soviet Znaniye (knowledge) publishers recently agreed in principle with Scripture Press Publications, an ECPA member, to issue a Russian version of the book "How to Really Love Your Child" by Ross Campbell.
But the agreement gave Znaniye the right to omit the final chapter, which deals with religious upbringing of children in the family, according to the Russian translator, Renata Ravich. 

Judging by the lines at the book fair, Soviet publishers could make a fortune if they only had the nerve to push religious glasnost a little further.
Near the overcrowded ECPA stand was a completely empty one run by the American Atheist Press Inc. Mr. Ross of ECPA, noting the vast difference in interest, gleefully remarked on the difficulties his atheist colleagues were having in grabbing the public's attention. "It's like selling ice to the Eskimos," he said. 

Ms. Polyakova is an assistant in the Journal's Moscow bureau. 

