.START 

By now, you would think everyone would know that the Iran-Contra trials are ho-hum politics except among die-hard Washington liberals.
But apparently that hasn't yet dawned on President Bush's Attorney General, Dick Thornburgh.
He even appears willing to put national security at some risk to avoid any charge that he is interfering with the legal processes grinding up former government employees charged with alleged Iran-Contra misdeeds.
Folks like a former CIA station chief in Costa Rica named Joseph Fernandez, for example. 

The latest absurdity grows out of a demand by Mr. Fernandez's lawyers that for a fair trial they be allowed to use secret government data in his defense.
The trial judge ruled that the material can be used, and Special Prosecutor Lawrence Walsh did not file an appeal. 

Mr. Thornburgh did want to appeal, and this raised a question over whether the Attorney General or Mr. Walsh has jurisdiction.
The Classified Information Procedures Act says that the power to appeal rulings on introducing secrets lies with "the United States." But who is the "United States" in the cockeyed world of special prosecutors, Mr. Thornburgh or Mr. Walsh? 

The appeals judges ruled that the U.S. is Mr. Walsh.
They also point out, however, that if Mr. Thornburgh is worried about secrets being disclosed he should use the power he clearly has to stop the trial.
The opinion by Judge Harvie Wilkinson III told Mr. Thornburgh that it's his duty alone to protect national security from harmful leaks in court.
If he is concerned, the law says he should file a national-security affidavit to bar disclosure of secrets.
Judge Wilkinson wrote that if Mr. Thornburgh files such an affidavit, "National security cannot be compromised." 

Mr. Thornburgh knows that the trial may well end if he heeds the unanimous warnings of the intelligence and defense communities and files the affidavit barring disclosure of bases, agents and other information.
If Mr. Fernandez can't use evidence he needs for a defense, the trial judge could dismiss the charges.
Saving secrets and freeing Mr. Fernandez from the grip of Mr. Walsh would stone two birds with a single affidavit. 

Mr. Thornburgh might find the courage to stop the Fernandez trial if he recalls Morrison v.
Olson, where the Supreme Court emphasized that even independent counsel are legally obliged to follow Justice Department prosecution policies.
Surely this includes concern for national security.
It was Mr. Walsh's hyperzeal that led him to indict Mr. Fernandez in the first place.
Mr. Fernandez is not charged with murder or even violating the Boland amendments, but with obstruction and making false statements not under oath to fellow executive-branch investigators looking into aid to the Contras.
This never would have been a criminal case without a $40 million-and-counting independent counsel, especially because Mr. Walsh should have known that any trial would risk secrets. 

The only reason to keep these Iran-Contra prosecutions going is to keep up a drumbeat against a former President's policy of keeping the Contras alive.
There are plenty of reasons to drop these cases and retire Mr. Walsh.
Quite aside from the chilling spectacle of political trials, it might be handy some day again to have CIA agents who will think it's safe to accept orders from superiors without first having to check with their lawyers. 

