.START 

McDonald's Corp., which generally opposes discounting, plans to offer more bargains amid a barrage of 99-cent specials from fast-food competitors. 

The strategy -- as yet unannounced but outlined by McDonald's management to securities analysts recently -- would be aimed at local markets where the chain is facing its biggest threats. 

"We're turning up the flame" with a variety of plans, McDonald's marketing chief Paul Schrage told the analysts.
But he said the discounting would be disguised so customers didn't come in simply because Mcdonald's was offering cheap food.
Rather than marking down menu prices, the chain would offer coupons giving patrons a discount on certain items -- hopefully on their next visit. 

"They don't want to do it in a destructive manner," says analyst Howard Hansen of Kidder, Peabody & Co. 

McDonald's looks on discounting as it does dirty tables: It erodes brand loyalty, hurts the bottom line and adds little to the company's long-term prosperity.
But lately discounters led by competitor PepsiCo Inc. 's three chains -- Pizza Hut, Taco Bell and Kentucky Fried Chicken -- have chomped into McDonald's customer counts. 

Same-store sales, adjusted for price increases, continue to run behind a year ago, leaving McDonald's little choice but to fight fire with fire. 

This week Wendy's International Inc. joined the fray by announcing a "Super Value Menu" featuring a variety of 99-cent items ranging from salads to shakes.
As will be the case with McDonald's, local Wendy's operators can decide which bargains to offer. 

With its business losing steam, McDonald's has been doing a number of things differently.
It decided recently to go national with a 14-inch pizza, although officially the product is still in test.
Moreover, McDonald's is talking about revamping its stores and menu to attract dinner-hour patrons. 

Customers may like discounting, but most chains don't. "We have a very clear priority to stay the hell out of it," says marketing chief Gary Langstaff of Grand Metropolitan PLC's Burger King unit. (The company's current daily 99-cent sandwich promotion was in the works before Mr. Langstaff joined the Miami-based chain earlier this year.) 

One reason chains are reluctant to discount is that, once embraced, the practice often becomes habit-forming. "It's our crack," says a Midwestern advertising man who works for McDonald's. 

A company spokesman, after noting that discounting has long been a local marketing option, said he wouldn't comment on any special intentions "for obvious competitive reasons." But analysts say they believe increased discounting will begin soon. "The problems are now, not next year," said Diane Mustain of Duff & Phelps, Chicago. 

To boost drooping sales this past summer -- traditionally the busiest season -- McDonald's launched a campaign called "Blast Back Mac" featuring discount stickers for future purchases.
Analysts think the promotion lifted August sales against weak figures a year earlier but probably didn't do much for earnings, since higher traffic is offset by lower margins. 

Much of the recent session between analysts and management focused on the industry slowdown, and particularly McDonald's performance. "They blamed the industry for the fact that sales were weak," says Leslie Steppel of Prudential-Bache Securities.
But, she said, management admitted that "perhaps it had raised prices more than they needed to." 

