.START 

It was a crime so rare and loathsome that it went for centuries without a name.
Now, inside the citadels of Anglo-Saxon jurisprudence, it is making a mockery of modern justice. 

We're talking about wignapping. 

Barristers must wear wigs along with black gowns to argue cases in Britain.
If they don't, they risk being found in contempt of court.
But the wigs are being snitched with alarming frequency from well-guarded court sanctums in and outside London.
The courts are warning barristers to hold tight to their good gray locks.
Clerks are keeping spares handy to rent or lend to hapless victims. 

"This wignapping is rife, I am afraid," says Chris Van Hagen, a barrister who has spied desperate requests for the return of missing wigs posted in nearly every criminal court in London. 

Donald Leach, a retired court clerk, suspects workmen and tourists.
But most of the culprits may be barristers.
Those in the wig world say almost nobody but a barrister would want to swipe the itchy hairpieces, long discarded by almost every other country. 

The bar is no longer the exclusive province of gentlemen, it seems. "Nowadays, we have a lot of people at the bar whom one is not too sure of their behavior," observes Thomas Field-Fisher, 74 years old.
His wig and robe were stolen two years ago from his chambers in Exeter, where he was serving temporarily as a judge. 

Barristers treasure their old wigs, as smelly and filthy as they are, because they connote wisdom and experience.
A barrister may don the same ratty hairpiece for 30 years, passing it on to a younger colleague upon retirement. 

So honest barristers must turn new white wigs to a shabby gray by hanging them in the rain or using them as dust mops. "You look like a fool in a sparkling new wig," says Philip Hackett, a London barrister. "You don't want to look like you're just out of school." 

British barristers and judges have worn wigs since Charles II imported the idea from France in the 1670s.
A London company, Ede & Ravenscroft Ltd., today claims 98% of the market for legal wigs in the United Kingdom.
The wigs distinguish barristers from solicitors, lawyers who ordinarily don't appear in court. 

Ede & Ravenscroft, 300 years old, pursues its monopoly from a narrow London shop whose carved mahogany paneling, brass rails and chest-high counters hark back to the Victorian era.
The firm gets hundreds of orders a year from people who have reported their wigs lost or stolen, says Michael Green, a salesman at the shop. "It has to be that they're taken by others in the profession," he says. 

A pink-cheeked customer overhears his remarks. "I'm putting my name on the box so it won't get taken," says the young barrister, as a wigmaker hands him a shiny black box emblazoned "N.F.
Harrison" in gold letters.
Mr. Green warns him that the labels don't deter wig thieves.
The lawyer, looking worried, clutches his $356 wig and flees the shop.
Used wigs cost less, between $50 and $240 each, but rarely appear on the market. 

In a stuffy loft two floors above, six women fabricate about 1,000 wigs a year on pockmarked wooden blocks resembling shrunken skulls.
The wigmakers attach rows of tightly rolled curls and a pair of ponytails with painful hand stitching, using 12-yard lengths of bleached curls made from horses' tails and manes. 

They strictly follow a pattern conceived by Humphrey Ravenscroft in 1822 when he invented the "modern" horsehair wig with fixed curls.
It replaced ones made of goat hair, which had to be powdered and dressed with scented ointment every day to conceal the filth. 

Occasionally a barrister may grab another's wig by mistake.
Barrister Michael Wolkind once took somebody else's from a row of identical wooden cubbyholes outside the robing room at the Old Bailey, London's most famous criminal court.
He realized his error in court when the wig began to feel too tight.
He returned it to exchange it for his own wig, but if it had disappeared, he says, "I probably would have gone on wearing" the wrong one. 

Missing wigs are rarely recovered, especially at the Old Bailey. "The Old Bailey is, after all, where {the worst} criminals are tried for theft," notes John Nutting, a barrister and occasional public prosecutor. 

It is also the place, consequently, where the defenders of the worst thieves gather.
Mr. Nutting says his antique wig and gown vanished from a window ledge in the Old Bailey cafeteria in 1987.
He couldn't find a spare hairpiece before his trial resumed and apologized to the judge. 

The judge literally flipped his wig, expressing delight at having an excuse to remove it. "He flung it down on the desk," Mr. Nutting says, "and we continued the case for the rest of the day without our wigs on." 

Testy court administrators either deny wignapping occurs or blame the disappearances on carelessness.
Scotland Yard hasn't been called to investigate. "We have enough other things to do," says one court official. 

At the Royal Courts, a Gothic labyrinth with three-and-a-half miles of corridors, Mr. Leach faults barristers for failing to lock their lockers. "They leave their keys in {the doors}," says the former clerk, who runs the changing rooms.
Opening a tall metal locker, he gestures at the top shelf and says, "Look, there's a wig up there." 

Wigs have disappeared from the Royal Courts' locked courtrooms and locked judicial chambers.
So have antique wall clocks, heavy oak tables, Victorian fireplace grates and eight-foot-high oil portraits. 

Because of terrorism, security is tight at most British courts.
Visitors pass by metal detectors and submit to bag searches.
But nobody challenges individuals walking out.
Last year, barrister Stephen Rich placed a red velvet bag containing his wig and gown on the guard's entry desk at London's Snaresbrook Crown Court.
After seeing a client in his cell, Mr. Rich returned to fetch his bag.
It was there, but the wig was gone. 

The security guards ignore people departing, Mr. Rich says, because "they are so busy watching people who come in." 

Mr. Field-Fisher keeps "a sharp eye" out for his missing wig whenever he joins fellow barristers in court.
After 40 years of wear, he declares, "I would know my wig if I saw it." 

