.START 

Boeing Co. was struck by 55,000 members of the Machinists union, and analysts said a work stoppage of a month or longer could further pinch strained production at the Seattle-based aerospace giant. 

Still, some believe a work stoppage of two to six weeks -- the most likely development, according to Wall Street observers as well as some union members -- might not damage Boeing much at all. 

The strike, which began at 12:01 a.m. yesterday, is the first in 12 years at Boeing, the world's leading airplane maker and the nation's biggest industrial exporter.
The Machinists decided to walk out after rejecting a contract offer that, they said, was too skimpy on wages, benefits and reduction in forced overtime, given Boeing's soaring profitability. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Boeing shares were off just 25 cents, to finish at $59.50.
The share price gained $3.125 Tuesday in a rising market, reflecting news of the contract terms Boeing had offered the union. 

"The airlines understand Boeing's position," said Bill Whitlow of Dain Bosworth Inc., a Seattle brokerage. "They recognize if higher salaries are awarded now, those will get translated into higher airplane costs down the road." 

Yet at least one of Boeing's biggest customers, International Lease Finance Corp., indicated that a walkout of two weeks or more could spell big trouble. "We expect if this drags on for two weeks, it will have a long-term detrimental impact on deliveries," said Steven Udvar-Hazy, president of the Beverly Hills, Calif., aircraft leasing concern. 

He noted that Boeing's last strike, which lasted 45 days in 1977, resulted in delays well beyond that time period.
Other big Boeing customers, most notably Japan Air Lines and UAL Corp., parent of United Airlines, wouldn't comment on the current strike. 

The strike could also affect Boeing's military and space production work, including its subcontracting on the B-2 Stealth bomber being built by Northrop Corp.
More than 300 Boeing workers -- about two-thirds of them employed on the Stealth project -- reportedly walked off the job yesterday at two sites in the Mojave Desert northeast of Los Angeles. 

Although many analysts and some union rank and file members were predicting a quick resolution, David Smith, of the St. Petersburg, Fla., investment firm of Raymond James & Associates, said he could foresee a protracted struggle.
The company, he said, would be better off enduring a lengthy walkout now than three years down the road, when several aircraft programs that are just gearing up will be in full swing.
And despite any griping from airline customers, Boeing isn't obligated to compensate them for late deliveries caused by strikes. 

In addition, Mr. Smith pointed out, Machinists union leaders -- who still have difficult negotiations ahead with Lockheed Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. -- are boasting of a large war chest and portraying the fight with Boeing as possibly one of the last big wins for American labor.
It isn't often these days, after all, that a union has an opportunity to bend a strong company into granting some of its demands. 

For the first six months of 1989, Boeing's net income rose 20% from a year ago to $356 million, or $1.55 a share, on revenue of $9.07 billion.
That's on the strength of its commercial business, with orders this year for 736 airplanes valued at more than $38.5 billion, even as its profit from defense contracting continues to dwindle. 

"It's a very important fight," said Matt Bates, a spokesman for the union's international office in Washington, D.C. "Our commitment to this is absolute.
The ball's now in Boeing's court." 

Said Carol Ryan, an electric equipment operator at Boeing's Auburn, Wash., plant, which fabricates airplane components: "There's pressure from the international.
They're saying if we don't stick with it now, we're going to get what we deserve." 

Nonetheless, many contend that the current walkout -- if it's short enough -- actually could bring relief to Boeing.
It would allow overburdened parts suppliers to catch up in their shipments to Boeing's commercial aircraft plants, which have been running flat-out to fulfill a record backlog of 1,603 planes valued at about $80 billion. 

Meanwhile, Boeing supervisory personnel and non-striking workers should be able to put the finishing touches on dozens of planes that are sitting on flight ramps outside its factories, nearly ready for delivery. "Obviously, they're not going to attach a wing," Mr. Smith said, "but they could sure put in a toilet seat." 

Already, there are considerable pressures on both sides.
Boeing, with about 65% of the global commercial airplane market, is counting on delivering about 30 jets a month to meet its stated goal of putting 328 airliners into service this year.
In August and September, the company finally was able to iron out its myriad production problems and maintain that kind of pace. 

A vital new Boeing program, the jumbo 747-400, was so far behind schedule this past winter that some customers were clamoring for financial reimbursement and Boeing temporarily hired hundreds of Lockheed workers to get things back on track.
Only in the past month or so has Boeing been able to meet a revised schedule for delivering 57 747-400s this year.
To date, the company has delivered 32 of the 57. 

But the union, too, has reasons to reach a quick resolution. "A long strike will break a lot of people," said Richard Slightam, a 23-year-old mechanic at Boeing's Renton, Wash., plant, where 737s and 757s are manufactured. "A lot of people are new hires and haven't had time to set out a firm savings.
If things went too long, the talk is they would find another job or cross the picket lines." 

Moreover, with Christmas approaching, it will be tough for the workers -- especially the more than 40% who haven't been through the throes of bargaining before -- to gut it out. 

There also seems to be internal grumbling in the union, which could weaken its stance.
Several Boeing workers said yesterday that their leaders' push for a wage increase doesn't reflect some employees' priorities.
They said they're more intent on getting bonuses bigger than those received in 

The contract approved in 1986 called for a bonus of 12% in the first year and 5% bonuses in each of the next two years, without an increase in base wage rates.
The offer rejected Monday by 85% of the Machinists included a 4% wage increase with an additional 8% lump-sum bonus the first year, a 3% wage increase and 3% bonus the second year, and a 3% wage increase without any bonus the third.
The offer also provided improved cost-of-living increases and better medical coverage and other benefits. 

Boeing said the lowest grade of Machinist workers, currently making $24,805 a year before accounting for overtime and bonuses, would earn a base rate of $31,563 after three years under its latest offer.
The base rate includes cost-of-living and other adjustments.
Boeing's most experienced machinists would make $46,630 on that basis, up from $38,461 currently.
Boeing has a total of 164,000 employees companywide, most of them in Washington state. 

Some workers said that, as important as higher wages and benefits are, they're fighting as much for a reduction in the overtime Boeing requires of them.
Boeing has proposed reducing an employee's mandatory overtime to 160 hours per quarter from the current 200 hours, while making all overtime in excess of that payable at a double rate.
But some workers complained the reduction is insufficient. "It's good money, but you don't have any time to yourself or your family," said Paul Huwa, a 26-year-old tool maker at Renton.
Workers at the Everett, Wash., plant that assembles 747s and 767s have been particularly burdened, often laboring seven days a week for three weeks at a stretch without a break. 

It wasn't immediately clear when negotiations might resume.
Boeing spokesman Paul Binder said the company hasn't made an attempt to start up negotiations again.
Federal mediator Doug Hammond, who joined the negotiations last weekend, remains in Seattle. 

Meanwhile, the company is doing its best to smooth customers' ruffled feathers.
International Lease's Mr. Hazy said Boeing would be "sending down a delegation" today to discuss the strike's impact on the backlog of more than 150 jetliners Internatonal Lease expects to receive over the next several years. 

