.START 

In a cost-cutting move, R.H. Macy & Co. is merging its I. Magnin and Bullocks Wilshire chains in Southern California under the I. Magnin name and closing one of its two I. Magnin stores here. 

According to Macy, Bullocks Wilshire will assume the I. Magnin name effective Feb. 1.
The seven Bullocks Wilshire stores are located in La Jolla, Los Angeles, Newport Beach, Palm Desert, Palm Springs, Palos Verdes and Woodland Hills. 

The combined chains are expected to have sales of more than $400 million this year. 

Macy also said it will close its I. Magnin store on Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles and convert it into a regional office building for employees of Bullock's Department Stores, a sister division.
The current Bullock's office building will be sold. 

Macy acquired I. Magnin, Bullock's and Bullocks Wilshire in May 1988 from Federated Department Stores Inc.
The Bullock's Department Stores name won't be changed. 

In addition, Macy said the famed Bullocks Wilshire art deco flagship store on Wilshire Boulevard will undergo a major renovation next year, although the company declined to estimate how much it would invest in that project. 

The decision to merge Bullocks Wilshire and I. Magnin isn't surprising since the two businesses have been operated as one company since they were acquired.
Rose Marie Bravo is chairman and chief executive of both, and both were served by the same buying staff.
Since the I. Magnin unit that is being closed is only a few blocks from the Bullocks Wilshire flagship, management decided it didn't need two separate units to serve the same customer base. 

"We're going with the I. Magnin name because people in New York and overseas find the Bullocks Wilshire name confusing," said Ms. Bravo in an interview. "Not only does it make sense from a merchandising point of view, but it will enable us to use one name in our advertising efforts." 

After the two chains are merged there will 29 I. Magnin stores nationwide, including three in Chicago and single units in Washington, D.C., Phoenix, Ariz., and Seattle. 

