.START 

The House voted overwhelmingly to repeal the Medicare Catastrophic Care Act, which angry senior citizens complained cost them too much and gave them too little. 

After the 358-67 vote to repeal the law, enacted just 14 months ago, the House soundly rejected a proposal to maintain a less expensive, stripped-down version. 

The lopsided rejection in the House makes it likely that the Senate also will repeal the catastrophic-care benefits and the unpopular income surtax that financed them.
The Senate may take up the measure today. 

The program provided expanded hospital and medical benefits as well as new drug coverage for 33 million elderly and disabled citizens.
The plan is unique because it is financed solely by its beneficiaries; on top of a flat monthly fee paid by all beneficiaries, about 40% of the wealthiest beneficiaries paid an income surtax. 

It was this surtax that triggered hostility from the elderly.
Many contended that they were being forced to subsidize lower-income beneficiaries and that they were paying for benefits they already received under current retirement plans. 

The repeal measure that passed the House would end the surtax immediately and refund all surtax revenue collected this year from seniors who paid estimated income taxes.
Many of the nearly 14 million seniors liable for the tax, which ranges from $22.50 to $800 this year, wouldn't have paid the levy until they filed their 1989 tax returns next year.
About 1.8 million, or 5% of the beneficiaries, would have been liable for the maximum tax of $800. 

The repeal proposal, sponsored by Reps.
Brian Donnelly (D., Mass.) and Bill Archer (R., Texas), also would end the monthly premium, which is $4 this year.
The government would keep the revenue already collected from the monthly premium in order to pay for the unlimited hospital benefits the law provides, after the payment of a deductible of $560 this year.
The expanded coverage would end Jan. 1, 1990. 

Opposition to the surtax obscured most other elements of the law and rocked members of Congress.
Other social benefits are supported by broad financing; Social Security is supported by payroll taxes paid by workers and their employers, Medicare for the elderly is financed by payroll taxes and general tax revenues, Medicaid for the poor is financed out of general tax revenues.
Many seniors resented bearing the full cost of their expanded benefits. 

"This is the Iwo Jima generation; they came through the Depression, fought in the war, sent people to the moon.
They think they have paid enough," explained Rep. Pat Williams (D., Mont.). 

The fierce reaction to the catastrophic-illness plan has scrambled the politics of providing benefits, particularly for the aged.
Many seniors say they wanted a plan to help them bear the cost of long-term care in nursing homes, not the expensive acute-care benefits they got in the Catastrophic Care Act.
But many in Congress may be reluctant to consider any new benefits until the dust has settled from this repeal. 

Referring to demands by the elderly for long-term care coverage, Rep. Fortney Stark (D., Calif.), who sponsored the rejected proposal to preserve the drug benefits, said "there's no way this can be done unless people are willing to step up to the bar and pay for it." By some estimates, long-term care could cost as much as $50 billion to $60 billion a year, five times the annual cost of the catastrophic-illness plan's benefits. 

Rep. Donnelly said the lesson from the opposition to the Catastrophic Care Act is "listen to the people you represent, not to the representatives in the corridors." Although the leaders of the powerful American Association of Retired Persons backed the plan, their support was drowned out by grass-roots opposition. 

