.START 

Hyundai Motor Co. 's struggling U.S. sales and marketing arm yesterday swept out the last of three high-ranking American executives who helped launch the South Korean auto maker in the U.S. market. 

Hyundai Motor America said yesterday its executive vice president and chief operating officer, W. Greg Warner, will step down Friday from the post he assumed just three months ago.
The company said his departure was caused by "differences regarding business direction." 

A Hyundai spokeswoman declined to elaborate further on the reasons for Mr. Warner's resignation, which follows the July resignation of his predecessor, Max Jamiesson, and the resignation of Art Meissner, the group vice president for sales, distribution and imports who left last month. 

The clean sweep of Hyundai's top three American officials comes in the wake of disappointing sales of Hyundai's mid-size Sonata sedan and just as the company tries to launch a redone version of its bread-and-butter model, the Excel, for the 1990 model year. 

All three executives came to Hyundai from Toyota Motor Corp. 's U.S. operations in 1985 with plans to mold the inexpensive Korean car franchise in the Japanese auto maker's quality image.
Initially, the plan worked.
Hyundai sold nearly 700,000 cars in less than three years. 

But this year, Hyundai was stung by quality complaints and the overall weakness in the U.S. auto market.
Hyundai's sales through August are off 31% to 132,440 cars from 191,772 a year earlier. 

Hyundai said Mr. Warner's duties as chief operating officer will be assumed temporarily by Bruce Campbell, its group vice president for parts and service.
Hyundai said it retained Lamalie & Associates Inc. of Dallas to search for a permanent replacement. 

The company said Mr. Warner plans to "pursue other business opportunities in the auto industry." He wasn't available for comment yesterday.
When Mr. Jamiesson and Mr. Meissner left Hyundai they both said they planned to become car dealers. 

Separately, Hyundai said this week it is scaling back its U.S. operations by eliminating 50 positions and leaving another 11 posts unfilled, continuing a hiring freeze instituted in June. 

Hyundai said the size of its U.S. headquarters staff was based on projected sales of 300,000 cars a year.
Now, though, the company said projections of annual sales have been reduced to 200,000 cars.
The latest cuts represent at least 8% of Hyundai's 600 employees in its administration and support staff.
A company spokeswoman said that about 40 workers voluntarily accepted a severance package and the rest were discharged.
The company wouldn't disclose terms of the package. 

