.START 

Congress is creeping toward antitrust-law changes that would encourage joint-production ventures among computer, high-technology and other businesses. 

The five bills under consideration would provide court protection for consortia such as U.S. Memories Inc., the affiliation of companies set up in June to compete with Japanese semiconductor makers.
In hearings last week, most members of a House Judiciary subcommittee indicated a desire to assist U.S. high-tech concerns in their competition with Japan.
But legislators have yet to choose among different approaches to the issue. 

Three of the House bills and a Senate counterpart would extend to manufacturing certain antitrust protections given to joint-research ventures in 1984.
These proposals would require that a production consortium targeted in an antitrust suit be judged by a flexible standard of whether it is "reasonable." The bills would limit monetary awards to a plaintiff's "actual damages." A separate House proposal would involve continual government oversight of consortia in exchange for broader protection against monetary-damage awards. 

One factor slowing the legislative process: The Justice Department hasn't offered guidance on which approach it favors.
James Rill, the department's antitrust chief, supports the general concept and, in an interview, promised a specific proposal "reasonably soon." 

Rep. Mike Synar (D., Okla.), a lonely dissenter, said during the hearing last week: "I'm more convinced than ever that exemptions {for joint-production ventures} aren't warranted." He added that it is "difficult to believe" that consortia such as U.S. Memories would disband without relaxation of the antitrust laws. 

MERGER WILL produce largest Canadian law firm.
In November, the Toronto firms of Fasken & Calvin and Campbell Godfrey & Lewtas will combine.
Fasken & Calvin is already part of a national partnership called Fasken Martineau Walker, which includes lawyers in Montreal, Quebec, London and Brussels. 

Once the Toronto merger is complete, the combined entity will have 352 lawyers.
The next largest firm based in Canada has about 330 lawyers.
Bradford Hildebrandt, a U.S. law firm management consultant, helped orchestrate the deal. 

Fasken Martineau, the national entity, has an unusual structure because its partners are also partners in the two regional firms, the Toronto operation and another based in Montreal and Quebec City.
The national firm shares some expenses and revenue.
Its clients include Toronto Dominion Bank, RBC Dominion Securities and Air Canada. 

National law firms are recent arrivals on Canada's legal scene. 

"Our clients are expanding nationally and internationally and our growth has to parallel their growth if we are to stay with them," says Walter J. Palmer, a Campbell Godfrey partner. 

The law firm is also considering inviting west coast Canadian firms into the partnership. 

TEXAS CASE tests government's power to go after lawyers' fees in drug cases. 

Federal prosecutors are trying to compel Mike DeGeurin, a Houston criminal-defense lawyer, to testify before a federal grand jury investigating his client in a drug case.
Prosecutors suspect Mr. DeGeurin's bill is being paid with drug money.
The lawyer has been subpoenaed to appear and produce all records related to fees received or due from his client, Jose Evarsito Reyes-Requena, who was charged with possession of cocaine. 

Two U.S. Supreme Court rulings in June gave U.S. prosecutors wide authority to seize assets of accused criminals, including funds needed to pay lawyers' fees.
The decisions confirmed prosecutors' power to seize assets as a weapon in the war on drugs. 

But Mr. DeGeurin says the government is going too far in this case.
He asked U.S. District Judge David Hittner to quash the subpoena, arguing that his testimony would force him to disclose information protected by attorney-client privilege.
Several legal organizations filed briefs supporting his position, including the Association of Trial Lawyers of America and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers. 

"It's one thing to say they can steal a lawyer's fees," asserts Gerald Goldstein, a San Antonio attorney representing the criminal-defense group. "It's a whole different thing to say they can also compel a lawyer to become a witness against his client." 

LAW PROFESSOR and TV star becomes consultant to Chicago law firm. 

Arthur R. Miller, who helped popularize the law during the eight-year television run of "Miller's Court," has joined the Chicago law firm of Mayer, Brown & Platt as a special consultant. 

Mr. Miller, a Harvard Law School professor, will remain a full-time faculty member.
Mayer Brown will pay Mr. Miller an annual retainer, which wasn't disclosed, for his services. 

As a consultant, Mr. Miller expects to spend about one day a week writing briefs and arguing cases on behalf of Mayer Brown clients.
He will work closely with the 520-lawyer firm's appellate-litigation group, which argued six times before the U.S. Supreme Court last term.
Two other full-time law professors are consultants to the group, according to Stephen M. Shapiro, its head. 

Mr. Miller says he may have to curtail his speaking engagements. 

"I've taught for 30 years and done television for 10.
But there's nothing I'd rather do these days than go into court and argue cases," he says. 

STATE JUDGE rules in favor of William Hurt in common-law-marriage dispute. 

In a decision that came as no surprise to family lawyers, New York State Supreme Court Justice Jacqueline Silbermann ruled that no common-law marriage exists between the actor and his former live-in companion, Sandra Jennings. 

The couple lived together for ten weeks in Beaufort, S.C., while Mr. Hurt was filming "The Big Chill." Ms. Jennings contended that during four of those weeks a common-law marriage existed.
She sued for an equitable share of Mr. Hurt's assets from his movie career. 

"Common-law marriage is a very outdated concept," says Maryanne LaGuardia, a Los Angeles family lawyer. "Once people started living together openly, then it seemed there was no reason to have it." 

Common-law marriages, which are recognized by 13 states, are difficult to prove because the couple must have held themselves out as married, says Robert Cohen of Morrison, Cohen, Singer & Weinstein. 

Judge Silbermann ruled there wasn't enough evidence to prove the couple ever intended to marry.
Without such an intention, living together wasn't enough to constitute a common-law marriage, she wrote. 

A. Richard Golub, Ms. Jenning's lawyer, said she would appeal. "The ruling reflects the judge's bias and emotional disposition toward Bill Hurt," he says. 

D.C. DEFECTOR: The former managing partner of Myerson & Kuhn's Washington office is joining the Washington office of Windels, Marx, Davies & Ives.
Both law firms are based in New York.
Michael J. Horowitz, 51, is the former general counsel of the Office of Management and Budget. 

