.START 

U S West Inc. said it agreed to buy closely held Financial Security Assurance Inc. for $345 million, a move that will bolster its capital assets unit and give it an entree to the so-called credit-enhancement market. 

The Denver-based telecommunications concern has been aggressively diversifying into the financial services arena.
James Ozanne, president and chief executive officer of U S West's recently formed Capital Assets Group, said the group's main objective right now is expansion. 

"A major piece of that strategy is to get into a series of niche markets," Mr. Ozanne said, adding that Financial Security "is just one of those niches." 

U S West's capital assets group comprises four niches: real estate, corporate finance, equipment finance and commercial real estate.
Last year, the unit reported operating profit of $20.7 million, before parent support, on revenue of $52.3 million. 

New York-based Financial Security Assurance insures certain corporate debt, giving a triple-A guarantee to securities backed by mortgages and other receivables.
The company gives U S West a foothold in this so-called credit-enhancement market.
Since 1985 about $38 billion of public asset-backed securities have been issued, although not all of that is credit enhanced with a financial guarantee.
Of those that were, Financial Security held about 60% of the market for the segment. 

Wall Street reacted positively to the news.
U S West shares rose $1.875 to close at $73.50 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. 

Industry analysts generally viewed the acquisition as a safe and solid investment for U S West, one of the regional Bell companies. "Good news is that the acquisition will have no material impact on earnings in 1989," said Paul Aran, a telecommunications analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co. "U S West is diversifying into areas of low risk with strong earnings potential." Jerry Brown, a U S West financial communications manager, said the acquisition will have a "slightly positive effect" on earnings in 1989, but not large enough to be significant. 

Financial Services will continue to operate with its current management and staff.
William I. Jacobs, Financial Services president and chief operating officer, said the agreement with U S West will give the operation the ability to expand into international markets. "U S West has the kind of resources we need to grow," said Mr. Jacobs. 

Some analysts believed the acquisition is a way for U S West to counter the effects of its depressed 14-state telephone territory and the harsh regulation that goes with it.
The acquisition "illustrates the frustration the industry has with regulation and prohibitions created by {Federal Judge Harold} Greene," who oversees the accord that broke up the Bell System, contends Robert Morris III, a telecommunications analysts. "If limitations weren't so strict, we'd see a lot more investments in the telephone network and if Judge Greene weren't so restrictive, we'd see more investments in telephone related companies." 

Joel Gross, a telecommunications analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp., maintains that U S West is "under more pressure to diversify because of its territory than other regional {Bell companies} that have a more robust region." 

U S West recruited the 46-year-old Mr. Ozanne from General Electric Co. 's financial-services subsidiary last month to accelerate the company's expansion of the capital assets group.
In the same expansion vein, last May U S West got into the reinsurance business by acquiring stakes in Enhance Financial Services Inc. and Asset Guaranty Inc. 

