.START 

The Food and Drug Administration approved an anti-psychotic drug made by a Sandoz Ltd. unit to treat severe schizophrenia in patients who don't respond to currently available drugs. 

Some 200,000 people in the U.S. are candidates for the drug, called clozapine, the FDA said.
Sandoz Pharmaceutical Corp., a subsidiary of the Swiss pharmaceutical giant, will make the drug in the U.S. and begin marketing it under the brand name Clozaril on Feb. 1. 

FDA officials said that clozapine isn't a cure, but may help many previously unresponsive patients to live more satisfying and productive lives. 

Clozapine is the first anti-psychotic drug to win FDA approval in 20 years, according to Sandoz Pharmaceutical.
Because the drug can produce a blood disorder called agranulocytosis, the approved labeling says it should be prescribed only for patients who fail to respond to two other less-toxic therapies. 

In addition, the company agreed to a unique testing program to monitor patients once a week for agranulocytosis, a potentially fatal reduction in white blood cells that are needed to ward off infections.
About 1% of the patients on clozapine develop the blood disorder. 

"The severity and hopelessness of unremitting chronic schizophrenia was an important factor in the decision to approve clozapine," FDA Commissioner Frank Young said.
Without effective treatment, schizophrenia can be incapacitating.
Many patients live in constant fear and distress, haunted by hallucinations and delusions. 

Under the testing program, a home health-care unit of Baxter Health Care Corp. will deliver the prescribed clozapine tablets to patients each week and collect blood samples for analysis at a national laboratory.
If the white blood-cell count of any patients drops, they will be taken off the drug. 

"There isn't really any {program} quite like this," said David Winter of the Sandoz unit, East Hanover, N.J. "We think it's necessary for patient safety." The drug also is associated with a high risk of seizures.
But Dr. Winter said that seizures can be stopped by reducing the dosage. 

Currently, Sandoz makes and markets clozapine under the brand name Leponex in Europe, Dr. Winter said, but because of the potential side effects, its distribution is under strict control. 

The development of clozapine as an anti-psychotic drug was largely abandoned in the mid-1970s after it was found to cause agranulocytosis, according to FDA officials.
But occasional reports of remarkable results in previously unresponsive patients prompted Sandoz to seek FDA approval for clozapine in 1984. 

Although the agency turned down the company's initial application, it encouraged further study of clozapine, the officials said.
A subsequent clinical trial was deemed "successful" by the FDA.
In that trial, 15 cases of agranulocytosis were caught by testing and reversed. 

