.START 

From a hilltop only 600 yards away, U.S. military officers in Panama watched through binoculars Tuesday as rebel Panamanian troops surrounded Gen. Manuel Noriega's command center, with the dictator inside, for four hours. 

Then they watched while troops from Gen. Noriega's Battalion 2000 counterattacked and rescued the strongman. "We would only have needed three armored personnel carriers to block only three roads that gave them access to the headquarters," said one U.S. military officer. 

"It would have been a surprisingly simple operation -- but the order never came for us to move," he added. 

Thus, the U.S. lost an opportunity to capture the man labeled this hemisphere's public enemy No. 1 by Presidents Reagan and Bush.
The details of how close the U.S. came to having Gen. Noriega in its grasp weren't publicly known yesterday.
But Democrats and Republicans in Washington complained that the Bush administration -- like the Reagan administration before it -- isn't willing to match tough rhetoric with action. 

"I think we really missed a golden opportunity to be of great assistance," said Rep. William Broomfield of Michigan, the ranking Republican on the House Foreign Affairs Committee. 

"I believe we should have done something militarily," added Rep. Lawrence Smith, a Florida Democrat on the same panel. "A declaration of support without action sounds pretty hollow." 

The White House said President Bush decided against intervening in the shortlived Panamanian coup attempt because he didn't want to interfere in the internal affairs of a Latin American nation. "We have traditionally stopped short of this kind of military involvement," said White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater. "And it was a decision to do that again in this case." 

The U.S.'s inability, or unwillingness, to remove Gen. Noriega, who continues to defy Washington despite its two-year campaign of threats, negotiations and economic sanctions, could have dire consequences for the Bush administration elsewhere in Latin America. 

Critics of the administration were asking what message the U.S.'s unwillingness to apprehend Gen. Noriega is sending to the drug lords in Colombia.
They also questioned how Nicaragua's leftist government, which has scheduled an open election for February, will view the unwillingness of the U.S. to inflict penalties on Gen. Noriega for stealing an election last May. 

Some Washington officials praised Mr. Bush's cautious approach. "I think the president is on the right track, generally, in Panam a," said Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.), chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on Western Hemisphere affairs. 

Sen. Dodd noted that the administration has worked patiently with the Organization of American States to isolate Panama diplomatically and that all but four Latin American countries -- Cuba, Nicaragua, Ecuador and Mexico -- have recalled their ambassadors from Panama. "We shouldn't try to overreact, jump in and solve this problem by ourselves," he added. 

At the White House, Mr. Fitzwater said the administration's decision against intervening also reflected confusion emanating from Panama following the first, sketchy reports of gunfire at the military headquarters of the Panamanian Defense Forces in Panama City.
Insurgent troops at first took control without much resistance, and U.S. officials initially weren't certain how widespread the rebellion was. 

Even after Gen. Noriega's headquarters -- known as the "comandancia," or command center -- was surrounded with the dictator inside, the insurgents never requested U.S. assistance, according to U.S. military officials in Panama. "I can't believe we wouldn't have given it if they had asked," one official said. 

Another said the U.S. military's only orders were to block entrances to U.S. facilities and to such compounds as Fort Amador, which are used jointly by U.S. and Panamanian forces.
Those orders, which kept the U.S. in compliance with the Panama Canal treaty, remained constant even after the rebel officers announced on Panamanian radio at 11 a.m. Tuesday that they had seized control. 

While U.S. forces held their positions, Battalion 2000, recoilless rifles and .50-caliber machine guns blazing, counterattacked an hour-and-a-half later. 

The rebels thought they had assurances from Battalion 2000 officers that they wouldn't oppose the coup.
That was a critical miscalculation and it raised speculation that Battalion 2000 officers may have tipped off Gen. Noriega in advance.
One military analyst in Panama even speculated that the wily Gen. Noriega may have used loyal officers to set up the coup to flush out his enemies. 

In any case, the Panamanian strongman's remarkable staying power will permit him to strengthen his control, analysts believe. "He is stronger to the extent that he has gotten rid of people who wanted to oust him," said a senior Panamanian official. "It is a simple mathematical operation of subtraction." 

Military analysts say U.S. firepower and troop capabilities in Panama are overwhelmingly superior to Gen. Noriega's forces.
The Panamanian troops number about 15,000, but that includes many noncombat personnel such as police and customs, ports and immigration officials.
U.S. military analysts say only 800 are trained, combat-ready forces.
The U.S. maintains about 13,000 troops in Panama, nearly all of whom are combat-trained. 

The Bush administration hasn't ruled out the use of force to oust Gen. Noriega.
Testifying on Capitol Hill, Secretary of State James Baker said, "The United States retains the option to use American forces." But he said the White House, not a group of junior Panamanian officers, would choose the time for such action.
And, addressing the administration's critics, he added: "It's easy to be an armchair general when you don't have any real troops under your command." 

U.S. military officials were still watching from their perch at Quarry Heights, a U.S. military facility in Panama City, when some 40 to 50 rebel soldiers walked into the courtyard at Gen. Noriega's military headquarters at 1:20 p.m. Tuesday and quietly surrendered.
Gen. Noriega was seen walking nearby. "It was so casual," remarked one U.S. military officer. "How could they not put up a fight when they knew officers involved in the previous coup against Noriega had been tortured and turned into vegetables?" 

Major Moises Giraldi Vega, who led the coup attempt, was killed, according to Mario Rognoni, spokesman for the Noriega forces.
It was unclear whether Major Giraldi died in crossfire or was executed later.
The spokesman said 12 rebels and six Noriega loyalists died. 

