.START 

Kevin McNerney, chief financial officer of Systems Center Inc., called securities analysts Sept. 7 to calm them about the stock's 8% drop that day.
But according to some of those analysts, Mr. McNerney didn't mention that he had sold all his shares in the Reston, Va., software manufacturer two days earlier. 

Mr. McNerney is one of six Systems Center insiders who have sold shares since late July, according to Securities and Exchange Commission filings.
The insiders, who include the chairman and the senior vice president for customer support and development, sold at prices between $22.50 and $25 a share. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Systems Center ended at $21 a share, up 12.5 cents. 

Mr. McNerney, who sold 3,972 shares, said yesterday that he has options for about 10 times that number.
He said he intends to exercise them after a six-month mandatory waiting period. 

Chairman Robert E. Cook sold 74,800 shares for $1.9 million July 20, representing 6% of his direct and indirect holdings.
Mr. Cook said he sold the shares to diversify his holdings, as the vast majority of his assets is in company stock. 

The four other insiders, who sold from 1,500 to 16,500 shares, delayed selling until recently because the stock price had been somewhat depressed or because they had not held their shares for the required six months, Mr. Cook said. 

Systems Center's stock fell $1.75 to $20.75 a share on 10 times its average daily volume on Sept. 7.
Mr. McNerney said yesterday that he attributed the drop to earnings predictions made by analyst Oakes A. Spalding of Spalding Associates in Arlington, Mass. 

Mr. McNerney said that when the stock began to drop, he took time from the company's regular board meeting to "assure" securities analysts and the firm's largest holders.
He said he told Mr. Spalding about his own stock sale and the selling by other insiders; but he said he doesn't know when he told Mr. Spalding and can't recall whether he conveyed the information to other analysts. 

Mr. Spalding declined to comment. 

Tim McCollum of Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., one of the analysts Mr. McNerney called Sept. 7, said McNerney didn't mention the sales. "The message was they still felt comfortable with the estimates {of earnings} out there," Mr. McCollum said. 

Analysts Kenneth Burke of Alex.
Brown & Sons Inc. and Mark Finley at Soundview Financial Group also said they weren't told of the insider selling. "That's news to me, and I don't like it," Mr. Finley said. 

BIG MAC ATTACK: Shortly after some Wall Street analysts soured on McDonald's Corp., the fast-food chain was hit by a spate of insider selling.
From July 27 through Aug. 29, 12 insiders, mostly officers, sold shares.
All but one sold back to the company in private transactions at market prices, SEC filings show. 

The largest such sale, according to the filings, was for $646,632, representing 48% of the shares held by Gerald Newman, the company's chief accounting officer.
Mr. Newman didn't return calls seeing comment. 

The next largest was by Bonnie Kos, a vice president, for $303,884, according to SEC filings.
The sale represented half her stake.
Ms. Kos sold 10,432 shares for $29.13 each, filings show.
She couldn't be reached for comment. 

The other 10 insiders sold 200 to 10,000 shares each, representing 12% to 75% of their stake in the company, SEC filings show.
They received between $29.13 and $30.88 a share. 

A McDonald's spokesman said the sales were "nothing out of the ordinary." He said the employees sold shares to raise money to exercise options and for personal reasons.
The company declined to confirm the figures from the SEC, but the spokesman said the sales followed a June 2 stock split that doubled the number of shares the officers held. 

He said the officers own a significant number of McDonald's shares in their employee stock ownership plans, which do not show up as private holdings in SEC data. 

McDonald's closed yesterday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading at $30.50, up 75 cents. 

Some Wall Street analysts turned bearish on McDonald's, which is one of the 30 stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, after the Oak Brook, Ill.-based fast-food giant released its second-quarter earnings report July 21.
The company reported record sales and earnings.
But analysts concluded that, for the fifth consecutive quarter, inflation-adjusted sales at its established outlets fell. 

Leslie Steppel, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said she is still concerned about the company's growth prospects.
Inflation-adjusted sales at U.S. McDonald's stores were down 7% from a year earlier in July and down 2% in August, she said. "My guess is they're still down for September," she said, and "there isn't anything coming in marketing and new products that convinces me that's going to change anytime soon." 

