.START 

Congress is in a political retreat from catastrophic health insurance, and that may, in the long run, most hurt those who campaigned hardest against the program: the elderly. 

The House is expected today to vote to repeal the Catastrophic Care Act of 1988.
Although Congress could ultimately fall back on a much cheaper, stripped-down set of benefits, it isn't likely to tackle high-cost, broad-based medical issues anytime soon.
And if it does, its trepidation is bound to limit the scope of any benefits that are enacted, particularly for older citizens. 

Senior citizens initially backed the catastrophic-illness plan, which provides expanded hospital, doctor and drug benefits under the federal Medicare program.
But when they learned that the program would impose an income surtax on about 40% of the plan's 33 million beneficiaries, many turned against it with a ferocity that stunned not only Congress but their voice in Washington, the powerful American Association of Retired Persons, or AARP. 

"People on the Hill really are shellshocked," says Sen. John D. Rockefeller IV (D., W.Va.). 

The House is expected to give in to the well-organized campaign by senior citizens, and the Senate could follow later this week.
Whether Congress repeals the law or sharply curtails it, this would be the first time that Congress has rolled back a major expansion of social benefits for the elderly.
It also would represent a huge blow to the credibility of the once-indomitable AARP. Says Rep. Harris Fawell (R., Ill.), a leader of the repeal movement: "The average member of Congress is going to continue to listen to how seniors feel, but they're not going to be as prone to listen to AARP" unless it can show that it's more in touch with its members. 

More significantly, the stinging that Congress has taken over the financing of catastrophic care may delay or forestall important health-care proposals that have broad-based support. 

"There isn't going to be a re-examination; there's more likely to be a retreat" from new health-care initiatives, says Rep. Sander Levin, a Michigan Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, which helped write the catastrophic-illness plan.
Adds House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.): "There will be a tendency to want to let the dust settle before embracing any very elaborate alternative programs." 

This will stall the benefit that seniors most want -- long-term care.
Other possible victims include medical care for the more than 30 million people who currently lack health insurance, and the possibility of a national health-care plan.
National health care is gaining increasing support from business leaders who are struggling with skyrocketing employee health-insurance costs. 

Some lawmakers now don't believe Congress will seriously consider any plan to provide long-term nursing-home and other health care to the elderly next year, even though a bipartisan congressional commission is expected to propose such a measure.
Referring to the catastrophic-illness plan, Rep. Levin notes that "if we can't tackle a program involving $10 billion a year, it's going to be awfully difficult to tackle one that costs $50 billion or $60 billion." 

Rep. Nancy Johnson (R., Conn.), another member of the Ways and Means Committee, says repeal would "make Congress look more carefully at the cost of new benefit proposals and the way in which we allocate those burdens." She also says the defeat may encourage Congress to move away from passing sweeping benefit plans that apply uniformly to large groups of people.
Instead, she predicts, Congress will try to tailor plans to groups needing specific coverage and to give potential beneficiaries choice about whether to participate. 

This would mark a major change in the benefits-for-all philosophy behind the two major national programs for the elderly, Social Security and Medicare.
But one of the primary objections to the catastrophic-illness plan is that many seniors feel they are being forced to pay for benefits they already receive under their retirement plans. 

Congress passed the Catastrophic Coverage Act by huge margins.
When President Reagan signed it into law on July 1, 1988, he called it "an historic piece of legislation" that would protect elderly and disabled people for costly acute care that "could wipe out the savings of an entire lifetime." Unlike earlier social programs, the catastrophic coverage was unique in that it was paid for solely by the beneficiaries. 

But the mechanism for financing the program -- a flat monthly fee for all beneficiaries, plus an income surtax for the wealthiest 40% of the beneficiaries -- almost immediately began to attract opposition.
Many middle-class retirees called the surtax -- a maximum of $800 per person this year -- unfair. 

The leadership of the American Association of Retired Persons, which has about 30 million members, continued to support the new law, but groups of retired federal employees and the National Committee to Preserve Social Security and Medicare, with 5.5 million members, organized seniors across the country to fight the surtax and demand changes in the law.
They produced a grass-roots rebellion that disregarded the leadership of the AARP and captured broad support on Capitol Hill.
President Bush and the administration have stayed on the sidelines during the debate. 

Shortly after the emotion over catastrophic-illness coverage dies down, analysts expect seniors groups to be back pressing for what they wanted in the first place -- protection against costly long-term illness requiring nursing-home stays or home care.
Because seniors are a "growing and politically active group," says Daniel Perry, executive director of the Alliance for Aging Research, lawmakers will have to "don their asbestos suits and go back into the radiation zone." 

But, says Rep. Barbara Kennelly (D., Conn.), Congress will be more cautious and it will work harder to find out what people want -- and what they're willing to pay for -- before it acts. 

The question of who will lead the elderly is one issue still to be sorted out.
Despite its miscalculation, the AARP remains the largest, best-financed seniors group.
The Committee to Preserve Social Security, which led the fight against the catastrophic-illness surtax, irritated many in Congress with what legislators said were distorted claims that many seniors would have to pay the maximum $800 surtax this year, when in fact, only about 5% would pay the top amount. 

"I don't see a seniors group out there that has helped its stature," says Rep. Johnson. 

The unpopular surtax that generated spirited elderly opposition to the Catastrophic Care Act of 1988 would apply to less than half of the plan's nearly 33 million beneficiaries this year. 

