.START 

Microsoft Corp. said it expects to report revenue jumped 34% in its fiscal first quarter, surpassing expectations. 

The announcement surprised analysts, and caused the software maker's stock to surge $6.50 to close at $75.50 a share in national over-the-counter trading.
The company said it saw growth across all product lines, both in the U.S. and overseas, demonstrating that Microsoft, along with several other concerns in the personal-computer industry, are outdistancing most competitors, who have been reporting soft results. 

The company estimated revenue for its first quarter, ended Sept. 30, at about $235 million, compared with year-earlier revenue of $176 million.
Analysts' estimates for the latest quarter ranged from $205 million to $220 million. 

Microsoft wouldn't comment on its earnings, but several analysts raised their estimates.
Michele Preston, of Salomon Brothers, raised her estimate to $48 million, or 85 cents a share, for the first quarter, up from her previous estimate of $42 million, or 75 cents a share.
In the year-earlier quarter, Microsoft posted net of $36.6 million, or 65 cents a share. 

"This is one bright spot in the middle of disappointments," she said.
Earlier this week, Businessland Inc., a major computer retailer, said results in its third quarter ended Sept. 30 were lower than the company's expectations.
However, "Microsoft has always been a bellwether to the industry," said Ms. Preston, who sees a healthy outlook for the personal computer industry. 

In July, Microsoft officials told analysts that the company expected that the personal computer industry's growth would only be about 10% in 1990, and indicated some estimates of its fiscal 1990 earnings were high. 

Microsoft wouldn't comment on which products performed best in the quarter.
The company's profit margins have been under pressure because of increased research and development spending, and a shift toward more applications products -- such as word-processing or graphics packages -- which have lower profit margins than operating systems. 

While the number of personal computers may grow only about 10% this year, more software is being purchased for each computer, said David Readerman, of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.
The rate of growth for software can increase at a much faster rate than for hardware.
Mr. Readerman said he is raising his estimates for Microsoft, predicting the company will post year-end revenue of about $1.1 billion, compared with $803.5 million the year earlier.
He predicts year-end earnings will be "close to $4 a share," or about $226 million, compared with year-ago net of $3.03 a share, or $170.5 million. 

He believes Microsoft's Excel and Word applications products, and its Windows operating system sold well in the quarter, as did its "mice," the hand-operated controllers.
He said he doesn't think revenue from OS/2, the new operating system for advanced International Business Machines Corp.-compatible personal computers, contributed much to the quarter.
As more programs come out that will run on the OS/2 system, that product, with much higher profit margin, will contribute strongly the rest of the year. 

Microsoft benefited from its aggressive push in European and Asian markets, said David Bayer, analyst with Montgomery Securities. 

Microsoft has moved quickly to adapt its software products to local languages, he said. 

He estimates Microsoft's after-tax margins in the quarter were 20% to 21%, roughly the same as the previous, and year-ago quarters.
He said economies of scale in manufacturing applications software have outweighed the effect of a shift to lower margin products. "For Microsoft, the important message is there is no one thing to point to {for the increase}.
Their sales are strong across the world, across the board." 

"It was a blowout quarter, without the benefit of any major new products," said Richard Sherlund of Goldman, Sachs & Co. "Microsoft is growing twice as fast as the rest of the industry." He said Microsoft's strong performance is further evidence of a "tiering" in the industry, in which few companies with hot product lines are breaking away from competitors. 

