.START 

Home Box Office plans to announce today that it will launch its Comedy Channel Nov. 15 on cable systems that have committed nearly 10 million subscribers to the new network. 

By premiering next month, the Comedy Channel will get a big jump on a rival cable comedy network dubbed "Ha] The TV Comedy Network," being developed by MTV Networks, a unit of Viacom Inc.
That network is scheduled to begin operating April 1. 

Dick Beahrs, president of the Comedy Channel, says the network has "established a great deal of momentum" by signing some major cable operators and by gaining commitments in most of the country's big cities, a crucial audience for attracting advertisers. 

But Thomas Freston, chief executive officer of MTV Networks, says his company isn't concerned about its competitor's head start. "I don't think the comedy network battle will be decided by who launches first," Mr. Freston said. "It will be won on who has the best idea.
They {HBO executives} say they want to be the 'MTV of comedy, ' with lots of short clips and bits mixed together.
We're planning a longer format with real shows, which we think will be superior in terms of ratings and revenue generation." 

The Comedy Channel's initial subscriber base is substantial at a time when many cable operators have limited channel capacity and new cable networks are plentiful.
Still, the expected total of 10 million subscribers is below the initial subscriber base for some other recent launches, such as Turner Broadcasting System Inc. 's Turner Network Television and Consumer News and Business Channel, a joint venture of General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co. and Cablevision Systems Corp. of Woodbury, N.Y. 

The number is also low considering that HBO's parent, Time Warner Inc., itself controls 5.6 million subscribers through its cable subsidiaries.
HBO says it isn't counting all of Time Warner's subscribers in its base of 10 million, since many of them won't get the Comedy Channel immediately. 

Among the cable operators that have committed to offering the Comedy Channel as part of their basic service are Cablevision Industries Inc., of Liberty, N.Y., and TeleCable Corp., Norfolk, Va. 

MTV says "Ha]" has "soft commitments" for about two million subscribers so far, but says it has signed up 14 charter advertisers already, including Coca-Cola Co. and Bristol-Myers Co. 

Though cable systems are now short of channel capacity, many are expected to expand considerably in the next several years, which may make it easier for the two comedy channels to become an accepted part of basic cable service. 

Originally, HBO's Comedy Channel planned to run movies and sitcoms about half the time, and short clips (including comedy acts) hosted by comics the rest of the time, says Mr. Beahrs. "But cable operators were absolutely insistent that we swing more toward these hosted segments, so they will be about 85% of the channel.
The operators said there were plenty of movies and sitcoms on cable already." 

Mr. Beahrs said the Comedy Channel has been offering cable operators three minutes of local ad time per hour, more than most cable channels provide, as an extra incentive. 

MTV hasn't announced details about its programming, but has signed network programming veteran Fred Silverman as a consultant. 

