.START 

The United Mine Workers union, after more than a 40-year hiatus, has applied to rejoin the AFL-CIO. 

The request follows a decade of struggle by the UMW to rebuild its dwindling membership, which has eroded because the bulk of U.S. coal is now mined by non-union workers.
The UMW controls only one-third of all bituminous coal mined in the U.S., compared with 50% a decade ago. 

UMW President Richard L. Trumka has said he wanted to return to the AFL-CIO through a merger with another energy union.
But he was rebuffed last year when he tried to merge the UMW with the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers. 

The UMW was a member of the old American Federation of Labor until 1947, when then president John L. Lewis decided to pull the union out because of a dispute over the Taft-Hartley Act. 

Joining the AFL-CIO is seen as the UMW's attempt to gain more financial and political clout.
That is increasingly important as Mr. Trumka tries to win congressional support to resolve labor problems.
For instance, the UMW is now pushing for a bill that would force coal companies to continue paying into a debt-ridden health benefit fund for retired workers.
That fund has been the center of a dispute that led to the UMW's continuing six-month strike against Pittston Co. 

The mineworkers' membership in the AFL-CIO also might dovetail with Mr. Trumka's personal ambitions.
Some associates suspect that the 40-year-old Mr. Trumka would like to someday head the nation's largest labor group. 

The AFL-CIO, which has been eager to recruit new unions and boost membership, is expected to approve the UMW's request by next month.
The 1.4 million-member-Teamsters union rejoined in 1987 and several railroad unions have also returned, increasing the AFL-CIO's membership to about 14 million. 

But AFL-CIO affiliation probably won't help the mineworkers regain lost ground with coal companies, industry watchers contend. "It won't improve the image of the UMW," says Joseph Lawson, president of SESCO Management Group, a Richmond, Va. labor consulting firm. "Their attitude about labor relations is a thing of the past." 

He criticizes the UMW for not adapting to the changing industry by negotiating individual pacts for different companies rather than one national agreement.
When Pittston sought a different contract, for instance, the UMW went on strike. 

Mr. Trumka, who once was praised for keeping peace in the coalfields, has also lost clout with coal companies following his decision this summer to call temporary strikes at most Eastern coal mines to draw attention to the Pittston dispute.
Even companies that signed the national pact were shut down.
In addition, Mr. Trumka this week called selective strikes against several coal companies believed to be supplying coal to Pittston. 

