.START 

Teresa Stratas can make anything bearable, even a revival of Puccini's "Il Trittico," that dreary trio of operas, "Il Tabarro," "Suor Angelica" and "Gianni Schicchi." The Metropolitan Opera revived the pieces for the eccentric, thimble-sized Greek-Canadian soprano last week.
It was good to be there, if only to be reminded of what we've been missing. 

Ms. Stratas, who last appeared in "La Boheme" at the Met eight years ago, seems to keep herself busy pondering the mysteries of the universe and her place in it, which unhappily doesn't seem to be on the stage very often.
She cancels a lot and her decision to sing surprised many. 

By now, after a 30-year career, her voice has lost some color and power.
But the glowing timbre remains unmistakable and the range is still sufficient for these pieces Puccini finished in 1918.
He himself had some doubts about his three one-acters, each an hour long. "It is exhausting even for me, the author," he said. 

At the Met, it seemed as if we might turn into overnight guests, while Ms. Stratas spent interminable intermissions quailing backstage, having her usual trouble facing the audience.
And she was also recovering from food poisoning. 

She came onstage all the same, first as Giorgetta, the unhappy wife of a barge owner in "Il Tabarro." With its moody music and tormented characters, it is the best piece in the triptych. (The aria about a tabby cat called Caporale makes up for a lot.) All those lost souls drifting nowhere on the river touch us with their small dreams and memories of what they once wanted.
When Ms. Stratas, wearing a cheap floral frock, sang exultantly about the bright lights of a better life, you wanted to stock up on the memory like a squirrel in winter.
By her side, Giorgio Merighi was a perfect Luigi, handsome and stentorian.
Everybody else was mediocre.
If my tabby, Genghis Khan, were serenaded by Mignon Dunn, he'd speed down the fire escape never to return. 

Ms. Stratas did get reasonable support in the second operalet, "Suor Angelica." I'm referring to the handsome donkey bringing in goodies for Angelica and the other 17th-century nuns, who also sing of a wasp and a lamb, though we sadly don't get to meet either. 

Sister Angelica has been stuck in this convent for seven years, after giving birth to an illegitimate child and sullying the family name.
When an aunt stalks in (Florence Quivar, in a grand vignette) to tell her the baby is dead and she must sign over her fortune to boot, Angelica brews herself some poison out of herbs and flowers.
I do hope it wasn't this decoction that soured Ms. Stratas's delicate tiny tummy.
Something certainly spurred her well beyond conventional portrayals of the ill-fated religious.
Ms. Stratas turned the last 15 minutes into a hair-raising study in madness, flinging off her habit and racing around the stage before breaking down and cowering in a corner.
A singer who can cradle an imaginary bambino while a mystical chorus sings a sickly tune in the background, and not make us laugh, is Duse and Bernhardt reborn. 

If only Angelica had prayed for us, and asked the Lord to spare us the agony of the third operina.
But on the show went with the utterly humorless Bruno Pola as Gianni Schicchi, the quickwitted con artist whom Puccini lifted out of Dante's Inferno, and Ms. Stratas, now dressed as a medieval teen-ager.
Her voice had lost the strength to sound nubile by then, but she still pulled together a decently phrased rendition of that old party favorite, "O mio babbino caro." 

Perhaps this valiant battle against weakness and an unwieldy program seemed longer and more effortful because time had not flown by at "Aida," which opened the season the night before.
But I doubt anybody minded since the main purpose of the event is to give everybody plenty of time to admire the Mary McFadden pleats stretching tightly over so many big bottoms, a snug look also favored onstage, where the Aida of the evening, Aprile Millo, appeared in a clinging dress wrapped with cartridge belts.
Ms. Millo's artistry is best contemplated with eyes firmly shut, something hard to do when facing lavish sets.
On past occasions, her finely textured singing has been ample compensation for her mannered gestures, but on this big night -- her first Met opening -- only some of her pianissimos were skillfully deployed.
Hers remains a major voice trapped inside a little cornball. 

Maybe she could be implored to just stand still, an option chosen by her stagemate Dolora Zajick who had better luck as Amneris.
Stature she hardly brought to the role, but the sound came out easily with a bright edge, particularly in the Judgment Scene with Placido Domingo.
He was in effectively steely voice, powering his way through the music, while looking uncomfortable the whole night, standing stiffnecked and hunched over.
Maybe Radames's chamberpot -- like golden crown is too heavy for him, though it was a discreet head-topper compared with the coneheads modeled by Ramfis (Paata Burchuladze) and the King (Franco De Grandis).
Mr. Burchuladze made his Met debut with a smooth basso, somewhat throttled and smaller than his big European reputation had led one to expect. 

James Levine conducted both evenings, returning also for the revival of "Porgy and Bess," in an uncut version that flowed as slowly as the street hawker's honey.
What's the point of turning this ambitious musical into a Wagnerian dirge?
Gershwin himself agreed to cuts at the premiere in 1935, and they help a structurally flawed work. "Porgy's" strengths are powerful chorus scenes and a few good tunes.
Three hours of Gershwin gave us a lot of time to wonder whether the piece even belongs in an opera house, particularly one the size of the Met.
Even restaged by Arvin Brown, Catfish Row's numerous characters were hard to keep apart and virtually impossible to understand over the swollen orchestration.
We might as well have been hearing "'Wadoo, zim bam, boodleoo, hoodle ahdawam," the nonsense refrain from "It Ain't Necesarily So" all night long. 

Michael Smartt was barely audible as crippled Porgy, and given to curious ticks, pulling at his clothes and rolling his eyes whenever he saw his Bess, the unalluring Priscilla Baskerville.
Admittedly it's hard to act when you are kneeling on a little trolley.
Yet Catfish Row's many whalesized ladies didn't do much better standing up, except for Marjorie Wharton, who got a big laugh chasing after Sporting Life with a meat cleaver, and making Ben Holt jump like Fungi, the Dingle Dolphin. 

Otherwise, the evening was as earthbound as poor Porgy, who finally rolled off toward New York on his goat-drawn cart at around midnight.
By that time many of us were ready for some of Sporting Life's Happy Dust, maybe mixed with "chevre".
Perhaps Hugh Southern, the Met's new general manager, can prevail on his artistic director Mr. Levine to make this show more audience-friendly by cutting it and maybe even relinquish his baton more often.
But I rather doubt we will be hearing much more than a peep out of Mr. Southern.
His appointment came after the Met's board scoured the planet for months looking for a general manager guaranteed to be more obeisant to Mr. Levine than the very competent Bruce Crawford, who decided life was too short to be a toady to a talented megalomaniac and left the Met for the saner, more intellectually substantial world of advertising. 

Why else would the Met have hired a British citizen with virtually no opera experience, though he toiled for years at the NEA and is said to love music?
The most you can say about Mr. Southern's recent and improbable elevation is that it is a boost for all of us who dream dreams we thought were impossible to realize, but may not be after all.
I hope I will soon be named Duchess Commander of the Royal Air Force.
Why not?
I've spent a lot of time in airplanes, I love high tea and I always fasten my seat belt.
Maybe Mr. Southern should get one for his new office.
Turbulence surely lies in his flight path. 

