.START 

Barbara Lyons, the fast-talking executive director of Wisconsin Right to Life, is on the road, visiting radio and TV stations and talking to editors of local newspapers.
It's her annual "media tour," and she's boosting one bill pending in the state legislature while roundly condemning another. 

Severa Austin, the lanky executive director of Planned Parenthood of Wisconsin, is in her Milwaukee headquarters, behind newly installed security doors, supervising her phone banks, rallying her troops for a legislative hearing on the proposed law that so distresses Mrs. Lyons.
Mrs. Austin proudly wears her new campaign button, "Cheeseheads for Choice." 

Mrs. Lyons and Mrs. Austin are the dairyland state's field marshals in the highly charged, deeply emotional battle over abortion.
The contest is increasingly being fought in state legislatures because the Supreme Court signaled strongly last summer that it is willing to give the states more flexibility in regulating and restricting abortion. 

In the early 1980s, it was the anti-abortion side that seemed to have most of the grass-roots energy.
Now, as both sides wait for the court to take the final step and reconsider its 1973 Roe vs.
Wade decision, both are mobilized for action -- anti-abortion forces seeking to tighten abortion restrictions, pro-choice forces fighting to hold onto what they have. 

Wisconsin is in the heat of the battle because its legislature is in session this fall.
Legislatures are also meeting in a few other states, and some may consider legislation responding to the Supreme Court's Webster vs.
Reproductive Health Services decision in July, which upheld most of Missouri's restrictive abortion statute. 

This fall's other battlegrounds include: 

Pennsylvania.
Anti-abortion forces led by state Rep. Stephen Freind have introduced a bill that would, among other things, outlaw abortions for purposes of sex selection and would call for spousal notice before an abortion.
The bill should have clear sailing because both the legislature and the governor, Democrat Bob Casey, are strongly anti-abortion.
Mr. Freind says the legislation "will force the Supreme Court to take another look at Roe vs.
Wade." 

Florida.
Republican Gov. Bob Martinez has called a special session of the legislature next week to consider restrictive abortion legislation.
But the Democratic leadership in the House opposes bringing any legislation to the floor this year, and it thinks -- but isn't sure -- it has the votes to resist parliamentary maneuvering. 

Michigan.
A state Senate committee will hold hearings Oct. 10 on a bill that would require minors to get parental consent before having abortions.
Sen. Fred Dillingham, the committee chairman, expects the bill to reach the floor in late October or early November.
Democratic Gov. Jim Blanchard, who faces re-election next year, says he would have "trouble" signing such a bill.
He opposes any legislation curbing a woman's right to an abortion. 

Meanwhile, Supreme Court decisions expected next spring in three more cases are likely to generate even more state legislative activity, and more test cases.
The high court is considering Minnesota and Ohio laws that require parental notification before minors may have abortions, and an Illinois law that sets tough equipment and facilities standards for abortion clinics. 

Here in highly independent Wisconsin, both sides are pushing distinctive legislative proposals that rally the troops even if they don't quite match the aims of strategists at the national level.
It is, in miniature, a paradigm of the nationwide struggle over the problem, in a state where opinion is almost evenly divided. 

Each side is proposing legislation aimed at appealing to as large an audience as possible.
On the pro-choice side, Mrs. Austin and her colleagues decided to energize their forces with a bill repealing Wisconsin's 150-year-old criminal statute providing up to 15 years in prison for a physician or anyone else who "intentionally destroys the life of an unborn quick child." Because of the 1973 Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion, those criminal provisions are unenforceable.
Anti-abortion forces want to keep the old statute on the books. 

On the anti-abortion side, Mrs. Lyons and her colleagues chose to support a bill that would require minors to seek parental consent before having abortions.
It includes a "judicial bypass" that allows a minor unwilling or unable to obtain her parents' consent to seek permission for an abortion from a judge in a confidential hearing.
Pro-choice forces oppose parental-consent legislation.
National leaders on both sides of the struggle hoped that their Wisconsin affiliates would employ different strategies.
But, they are learning, this is a fragmented battle in which local leaders are convinced that they know what's best -- and are going to make their own decisions. 

Pro-choice leaders in Washington generally oppose on psychological grounds new legislation repealing the old criminal statutes; it seems to be an admission the Supreme Court ultimately will overturn Roe, an admission they aren't prepared to make.
Kate Michelman, executive director of the National Abortion Rights Action League, says, "When we try to repeal these old laws, we admit they have some validity.
And we don't want to do that.
Our goal is to preserve what's left of Roe vs.
Wade and gain back what we have lost." 

But Mrs. Austin, the pro-choice field marshal in Wisconsin, disagrees.
She wants a roll-call vote on the old statute. "We want politicians to declare on this, one way or another," she says. "The time has come, and this is the way to do it." 

Anti-abortion leaders in Washington haven't been able to get their way, either.
They wanted their Wisconsin allies to support a parental-consent bill without a judicial bypass, in hopes of a case that they can ultimately take to the Supreme Court.
The judicial-bypass procedure that exists in current parental-consent laws in several states "is just meaningless, it's a rubberstamp procedure," says Burke J. Balch, director of state legislation for the National Right to Life Committee. "Judges willing to make the decision always approve the abortion." 

But Mr. Balch and his colleagues are still looking for a state where they can get the job done; Mrs. Lyons and her colleagues wouldn't go along. "They wanted a test case," says Mrs. Lyons, who is moving a cot into her office for the long nights ahead. "But Wisconsin isn't a good place for test cases.
We are not going to propose unconstitutional laws in this state." 

National anti-abortion leaders have hammered out a legislative agenda that may or may not appeal to local leadership or fit local situations.
Parental involvement in abortions for minors, through notification or consent, is at the top of the agenda.
Included, too, are suggestions for legislation that would forbid abortions in government-run hospitals; require abortion clinics to display printed material directing patients to alternative agencies; force state governments to mount public-information campaigns describing the "humanity" of an unborn child; and ban abortions for purposes of sex selection and as a means of birth control. 

The major push to pass this package of legislation will come next year, as legislatures return to work in most states. 

"Their goal," says Mrs. Michelman of her anti-abortion opponents, "is to keep testing the limits of the Supreme Court's decisions, to keep narrowing and restricting the conditions under which women can have abortions.
They seek test cases so there is a constant flow of cases going before the court.
And, finally, they seek to overthrow Roe vs.
Wade." 

At a hearing in Milwaukee on the prochoice bill to repeal the old criminal statute, passions were high. 

Shelly Banda testified that her parents coerced her into an abortion when she was 16 years old. "I have felt guilt and pain ever since," she told state Rep. Rebecca Young and members of her Children and Human Services Committee. "Please hear me now," she said in a whisper. "My abortion didn't give me new freedom.
It has put me into bondage.
The simple truth of abortion is a dead baby and a grieving woman." 

Asked if she thought that physicians who perform abortions should go to jail, she replied -- to wild cheers from her supporters -- "I think any doctor who performs an abortion is in a prison of his own." 

Five TV cameras whirred as Monica Migliorino, a well-known abortion foe, held up a photograph of a five-month-old fetus she said she removed from a trash barrel at an abortion clinic. "I took this baby out of the barrel.
I took it home to my apartment and photographed it.
Then I buried it in Holy Cross Cemetery." 

She, too, was cheered by 150 or more anti-abortion people at the hearing. 

The Rev. Tony Larson, a Unitarian minister, drew catcalls when he testified that Adolf Hitler was a prominent anti-abortion leader who closed abortion clinics and even executed a woman for having an abortion.
The anti-abortion crowd booed even more loudly when he said that "women who oppose abortion are the ones who make it necessary -- by also opposing sex education and birth control." 

When he finished, he was applauded by some 150 pro-choice supporters, most of them smartly dressed young women allied with Planned Parenthood. 

Mrs. Austin, helping to orchestrate the testimony for her side, says it has been difficult to get women to come forward and testify about their "successful" abortions. "It takes a lot of courage," she says.
But Georgene Voutila, a volunteer worker for the National Abortion Rights Action League, was willing. "I had an abortion at the age of 32, when I was a single woman," she testified. "The counselors were thoroughly trained, the staff was warm and caring, the physician was gentle.
It was the right thing for me to do, and I have never regretted it.
At the time, I was barely able to support myself." 

Mrs. Lyons, the anti-abortion strategist, missed the hearing.
She was on the road, talking to radio and TV reporters and newspaper people.
But she seethes with anger at the idea the legislature should take up Mrs. Austin's bill before taking up hers, even though it was filed first.
Although she believes she has the votes on the floor, she is opposed by the legislative leadership. "The leadership put the bill to repeal the criminal statute on the fast track," she says. "They are trying to bury ours." 

The speaker of the Assembly, the lower house, is Tom Loftus, a strong pro-choice advocate who is widely seen as the Democratic candidate for governor next year.
He would run against Republican Gov. Tommy Thompson, who is anti-abortion. 

But Mrs. Lyons is ready to play a trump card.
State Rep. Robert T. Welch, a leading anti-abortion legislator, says he will try to "pull" the parental-consent measure from Mrs. Young's committee and take it straight to the floor.
It is a parliamentary move employed only four or five times in a decade, and Speaker Loftus threatens swift retribution to any Democrat who votes for it. 

In Wisconsin, and soon across the nation, they have just begun to fight. 

