.START 

A top thrift regulator expressed concern that the government may need more than $50 billion to clear up the problems at the nation's insolvent savings and loans. 

William Seidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., said the latest loss projections at thrifts under government management "raise concerns about the adequacy of the $50 billion" provided in the sweeping thrift-bailout law enacted in August. 

Although outside analysts have questioned the sufficiency of the funding, Mr. Seidman's remarks were the first evaluation from a government official who has had access to data from seized thrifts and the field of potential buyers for the institutions.
Mr. Seidman, whose agency is managing the seized institutions, previously had adhered to the Bush administration estimate of $50 billion for merging or selling off insolvent thrifts. 

Speaking before the Senate Banking Committee, which was reviewing the rocky start-up of the bailout, Mr. Seidman said about one-third of roughly $300 billion in S&L assets that the government must sell are in "difficult, non-liquid" holdings, which could mean delays that pile on new costs to the taxpayer. 

"Six months to a year from now, a more-informed guess can be made," Mr. Seidman said. 

Other financial limitations of the bailout were also apparent yesterday at a House banking panel.
David Cooke, executive director of Resolution Trust Corp., which is disposing of sick thrifts and their assets, said the agency has plowed $8.5 billion into insolvent thrifts to replace high-interestrate certificates of deposit.
But some S&Ls under government management still had to rely on brokered deposits to attract funds.
This volatile source of liquidity from deposit brokers seeking high interest rates contributed to current S&L insolvencies. "It's a fact of life that some of these {S&Ls} are relying on brokered funding." he said.
FDIC Chairman Seidman, while expressing concerns, also said the losses of the S&Ls recently placed under government control have narrowed.
Institutions placed under conservatorship in the first quarter had estimated losses equaling 36% of gross assets, he said.
For those taken over after March 31, losses averaged 21%. 

Under the new thrift law, the FDIC does most of Resolution Trust's work of selling ailing thrifts and their assets.
The new law's elaborate plan to avoid fraud and abuse, however, requires Resolution Trust to answer to several layers of auditors, including its Oversight Board, which includes Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Jack Kemp. 

Resolution Trust recently has clashed with the board and the Treasury several times over policies and proposed transactions to sell sick S&Ls.
For example, the agency delayed selling five large, insolvent thrifts by the end of the fiscal year last Saturday, because bidding policies weren't clear.
But it tried to keep the $8 billion reserved for those transactions on its fiscal 1989 books.
The Oversight Board quashed that plan and said it was illegal. 

The delay will shift $8 billion of the federal deficit from fiscal 1989 to 1990.
Because of its timing, the move won't trigger other spending cuts under the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law.
However, it demonstrated what Mr. Brady called a "healthy friction" between the agencies. 

The Oversight Board and Mr. Seidman have also disagreed about the types of transactions that Resolution Trust may engage in and the types of fees that should be assessed to buyers of institutions.
Mr. Seidman even said he had to clear his written testimony to the committee with the White House Office of Budget and Management, which didn't change the testimony. "We are not as independent as we used to be," Mr. Seidman said of his agency. 

Senate Banking Committee Chairman Donald Riegle (D., Mich.) also pressed Resolution Trust to complete its assessment of government transactions from last year, in which sales of insolvent thrifts included hefty tax breaks as incentives for buyers. 

