.START 

for only the second week since early May -- assets fell, Donoghue's Money Fund Report said. 

The Holliston, Mass., newsletter said the average seven-day taxable-fund yield was 8.62% for the week ended Tuesday, up from 8.6%, where it stood two weeks in a row. 

Brenda Malizia Negus, the newsletter's editor said "short-term interest rates have picked up a little steam." Institutional money managers may have pulled cash out of funds last week and purchased money-market instruments directly to capture the higher yields, explaining the drop of total assets, she added. 

Money funds invest in securities such as Treasury bills, bank certificates of deposit and commercial paper, and all were sold with higher yields in the latest week. 

The rise in short-term rates was evident in the CD market.
The average six-month CD aimed at consumers was offered with a yield of 8.13%, up from 8.04%, according to Banxquote Money Markets, a New York information service.
Yields on U.S. Treasury bills at Monday's auction were also higher; the yield on the six-month issue was 8.36%. 

Total money-fund assets declined $1.4 billion, to $341.8 billion, for the week, Donoghue's said. 

Since the first week of May, Donoghue's said, assets have grown about $48.2 billion.
The number of taxable funds it tracks has increased by 25, to 395, in the period. 

The average maturity of the investments in money-fund portfolios was up, by one day, to 38 in the week ended Tuesday.
The average maturity is considered an indication of which direction professional money managers think interest rates are headed. 

The average 30-day compounded yield was unchanged for the third-consecutive week at 8.6%.
A compound yield assumes the interest rate remains unchanged for a year and dividends are reinvested. 

The average seven-day simple yield, according to Donoghue's, was up 0.02 percentage point to 8.28%, while the 30-day simple yield was again 8.26%.
The highest yielding general-purpose money fund for the most recent week was Dreyfus World-Wide Dollar, which was paying 9.52%, followed by Alger Money Market Portfolio at 9.41%.
Each of those funds is waiving most management fees in order to attract deposits. 

