.START 

Lummus Crest Inc., a petrochemical plant builder, filed suit against Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, accusing the troubled Italian bank of civil racketeering and breach of contract for refusing to honor letters of credit to Iraq confirmed by the bank's Atlanta branch. 

The suit, filed in U.S. District Court in Atlanta, this week, asks the court to uphold the letters of credit, issued by the Central Bank of Iraq, as valid.
The suit also seeks $23.4 million plus treble damages under the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations act. 

According to Lummus, a unit of Stamford, Conn.-based Combustion Engineering Inc., BNL had been honoring the letters of credit and already had paid out $30.5 million through July 15.
Lummus asserts that the total amount of the letters of credit, issued for supply and service contracts related to a petrochemical plant under construction in Iraq, is $53.8 million. 

However, Lummus said when it asked BNL for payment under the letters of credit on Aug. 3 and Aug. 15, the bank stalled.
On Aug. 30, Lummus said, BNL refused to make further payments, saying the letters of credit actually totaled $30 million -- not $53.8 million as previously confirmed. 

Lummus said it is continuing work on the project, contracted for by Techcorps, the Technical Corps for Special Projects, an agency of Iraq, despite the bank's refusal to make disbursesments. 

"The project is continuing.
We have a tremendous relationship with our client," Charles Kemps, Lummus' director of marketing and communications said, referring to Iraq. "We've been working with the client for 14 years and they have never failed to pay." 

In Rome, a BNL spokesman said the bank didn't have any immediate comment on the Lummus action. 

As previously reported, Banca Nazionale in August announced that its Atlanta branch had issued letters of credit to Iraq -- eventually estimated at $3 billion -- without proper authorization, after Italian and U.S. banking authorities and the Federal Bureau of Investigation had initiated investigations. 

