.START 

Brewers Hope for Treat 

From Promotion Tricks 

AMERICA'S BREWERS are trying to transform Halloween from a cider sipping to a beer guzzling holiday. 

Many beer makers, including Anheuser-Busch Cos. and Adolph Coors Co., are running specially-designed TV commercials with a Halloween theme.
Others are readying in-store displays in an effort to make theirs the brew of choice at Halloween parties. 

At a time when the overall beer market is flat, marketing experts say brewers need to scare up more sales in October, one of their softest months of the year.
Average monthly beer consumption is 15 million barrels, but only 13.9 million barrels were consumed last October, says Frank Walters, director of research at Impact, a trade publication that tracks the liquor industry. 

This year, Miller Brewing Co. plans to sell its Lite brand with special glow-in-the-dark labels in its Miller Lite Beer Chiller promotion.
The Philip Morris Cos. subsidiary also is running a TV spot with a Halloween theme that stars actor Joe Piscopo.
Its Genuine Draft brand will be promoted in stores and bars by a character called Count Draftula. 

Coors's new "Phantom of the Fridge" TV campaign features a sweepstakes that will award $100,000 in prizes.
And Corona, a Mexican beer, is getting into the act with in-store promotions. 

But the Halloween marketing efforts don't sit well with some consumer groups.
The Center for Science in the Public Interest, a watchdog group in Washington, says the promotions shamelessly attempt to woo underage consumers. "Beer companies try to make drinking a part of every celebration," says Patricia Taylor, who heads the center's alcohol policies project. "These types of promotions are clearly attractive to young consumers." 

Beer makers defend their promotions, saying that many are done in bars where adults increasingly celebrate Halloween. "Halloween doesn't necessarily have to be just a kids' holiday," says Mike Mazzoni, executive vice president of Chicago-based Barton Beers, which markets Corona. "If it's tasteful and directed at the adult consumer, it can be very effective." 

Some beer companies plan to pitch their brew during other holiday periods when sales traditionally cool off.
Stroh Brewery Co. expects to run an ad campaign this Christmas season using the "Strohman" character, which, of course, resembles a snowman. 

Charity Woos Men 

With Sports Events 

PERSUADING MEN to donate to a good cause is a challenge charities have faced for years. 

Now one organization is giving sports marketing a try to boost contributions from men.
The United Negro College Fund is planning a variety of sports-related sponsorships over the next couple of years.
Later this month, it will sponsor the Bryant Gumbel/Walt Disney World Pro-Am Golf Tournament at Lake Buena Vista, Fla., its first big event targeted specifically to men. 

The college fund decided to step up its efforts in the sports area after a poll by Louis Harris & Associates found that just 45% of the fund's contributors are men and most of them are black. 

The poll concluded that sports-functions have strong potential for reaching white males.
The golf tournament, fund officials say, was designed specifically to attract top-level executives. 

Of the $40 million the fund took in last year, $1.4 million came from a handful of sports-related promotional events featuring such celebrities as basketball player Michael Jordan and track star Carl Lewis. 

"Many organizations are struggling" to reach men, says Frederick T. Miller, president of the Chatham Group, a consulting firm in Chatham, Mass.
He says churches face a constant battle trying to get donations of money and time from men. 

The switch toward sports-oriented fund-raisers makes sense, Mr. Miller says, noting that organizations like the YMCA haven't had as much trouble as other groups reaching men. 

Mattel Plans to Do Good 

For Itself and the Needy 

MATTEL INC. HOPES a little goodwill will pay off handsomely for the company this Christmas. 

For a big yuletide promotion, the toy maker is asking kids to turn in old toys, which will be cleaned up and given to needy children. 

What's in it for Mattel?
In exchange for the old toys, kids get wish books that offer $75 in rebates on new Mattel toys.
The books feature pictures of toys Mattel thinks will be the hot items on kids' wish lists. 

"The promotion is designed to increase Mattel's share of the market," Bob Sansone, Mattel's president, says. "But we're also helping kids get into the spirit of giving during the Christmas season." 

The novel rebate promotion follows the company's introduction last year of discount couponing, a first for the toy industry. 

The rebate promotion, called "Mattel Kids Care Too," will be launched Oct. 14 at the Los Angeles Zoo, followed by events in other big cities. 

Odds and Ends 

SABLE & Rosenfeld Foods Ltd., Toronto, is marketing carrot sticks laced with vodka.
Silly Dilly Carrot Sticks are advertised as the carrots that "make a unique statement of good taste in a Bloody Mary." . . . Unit sales of women's costume necklaces were down 6% in the second quarter, according to the research firm NPD Group, Port Washington, N.Y.
But consumers doubled their purchases of strands of pearls, thanks to first lady Barbara Bush's penchant for pearls. 

