.START 

Varity Corp. said it agreed to pay an indicated $577.3 million in cash and securities to acquire K-H Corp., about $64.4 million less than the purchase price agreed to last May. 

Varity and Detroit-based K-H, which formerly was Fruehauf Corp., have been negotiating to amend the original agreement since August, when K-H revealed it had received less cash than expected from the sale of its trailer division and the Fruehauf name to Terex Corp. 

Varity said that under the terms of the new agreement, it would pay about $41.3 million cash, 37.8 million new Varity shares and $436.8 million principal of notes.
The previous agreement involved $66 million in cash, $430 million of debt and 55.5 million Varity shares. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Varity closed unchanged at $2.625. 

Wilbur Ross of Rothschild Inc., who represented a group of debt holders in the negotiations, said he is recommending they vote in favor of the proposal even though they would receive only $81 in cash for each $1,000 of principal, instead of the previously agreed $130.
They also would get $774.12 of securities. 

"Given the difficult circumstances, we see this as a fair deal," Mr. Ross said.
He said the alternative to an acquisition by Varity is for K-H to restructure itself as an independent company, a time-consuming and complex task. 

"This has already dragged on a lot longer than expected, and we have {an interest payment} coming Dec. 15," Mr. Ross added. "We could close this deal by then." 

Shareholders of both K-H and Varity are scheduled to vote on the transaction at meetings to be held Nov. 29, the companies said.
The transaction also requires approval by K-H debenture and note holders. 

The revised agreement calls for K-H shareholders to receive seven-tenths of a Varity share for each K-H share.
Under a complex formula in the previous agreement, they could have received as much as one Varity share. 

Varity is a Toronto-based farm-equipment and auto-parts concern.
K-H's major asset is its Kelsey-Hayes auto-parts operation. 

