.START 

The outlook for business has become increasingly less optimistic going into the fourth-quarter holiday season, a survey of business executives by Dun & Bradstreet Corp. found. 

Business executives' expectations for higher sales and profit fell to their lowest level in four years, the survey of fourth-quarter business expectations said.
But this comes on the heels of a significant decline in expectations in the third quarter. 

"After two years of consistently strong expectations, business executives are getting skittish," said Joseph W. Duncan, corporate economist and chief statistician of Dun & Bradstreet. 

But the business executives' seemingly bleak outlook was tempered by the concomitant drop in their expectations for higher prices and inventories, the survey said. "Thus, two of the major factors that have fueled recent recessions -- inflation and excess inventories -- appear to be well under control," Mr. Duncan said. 

"The data show a slowdown is imminent or will continue, but not that much to warrant forecasting a recession," said Douglas Handler, an economist with Dun & Bradstreet. 

Mr. Handler said he thought the executives' decreased optimism was in response to the slowdown in production growth and consumer spending that started several months ago, and that "accordingly, {the executives} have scaled back their plans." Mr. Handler said that small businesses, in particular, "react very strongly to any potential source of anxiety," noting that manufacturers were reacting to a potential slowdown in export growth because of the stronger dollar while retailers were reacting to the slowdown in consumer spending or cutbacks that could be expected. 

The quarterly survey by the business information company, conducted between Aug. 14 and Aug. 30, polled 1,500 executives nationwide in manufacturing, retailing and wholesaling on their expectations for fourth-quarter sales, profits, inventories employment and new orders.
The survey calculates indexes by subtracting the percentage of those expecting decreases in various categories from the percentage expecting increases. 

Retailing executives were particularly negative, with their expectations for gains in sales and profits falling to the lowest level since the 1983 fourth quarter.
The sales optimism index for retailers plunged nine points from the third quarter and 17 points from a year ago, to 55. 

"Retailers were surprisingly optimistic in the fourth quarter last year, and this year's expectations are more in line with recent retail-sales statistics," Mr. Duncan noted. 

Overall, the sales optimism index for the fourth quarter fell seven points from the third quarter, to 60.
Manufacturers' expectations for higher sales fell eight points to 60, while wholesalers' expectations edged down to 

The profits-optimism index for all firms fell to 54 from 61 in the third quarter and 67 in the 1988 fourth quarter.
Expectations for increased profits by retailers, wholesalers and manufacturers all fell.
But expectations among manufacturers of nondurable goods increased three points to 

Expectations for higher selling prices decreased to 34, down five points from the third quarter and eight points from a year ago, while expectations for increased inventories fell two points to 19 from the third quarter.
The new orders index among durable goods manufacturers fell eight points, to 52, while the index for nondurable goods manufacturers decreased one point, to 63. 

The employment optimism index also fell, to 17 from 22. "With lower sales and profit expectations, retailers are not expecting to boost employment this holiday season," Mr. Duncan said. 

