.START 

Doctors and hospitals take note: Medicare is preparing to cut all payments by a flat 2%. 

Under the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law, Congress has only 10 days left, until Oct. 15, to avert such mandatory, across-the-board cuts in federal spending.
The cuts could be restored as soon as Congress enacts a deficit-reduction measure.
Until then, Medicare providers would probably be the hardest hit, but they would hardly be the only ones to feel an immediate impact. 

For instance, new borrowers in the guaranteed student-loan program would have to pay higher origination fees, and lenders would be paid at a lower interest rate, in order to save money.
And farm payments and certain foster-care and adoption-assistance benefits would also face immediate cuts. 

Meeting the deadline will be "difficult, some say impossible," concedes Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine).
To try to achieve that goal, Sen. Mitchell yesterday canceled next week's planned Senate recess. 

If the lawmakers fail, the law would force federal officials to plan cuts with all the discrimination and care of a power lawnmower.
The process is dubbed in bureaucratic budgetary parlance as "sequester," a word usually used to describe the measures taken to protect trial juries from outside influence.
In this case, it essentially means protecting budget money from being spent. 

Based on the White House Office of Management and Budget's August calculations, $16.2 billion in spending would be cut across-the-board, half from defense accounts and half from non-military programs.
The actual reduction could be slightly larger depending on how much the projected budget deficit is increased by legislation that might become law before the deadline. 

All told, the cuts aren't all that Draconian -- certainly far less severe than everyone expected when the Gramm-Rudman law was enacted in 1985.
The mere threat of lopping off budget money was thought to be sufficient to make the White House and Congress do anything to meet the law's deficit-reduction targets. 

But lawmakers view this year's deadline with no more anxiety than they would a routine dental checkup. "The talk around here is incredibly unfocused and unconcerned," complains New Mexico Sen. Pete Domenici, the ranking GOP member of the Senate Budget Committee. 

For one thing, most lawmakers expect the cuts to be quickly restored once a deficit-reduction measure, now bogged down by the fight over President Bush's capital-gains tax cut, is signed into law.
And as it turns out, a number of additional provisions will soften the blow. 

Many mandatory federal payments, including federal retirement and Social Security benefits, are exempt from cuts.
Other programs, such as veterans' health care and community health programs, can't be cut by more than 2%. 

Little immediate disarray is expected since federal departments can temporarily cut back or delay spending without much effort -- by putting off that big paper-clip purchase, for instance.
And in the case of the reduced Medicare payments, it's possible that the lost money could be paid out later, although one budget offical says the process would be "messy." 

If the budget fight drags on to the end of the year, it could cause some pain.
The Pentagon, for instance, could be forced to make deep cuts in everything from production funds for the radar-eluding B-2 Stealth bomber and various tactical missiles to money for spare parts for top-of-the-line Navy and Air Force jet fighters. 

In that case, defense officials would be expected to cushion the impact by shifting money among different accounts, dipping into a nearly $20 billion pot of money previously earmarked for the Pentagon, and slowing down development and acquisition of some new weapons.
In addition, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney is already urging Mr. Bush to use his authority to protect personnel accounts, which make up one quarter of the Pentagon's budget, by ordering deeper, offsetting cuts in other military spending. 

This process has actually happened twice before.
In Gramm-Rudman's first year, a largely symbolic across-the-board cut was made in fiscal 1986 outlays.
Although the projected deficit was well above the $171.9 billion target, the law limited the cut to $11.7 billion to prevent upheaval in the middle of a fiscal year. 

In 1987, in the wake of the stock market crash, the first budget summit between lawmakers and the Reagan administration failed to reach an agreement in time to avoid the automatic cuts.
The Office of Management and Budget advised agencies to move funds among various accounts and otherwise avoid disruptions until the accord was implemented.
The cuts, which lasted more than a month, were restored when Congress finally passed budget legislation. 

Andy Pasztor contributed to this article. 

