.START 

The fierce political battle over cutting the capital-gains tax has left the Bush administration's budget strategy in a shambles. 

For months, Budget Director Richard Darman has justified last spring's gimmick-ridden budget agreement with Congress as a steppingstone to a better, broader accord.
By establishing a spirit of cooperation, he said, the administration was laying the groundwork for more serious budget talks this fall. 

But in the past few weeks, the spirit of cooperation has been poisoned, and talk of a new budget summit has evaporated.
Most close budget observers believe there's now little chance to make progress on the deficit until after next year's congressional elections. 

The reason: the fight over capital gains. 

"The dominoes were falling into place -- until we came to the capital-gains debate," says Senate Budget Committee Chairman James Sasser (D., Tenn.) "That's poisoned the whole process." 

Adds Stephen Bell, a Salomon Inc. official who was formerly GOP staff director of the Senate Budget Committee: "There was a faint hope at the beginning of the year, but there's no hope now.
And the confrontation I see coming this year will merely foreshadow absolute hell next year." 

The final blow to the administration's budget strategy came last month, when Mr. Darman and White House Chief of Staff John Sununu torpedoed a secret offer made to Republicans by House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.). 

Mr. Foley's offer would have stripped the deficit-cutting budget "reconciliation" bill of its most contentious provisions, including the capital-gains tax cut.
That would have allowed the budget bill to proceed without controversy, and still would have kept the capital-gains tax cut alive because the House Democratic leadership promised to have a separate vote on the tax cut later.
The deal was welcomed by House GOP leader Robert Michel of Illinois, who saw it as a way to keep deficit-cutting efforts on track. 

But Mr. Darman rejected the deal, fearing it would hurt the chances of getting the president's capital-gains proposal through Congress.
The administration couldn't have made it clearer: Cutting the capital-gains tax was a higher priority than cutting the budget deficit. 

"They have put all their chips on winning capital gains, and it has little to do with deficit reduction," says House Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta (D., Calif.). "That poisons the well for the relations you need if you're going to tackle this seriously." 

In comments last week, Mr. Darman further contaminated the waters by publicly criticizing the House Democratic leadership, saying they were pursuing a "kamikaze approach" to national politics.
He also acknowledged it may be difficult to reach any kind of major budget agreement with Congress before next year's election. 

The budget director leavened his remarks by saying he hopes "we can get this behind us." After the partisan battling over capital gains cools down, he said, "I would hope we could talk constructively at that point." 

But Democratic members of Congress have said they are no longer willing to deal. "There's no incentive from our standpoint to go through that exercise again," says Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine), referring to the spring negotiations.
Those talks produced agreement on a deficit-reduction plan for fiscal 1990, which began Oct. 1 -- an accord Congress is still struggling to carry out.
The talks Mr. Darman hoped to hold this fall would have been for the fiscal 1991 budget. 

Even if the capital-gains tax fight hadn't stirred partisan rancor, getting a new deficit-cutting deal this fall would have been difficult.
Budget experts from both parties agree that any politically acceptable effort to make big deficit reductions must involve both a tax increase and large cuts in Social Security and Medicare benefits.
The first would require President Bush to break his no-new-taxes pledge; the second would expose politicians from both parties to the wrath of senior citizens. 

Moreover, public concern over the budget deficit seems to be waning.
The deficit is shrinking as a percentage of the nation's total output, and financial markets no longer see it as a cause of economic instability. "Budget deficits are passe subjects on Wall Street," says Mr. Bell. "They won't let you into a party on Manhattan if you talk about the budget deficit." 

In addition, pressure for new spending is building.
Since submitting his budget in February, for instance, President Bush has asked for spending increases to fight the war on drugs and to provide aid to Poland.
And in each case, Congress has increased the president's request.
As a result, any modest improvement in the budget picture that resulted from last spring's deficit-cutting agreement has been eliminated.
Even if the administration and Congress carry out this year's budget deal, they still will face the daunting prospect of reaching the $64 billion deficit target required for fiscal 1991 under the Gramm-Rudman law.
That could require cuts of more than $60 billion, according to Congressional Budget Office estimates. 

The Bush administration is preparing what some White House officials call a "slash and burn" budget to meet next year's tough target without raising taxes.
Such a budget, due out in January, would likely be declared dead on arrival in Congress.
And with congressional elections approaching in November, the chances for agreement on painful deficit cuts seem slim. 

Instead, Congress and the White House may once again take the easy route, relying on blue smoke and mirrors -- such as this year's moves to take the Postal Service off budget and to shift a military pay date to put it in the previous fiscal year -- to meet the budget law's requirements. 

"What the system requires is something to make the status quo much more painful, and that isn't there," says John Cogan, a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution and a former Reagan budget official. "There is nothing to move the Democrats, the Republicans, the House and Senate and the administration off their current positions.
They are much too comfortable." 

