.START 

Strong performances by Japanese shares and growth stocks buoyed the top-performing mutual-fund managers in the latest quarter and 12 months. 

With a nudge from a strengthened yen in the final week of the third quarter, five-year standout Merrill Lynch Pacific Fund edged out two domestic funds that have shone for the past year -- National Aviation & Technology Fund and the aggressively managed Janus Twenty Fund. 

For the 12 months, Alger Small Capital Fund, which invests in rapidly growing companies with market capitalizations of less than $1 billion, soared nearly 76%.
That result is particularly sweet for fund adviser Fred Alger Management, whose subpar overall performance in 1987 and 1988 prompted an unusual number of institutional clients to dump the money-management firm last year. 

"The growth style {of money management} is coming back into favor, and we're having a very good year for our clients," says David Alger, brother of Fred and portfolio manager of Alger Small Capital Fund. 

Fueling the top domestic performers was a hodgepodge of individual stocks ranging from the obscure -- such as Flow-Mole Corp., an installer of underground utilities -- to giant issues such as Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae. 

Around 35% of the $360 million assets of Merrill Lynch Pacific Fund consists of Japanese property-and-casualty insurers, including Fuji Fire & Marine Insurance Co. and Nichido Fire & Marine Insurance Co. Mr. Silverman also is betting that Japanese consumers will keep loosening their purse strings, helping companies that cater to the Japanese retail market. 

Meanwhile, long-haul stalwarts G. Kenneth Heebner and Peter Lynch continued to rack up solid results, keeping them well ahead of the pack for the five-year and 10-year periods. 

Like the National Aviation & Technology Fund, Mr. Lynch's huge Magellan Fund got a lift from its holdings of UAL Corp. and NWA Inc., two airline stocks driven up this year by takeover activity. 

While the world's leading central bankers helped this fund a bit by pushing the dollar down late in the quarter, almost all the fund's gains came from its stocks. 

Before grabbing every Japanese issue in sight, however, investors should consider this: Sometime around June, fund manager Stephen Silverman for the first time bought put options on Japan's Nikkei stock index.
Put options amount to a right to sell something at a specified price within a limited period. 

"It's not that I'm bearish," says Mr. Silverman.
But he admits to being "cautious," partly because the stock market's recent climb has come despite relative weakness in the Japanese bond market.
He characterizes the put options as a kind of insurance against a broad market decline. 

Still, Mr. Silverman insists that he sees plenty of room for appreciation in his individual holdings. 

Property and casualty insurers -- known as non-life insurers in Japan -- continue to be undervalued, he argues.
That's partly because they carry securities and other assets at far below market value and because their reported earnings often vastly understate their true earning power, he says. 

The non-life insurers offer "by far and away the best deal of anything I've seen," says Mr. Silverman.
Besides Fuji and Nichido, Mr. Silverman has held Dai-Tokyo Fire & Marine Insurance Co. and Koa Fire & Marine Insurance Co. for about the past five years. 

Among the Japanese domestic consumption plays is Sangetsu Co., a maker of carpeting and wall coverings, and Senshukai Co., whose representatives sell a range of products similar to those offered by many U.S. shop-by-catalog concerns. 

Merrill Lynch Pacific's third-quarter jump was a sharp reversal of its 10% decline in the first half of 1989.
The A and B versions of this fund are essentially the same, with slight differences in fee structures. 

This $12.8 million fund looks for small companies whose sales and earnings are growing rapidly and who seem capable of keeping up the pace. 

Manager David Alger says the current portfolio, on a weighted average basis, should post earnings growth of 40% this year.
The fund, which includes about 30 stocks, recently has bolstered its positions in such issues as Gantos Inc., a Michigan-based apparel store chain; Max & Erma's Restaurants Inc., an Ohio chain; and Flow-Mole, which drills narrow tunnels for optical fiber networks and other underground utilities. 

Also increased recently were positions in Environmental Systems Co., a Little Rock, Ark., waste-management concern; and Uno Restaurant Corp., a Boston-based pizza chain. 

Even if the U.S. economy achieves its hoped-for "soft landing" in the next few quarters, Mr. Alger says he thinks earnings at most bigger companies will weaken.
And that, he says, is likely to steer investors to smaller companies whose market niches enable them to keep growing. 

Close behind Alger for the 12 months are National Aviation & Technology Fund and Janus Twenty Fund.
Tom Marsico, 34-year-old manager of Janus Twenty Fund, also runs the three Idex funds that appear in the top quarterly and 12-month rankings.
Janus Twenty, whose name derives from its strategy of keeping only about 20 stocks in the portfolio, has focused on three sectors this year: financial services, environmental services and communications services. 

National Aviation, founded in 1928, now invests in a broad range of technology stocks.
UAL and NWA have been its largest holdings for the past several years.
But with NWA having been taken private, American Airlines' parent AMR Corp. recently has become its second largest holding. 

Fund manager G. Kenneth Heebner, like Mr. Alger, is enamored of smaller growth stocks these days. 

With such stocks as Carnival Cruise Lines Inc., Sci-Med Life Systems Inc. and HMSS Inc. in its limited portfolio, the fund was up 46% for the year as of Sept. 28. 

Mr. Heebner, who went through a slump last year, also has done well with some better-known stocks such as Fannie Mae, Tiffany & Co. and L.A. Gear, the athletic-shoe maker. 

But he says his favorite is the one that scored the biggest for him in the third quarter: Sotheby's Holdings Inc., the international auction house.
Mr. Heebner is counting on Asian wealth to keep the art market booming.
Even if Japanese buyers slow their purchases, Taiwanese and other Asians buyers will step into the breach, he predicts. 

Mr. Heebner still likes Texas Air Corp., too.
With a new labor force, service at Eastern Airlines is likely to improve sharply, and with its strong route structure, the Texas Air unit ought to make a "spectacular turnaround," he says. 

Also high on his list are Duty Free International Inc., which operates duty-free shops at airports and along the Canadian border, and St. Jude Medical Inc., a maker of mechanical heart valves. 

On the other hand, Mr. Heebner is down on technology stocks, having swallowed losses in the past quarter on Chips & Technologies Inc., Applied Materials Inc. and Compaq Computer Corp. 

The $78.3 million fund is available only as part of a variable annuity or variable life-insurance policy, through New England Mutual Life Insurance Co. 

Non-bank financial stocks continue to make up the biggest segment in the nation's biggest stock fund. 

In addition to his large holdings in Fannie Mae, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and Student Loan Marketing Association, fund manager Peter Lynch has built big stakes in several companies that cater to consumers' financial needs. 

"This garbage about the consumer being overextended and hopeless -- I don't buy it," says Mr. Lynch. "The consumer savings rate is going up," making the consumer a better credit risk, he reasons. "What's bad for autos is good for Beneficial Finance." 

Magellan holds Beneficial Corp. and Household International Inc. Mr. Lynch also is betting on American Express Co. -- now the fifth largest holding in the $12.5 billion fund -- and Norwest Corp., Minneapolis, which he describes as half finance company and half bank. 

Magellan also has acquired or increased stakes in what Mr. Lynch calls "overlooked or improving utilities," including Southern Co., Centerior Energy Corp. and DPL Inc., Dayton, Ohio. 

Nestle S.A. of Switzerland, which wasn't in the fund six months ago, now is among its top 25 holdings.
Mr. Lynch says Nestle is trailing other food stocks despite its "great quality" and "great record" and says, "It didn't make sense to have it selling at a discount just because it's in Switzerland." 

Despite Mr. Lynch's spectacular 10-year record, he told holders at the fund's recent annual meeting that he is proudest of his performance over the past five years, a period in which the fund has had one million or more shareholders. 

Magellan ranks 21st on the five-year list.
Most of the funds above it are international funds that have benefited from the dollar's decline. 

Percentage gains for periods ended Sept. 30; assets as of June 30 

N.A.=Not available 

Source: Lipper Analytical Services Inc. 

