.START 

Battered by multiple central bank interventions in Asia and Europe, the dollar closed mixed in subdued trading. 

The dollar rose against the pound and yen but closed lower against the mark and other major currencies. 

Foreign exchange dealers said the market remains focused on the outcome of today's Bundesbank central bank council meeting, adding that few participants were willing to stake positions ahead of the council's decision on whether to raise key lending rates. 

While turmoil in Panama helped bolster the dollar Tuesday, news about the Central American nation yesterday had little, if any, impact on the foreign exchange market, traders said. 

The dollar reached an intraday low of 1.8730 marks, with several dealers saying the slide was more a reflection of the mark's strength than the dollar's weakness.
The mark has posted steady gains this week as the market expects an increase in German interest rates.
Sterling, in particular, has come under heavy selling pressure against the mark. 

Late in the New York trading day, the dollar was quoted at 1.8813 marks, down from 1.8873 marks late Tuesday in New York.
The U.S. currency was changing hands at 141.60 yen, up from 141.25 yen in New York late Tuesday.
Sterling was trading at $1.6020, down from $1.6045. 

In Tokyo Thursday, the dollar opened for trading at 141.50 yen, up from Wednesday's Tokyo close of 140.60 yen. 

Several rounds of aggressive dollar-selling by the Bank of Japan, the Bundesbank and the Bank of England Wednesday, knocked the dollar well below Tuesday's levels against the mark.
The Bank of England, attempting to support the wobbly pound, bought sterling for dollars and European Currency Units five times during the day. 

The dollar, which rose to almost 142 yen in Tokyo trading, lost some steam due to the interventions, but closed above Tuesday's levels.
Traders attributed the yen's weakness to the anticipated German rate increase, noting that the chances of Japan following suit are slim. 

West German bankers and economists predict that the Bundesbank will increase rates at least one-half percentage point, while some market analysts predict a full-point rise.
The German discount rate now stands at 5% and the Lombard rate at 7%. 

News that Germany's unemployment rate fell to 7.3% in September, the lowest level since July 1982, from 7.5% in August may provide added ammunition to central bank council members who want a significant rate increase.
A full-point German rate increase could force Britain to raise its base rates to block a sharp decline in sterling. 

"A number of other European countries, especially the British, feel they would have to follow the Germans' lead and they aren't anxious to do so," said Samuel Lek, foreign exchange managing director at Bear Stearns & Co. in New York. 

Mr. Lek said the foreign exchange market has already factored a half percentage point, if not a full percentage point, increase into its dealings.
The effect is to put the Bundesbank under pressure from the market to raise rates, he added. 

"It's really becoming a circular problem for them, with no way out," he said, explaining that the market appears to be pulling the Bundesbank toward higher rates while the EMS partners are exerting an opposite influence.
Other traders concur, adding that if the West Germans don't raise rates at least a half point then the dollar will soar against all major currencies, including the mark. 

Indeed, many market participants expect a solid show of force, in the form of coordinated central bank interventions, after the West German meeting. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $367 an ounce, up 10 cents.
Estimated volume was a light 1.5 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Thursday, gold was quoted at $366.85 an ounce. 

