.START 

Imagine socking away more money in a quarter than you usually do in a year. 

Investors in many stock mutual funds did just that in the third quarter.
Swept up by a surging market, stock funds had an eye-popping three-month return of 9.21%, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc. 

This total return, or price change plus dividends, was the strongest by stock funds as a group for any quarter since 1987's first period.
And it about matched the average annual return for stocks in the past 60 years. 

Stock funds that invest partly or completely in foreign companies were among the best of the bunch, shrugging off currency gyrations to post double-digit gains.
U.S. growth funds, which invest chiefly in stocks of small, rapidly expanding companies, jumped more than 10%.
But bond funds barely broke even as they were dragged down by weakness in prices for high-risk, high-yield junk bonds. 

For the nine months, stock funds posted a staggering average return of 25.4%.
Every fund category boasted quarterly gains, for the first time in 2 1/2 years. 

But stock-fund investors expecting the windfall to continue could soon be let down, analysts say. 

"A lot of investors have become very spoiled" and will be disappointed when stock funds cool, says Kenneth Gregory of Litman/Gregory & Co., a San Francisco investment advisory firm.
Adds A. Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical: "Some people will believe these gains are built in." 

Despite the strong returns, the funds' run-up failed to match Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, which rose 10.7% for the quarter and 29% for the nine months assuming dividends were reinvested.
That marks the sixth consecutive quarter -- and the 23rd time in the past 30 quarters -- that the funds on average have lagged behind the index.
Major reasons: Funds' cash holdings, currently about 10% of assets, and their management costs. 

International stock funds, which invest outside the U.S., posted a total return of 13.8% for the quarter.
Global stock funds, investing both here and overseas, jumped 11.7%.
Many of the top-performing funds had sizable Japanese holdings. 

In a major shift, both categories were bolstered far more by surging foreign stock markets than by a weakening U.S. dollar, which boosts the value of portfolios denominated in foreign currencies.
International funds overall picked up only about 3% from currency changes in the quarter, estimates Jon Woronoff, publisher of the International Fund Monitor, a Washington-based newsletter.
The rest of the gains, he says, stemmed from strong foreign markets. 

"Until now, people said that it's not really the markets, it's the currency," Mr. Woronoff says. "But this time you can refute the argument that international funds are only interesting with a weak dollar." 

At the $38 million T. Rowe Price International Discovery Fund, for instance, the 24% gain for the quarter stemmed largely from market appreciation of the stocks of small foreign companies it holds, says M. David Testa, fund chairman.
About one-third of the portfolio is lodged in Japan. 

The most aggressive domestic stock funds fared best.
Besides the double-digit gains in growth funds for the quarter, small-company growth funds and capital appreciation funds rode the wave of rising stock prices. 

Some more narrowly focused funds also stood out.
Those that invest solely in health and biotechnology companies shot up 16.7% and those concentrating in science and technology issues rose 10.3%. 

Even gold-oriented funds, laggards for nearly two years amid slumping bullion prices, showed some life; they rose an average 7.4% for the quarter.
In fact, some fund specialists say it's time for investors to consider adding a smattering of gold funds again to their portfolio.
Kanon Bloch Carre & Co., a Boston-based research company, recently gave clients a buy signal on gold funds, only its fourth such recommendation in the past 20 years. 

Not all gold funds glittered, however.
And not all of them hold all gold stocks.
Strategic Gold/Minerals Fund, which fell 5.7% for the quarter, trailed all 1,741 mutual funds tracked by Lipper for the nine-month and one-year periods.
The reason, according to fund manager Grant Brenna: Nearly one-third of the fund's portfolio isn't in gold-mining shares at all, but in oil stocks. 

As a group, bond funds brought up the rear: Fixed-income funds averaged a measly 0.6% return for the quarter and 7.5% for the nine months.
And they managed to eke out that slim total return only because of interest income. 

Those hardest hit by far were junk funds, which were roiled by debt problems at several highly leveraged companies.
As a group, these funds lost 1.27% for the three months, according to preliminary data released by Lipper.
Twenty of the bottom 25-performing funds for the period were junk portfolios. 

Rising interest rates also hammered the most aggressive bond funds, particularly zero-coupon bond funds.
These funds, which invest in bonds sold at a deep discount and don't pay any interest until they mature, are thus affected more than other bond funds by fluctuations in interest rates. 

The performance of zero-coupon bond funds, which surged in the second quarter, highlights the fickleness of quarterly rankings.
Another case in point: International funds, this quarter's winners, lagged badly in the second quarter.
The zigzagging results underscore the risks to investors of jumping on the latest hot fund group, financial advisers say. 

