.START 

A good laugh isn't what it used to be.
At least not at the movies.
More and more, comedy is keeping company with murder, torture and other violence. 

It's not that comedies have not had violent scenes; many of them have.
What is new is that violence and comedy are woven into the same scenes in quality, mainstream films. 

We are not talking here about the Three Stooges, but realistic portrayals of violence, the kind that should make us cringe.
As with any dilution of the moral code, it is happening at an almost imperceptible rate, sneaking in here and there.
What shocks at first becomes routine the fourth time, and "normal" the 14th. 

The line in mainstream films was crossed in 1976 in "Silver Streak," a successful comedy with gratuitous violence spicing up the slapstick.
It was not generally thought of as a black comedy, and the genres began to be blurred. 

The next breach was in 1978's "Foul Play," in which a senile pope applauds at a theater as the curtain comes down, upon which are dead security guards, festooned like shells and buoys in a net at a seaside bar.
The joke is on the pope, who is so out of touch that he doesn't notice the dead people.
Or maybe he does.
Ha ha, gosh, what will that zany pontiff do next?
As comedy, it is sophomoric; as religious satire, it is less than sophomoric.
We are not supposed to worry about whether the guards had families; they are merely props not accorded the dignity of their own deaths. 

In "Prizzi's Honor" (1985), the slyly wrought tale of a hitman and hitwoman who fall in love, innocent folks are once again caught in the crossfire.
This doesn't slow down the madcap antics of these evil-but-cute killers.
An innocent woman is gunned down by mistake in an elevator as she arrives with an armload of groceries.
The killers see this as an inconvenience.
Oops.
Shrug.
Ha ha. 

Audience: Oops.
Hmm.
Well, shrug, Ha ha.
We are supposed to be laughing, right?
The reviews said this was a comedy, right?
No sense spoiling a good flick with concern over a graphic random killing] 

Likewise, in last year's "A Fish Called Wanda," we are not supposed to be disturbed when an inept killer is crushing a woman's pet dogs to death; we are supposed to laugh at his inability to kill the woman herself, which he finally does when she has a heart attack over the carnage.
Are you laughing yet?
The people at the theater I went to were howling.
A couple of viewers cocked their heads as if they sensed something out of balance, but then succumbed to the good humor around them.
Who wants to be a wet blanket? 

Perhaps the most disturbing mix of violence and comedy was in the biggest hit of this summer.
In "Batman," innocent people die grotesque, agonizing deaths while "Joker" Jack Nicholson cracks one-liners.
The result is an audience uneasily laughing at ghoulish depictions of human suffering.
But laugh they do. 

In a class by themselves are the slasher films, in which young people lose their lives in varied ways, often inventively and with much loss of blood and limbs.
Ask the fans -- usually teens -- why they aren't repulsed and they remind you that you aren't supposed to take it seriously.
It's a kick.
That's all. 

And, perhaps, so it is.
But as you look around the theaters and hear people guffawing at less cartoonish horrors, you will notice young people laughing the heartiest.
You could conclude that the young have always been more callous than their elders.
After all, they have no sense of their own mortality and little acquaintance with real-life tragedy to temper their indiscriminate exuberance.
You could also say they have been "dulled down" by watching 10,000 killings on television.
But you might also wonder about the impact of slasher films, where violence is the comedy, and mainstream films that use killings as a comic device. 

Not so many years ago, a little comedy called "King of Hearts" was a cult favorite of college students.
It is the tale of a first world war soldier's reactions to French villagers, who unknown to him are escaped inmates from an asylum.
They have taken the roles -- butcher, baker, ballerina -- of the former inhabitants of the deserted town.
The soldier is captivated by their sweet goofiness.
But before he can rejoin his outfit, his comrades enter the town and encounter enemy soldiers.
As the two sides slaughter each other, the lunatics soberly slip back into the asylum, a "saner" world.
Contrasted with the preceding levity, it is a powerful message. 

If "King of Hearts" were filmed today by some other filmmakers, they might not resist going for one more big laugh at the end.
Right after the killings.
Or better yet, during. 

Mr. Knight is a media fellow at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University. 

