.START 

The Justice Department said it sued Southeast Connectors Inc. to recover about $1.2 million in damages related to allegedly faulty electrical connectors that the Miami company sold to the government for use in military aircraft. 

The connectors are used to transfer electrical signals from one piece of equipment to another.
In a suit filed Monday in federal court in Miami, the government alleged that Southeast Connectors falsely described the condition and quality of connectors in contract bids made between 1980 and 

Also named as a defendant in the government's suit was Edward Neil Bonavia, president of the company and its sole shareholder.
Neither Mr. Bonavia nor other Southeast Connectors officials could be reached for comment. 

British firms should brace for "acute, albeit temporary, pain," warns David Kern, chief economist for NatWest. 

Mr. Kern's gloom stems from a string of recent economic indicators showing that Britain's inflationary pressure hasn't lost potency despite 15 months of rising interest rates.
The U.K. current-account deficit is headed toward a record 20 billion pounds ($32.08 billion) this year, suggesting a still-healthy appetite for imports.
Wage-settlement increases have been running at more than 9%. 

Economists predict that because of the inflationary signs, interest rates will remain high, possibly hitting 15%, particularly if sterling continues to come under pressure.
Unemployment, falling for more than two years, will begin to rise sometime next year when growth in U.K. gross domestic product will likely slide to 1.5%, Mr. Kern forecasts. 

The light at the end of the tunnel should come in mid-1991, Mr. Kern predicts, after a major corporate retrenchment. 

Soviet cooperatives, which provide goods and services rarely available in the state sector, must deal with corrupt officials who routinely demand big bribes, a Moscow newspaper reported.
The Moskovskaya Pravda said, "It is well known that without bribes today you cannot get the necessary permission {to open a cooperative} or premises." The size of the bribe increases with the desirability of the location, with 3 square feet of space running at between $480 to $800, it said. "And who takes these bribes?" the newspaper asked, answering: "Responsible officials, frequently Communists." 

Air New Zealand canceled all its domestic passenger flights and a number of international services until midafternoon today due to a dispute with cabin crews, the airline said yesterday.
The crews planned to hold stop-work meetings in the morning to discuss the dispute, which centers on staffing new long-range Boeing 747-400s.
The airline said the cancellations would include six return flights to Australia.
In Australia itself, airline pilots said they were withdrawing a 30% pay-hike demand that is at the heart of a dispute disrupting Australia's domestic air services; instead, the pilots are seeking an unspecified increase based on a 25% increase in productivity. 

Four Brazilian fruit-juice makers are planning to enter the Japanese market and to build a huge juice-storage tank complex, a Japanese trading-house official said.
The move is designed to take advantage of Japan's deregulation of squeezed orange-juice imports in 1992.
A report in the Nihon Keizai Shimbun said the four companies, accounting for 60% of all squeezed orange juice in the world, will build tanks that are capable of holding up to 18,000 metric tons of squeezed juice.
The juice will be shipped from Brazil on tankers. 

Crime in Japan, traditionally one of the world's safest countries, is on the increase, says a report by Japan's Justice Ministry. 

But violent crime is actually decreasing in Japan, the report said.
Of 1988's 2,207,380 Japanese criminal cases, including traffic violations, only 1,441 were for murder, down from 1,584 in 1987.
Japan's population is 123 million. 

Justice Ministry sources attributed the increase in Japanese crime, up 74,763 cases from 1987, to relatively minor crimes such as traffic violations and petty theft. 

Thefts in Japan for 1988 accounted for roughly 1.4 million cases, according to the Justice Ministry. 

Hong Kong is fighting an outbreak of malaria among Vietnamese boat people, with 255 diagnosed as having the disease, health officials said.
Malaria has been almost eradicated in Hong Kong but is endemic in Vietnam. . . . The Brazilian government raised the retail price of gasoline and alcohol fuel 10% to compensate for inflation.
The pump price of gasoline rose to 2.03 new cruzados a liter, or about $1.95 a gallon. 

