.START 

Money managers beat the stock market in the first nine months of the year, and top managers don't see any reason to retreat from stocks despite this year's dizzying advances. 

Money managers posted an average 30% gain on their stock portfolios in the first nine months, topping a 28.9% rise for Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.
For the 12 months ended Sept. 30, the professional managers trailed the market by a hair, posting an average increase of 32.7% against 32.9% for the S&P 500. 

The nine-month results for the 448 money managers tracked by CDA Investment Technologies Inc. show that many investment advisers have been successful in finding individual stocks that have outpaced even the surging stock market.
That extended the pattern of the past year, and reverses the trend of much of the 1980s when the stock market as a whole did better than did the choices of most professional stock pickers. 

But even as market indexes have pushed to new highs, including records set this week by the S&P 500 and the Dow Jones Industrial Average, top-performing managers say they see ample opportunities for price gains left in the market. 

"In January, nobody thought this would be one of the best years in history," said Franklin Crews, president of Market Research & Management Inc., Hutchinson, Kan., which manages about $450 million for clients and was one of the top performers measured by CDA. "The market goes until its stops," and investors should hang on to stocks until there's a clear sign that the post-crash rally is over, he said. 

William Jeffery, partner in La Jolla, Calif.-based Wall Street Associates Inc., saw buying opportunities in companies whose earnings have been underestimated this year by analysts expecting a recession. "A lot of analysts are hindered by their economists," he said. "There are a lot of excellent opportunities out there." 

Retailing stocks, typically avoided by those expecting an economic downturn, have proved stellar performers for Wall Street Associates, which has $240 million under management.
Strong earnings of Quiksilver Inc., a clothing designer that has entered the retail field, pushed its stock to $24.625 at yesterday's close on the over-the-counter market.
Wall Street Associates' average purchase price for Quiksilver was $9 a share. 

Costco Wholesale Corp., another of the firm's holdings, rose to $30.375 at yesterday's close in OTC trading, double its price at the start of the year.
Mr. Jeffrey, who looks for small-capitalization companies in the $100 million to $400 million range, said these stocks remain "incredibly cheap on a relative basis and on an absolute basis." 

Another top-performing manager following the small-stock strategy, Milwaukee-based National Investment Services of America, invested 15% of its $300 million stock portfolio in each of three industries and has hit the jackpot with all of them since the start of the year, said Eugene Martin, executive vice president. 

In the shoe industry, L.A. Gear Inc. rose 300%, while Nike Inc. Class B shares and Stride Rite Corp. have doubled.
Medical-instrument companies St. Jude Medical Inc. and Biomet Inc. have doubled, and pollution-control concerns Wellman Inc. and Calgon Carbon Corp. also have doubled. 

"We look for companies that have 20% earnings growth for three years and have an unregulated monopoly without any competition to start with," said Mr. Martin. "We're still finding these types of stocks to buy." 

Another top-ranked money manager, Morris Mark of New York-based Mark Asset Management Inc., has been successful with companies with "strong consumer or business franchises," such as PepsiCo Inc., Philip Morris Cos. and Walt Disney Co. 

But his strategy isn't limited to household names.
He owns Comair Holdings Inc., a feeder airline with strong ties to Delta Air Lines. "I basically like the major airline business, and to me, somebody who has a good relationship with them has a franchise," said Mr. Mark. 

Airlines also figured into the strong performance of San Francisco-based Richard C. Blum & Associates.
The firm uses its $400 million in assets to take big stakes in a small number of companies, typically with the consent of management.
A Blum partner also often joins the board of the companies in which positions are taken. 

But the firm's big winner so far this year -- UAL Corp. -- came from a different route.
Blum & Associates had invested $100 million in the NWA Inc. airline takeover as part of the group led by Alfred Checchi.
From its research on NWA, the firm decided to buy 300,000 shares of UAL at about $134 each.
It closed yesterday at $282.375 on the New York Stock Exchange. "We invested at the right time," said Blum Managing Director Alexander M. Heymeyer of the UAL stake, part of which the firm has since sold. 

CDA, based in Rockville, Md., compiles the performance data from public filings money managers make each quarter with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The data aren't precise because CDA calculates the returns as though the stocks were held for the entire quarter, without any stocks being bought or sold.
The results don't reflect cash or convertible securities held in the portfolios.
There also isn't any calculation for fees paid by clients. 

Here are results for top stock managers with accounts of more than $10 million for the nine months ended Sept. 30, as compiled by CDA Investment Technologies Inc.: 

Here are results for top stock managers with accounts of more than $10 million for the 12 months ended Sept. 30, as compiled by CDA Investment Technologies Inc.: 

