.START 

Everybody loves a leader, especially the stock market. 

Stock watchers have always wanted one big stock they could cite as the market's bellwether -- the first to signal bear markets and to march the market ahead to new highs.
For about 28 years, the market leader was General Motors Corp.
Since 1973, the bellwether has been International Business Machines Corp. 

But now IBM is in danger of being dethroned from its 16-year reign as the king of stocks.
This week, something strange happened.
As the stock market soared with a 40-point rally Tuesday, Big Blue staggered and stumbled to a loss of $2.625. 

Technical analysts were aghast.
Jack Solomon at Bear, Stearns Cos. said bellwether IBM had become the Judas goat, "leading sheep to slaughter." 

Though IBM is still the single most influential stock in Standard & Poor's 500-stock index and one of the 30 big stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, traders and investors are beginning to doubt the stock's pathfinder status. "I don't think the fate of IBM means anything for the fate of the market or the economy," says Joan Finsilver, managing director at Brean Murray, Foster Securities Inc. 

So the search is on for a new leader.
Big, well-known consumer-products stocks, such as Philip Morris Cos. and Procter & Gamble, clearly stole the spotlight from IBM this week, rallying powerfully with the market and ignoring the sickly performance of Big Blue. 

But stock traders don't expect a swift coup d'etat.
They say Philip Morris (known as "Big Mo" for its stock symbol MO), Procter & Gamble, American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and Merck & Co. will assume a tag-team leadership for the next month or two.
And some don't think that IBM has lost its grip on the title. "Philip Morris and Procter & Gamble are having their moment of glory," said Edward Laux, head block trader at Kidder, Peabody & Co. "But I don't think IBM will {permanently} lose its luster." Rather than a leader, IBM has been a glaring stock market laggard.
The prestigious high-tech issue is only $5 above its Oct. 19, 1987, low of $103.25.
Since that date, IBM is up 4.8%.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average is up about 60%. 

"We've had five years of bad news," Barry Bosak, analyst at Smith Barney, said of the blue-chip computer maker. "It did look like the company was getting the mud off their shoes and climbing up on the running boards," but disappointments keep coming, he said. 

Last week, IBM -- long regarded as the best-managed and among the most innovative companies in America -- saw its stock plunge $6 when it announced that profits this year will be lower than analysts' expectations. 

Yesterday, Big Blue's chairman, John Akers, played down the company's troubles as native to big technology companies, and the market turned a curious, hopeful ear.
IBM closed at $108.25, up $2.25, on volume of three million shares in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. 

It may be impossible for IBM to remain a reliable bellwether for stocks, given the volatile swings of stocks in the technology sector. "I am not sure if it ever was quite the emperor, given its record over the past four or five years," said William Easterbrook, analyst for Kidder Peabody. "It has to do with the computer industry.
Parts of it are a commodity business where it is tough to make profit margins, and product cycles are shortening." 

Revenue growth in the computer sector is "single-digit," about 8% this year, Mr. Easterbrook figures.
That's one reason investors are bailing out of IBM. Big Blue's weighting in many institutional portfolios is dropping to 2% or 3% of total holdings, compared with 6% in the early 1980s, says Mr. Bosak of Smith Barney. 

Moreover, some analysts say that the tax laws are working against cyclical capital goods producers such as IBM in the stock market while favoring takeover candidates.
David Hale, senior economist of Kemper Financial Services Inc., says the tax system favors companies that can load up on debt.
Consequently, corporations such as brand-name food and consumer-product companies that can generate steady sales to meet interest payments are being valued more highly on their buy-out potential. 

Takeover premiums aside, investors do recognize Philip Morris's earnings power.
The company is trading at a price-earnings ratio of about 17, while IBM is trading at 11. 

Some traders believe the stock market ultimately will demand a new leader. "The market always needs some influence to follow," said Mr. Solomon of Bear Stearns. "We kill ourselves looking for sectors and groups, instead of looking at what always makes the market move: earnings." 

