.START 

a macaw obtained in a barter deal -- loudly greets visitors to Atwood Richards Inc. here.
Throughout the offices, the clutter of wine bottles, wristwatches, leather coats and assorted bric-a-brac reveals the business at hand: the constant trading of almost anything and everything that companies make or could possibly ever need. 

But more than a talking bird makes this company rare.
While many small businesses are aping assorted practices of Japanese companies, Atwood says it took its whole business concept from Japan.
And its fortunes have surged. 

The 31-year-old closely held company, which has about 110 employees, used to stick to a narrow track, mostly arranging swaps of radio commercial time for office furniture and other products needed by American broadcasters.
But in 1974, entrepreneur Moreton Binn took control of the company.
He started remolding it along lines inspired by the bartering practices of the huge, freewheeling Japanese trading firms that helped their country recover after World War II. No longer confined to one industry or country, Atwood sees itself as a "driving gear" for all sorts of deals, in numerous industries and countries. (It currently has nine European offices.) 

The Japanese strategy has set Atwood apart from traditional American barter deal makers.
And the company's revenue and profit have soared more than twelvefold since 1974, says Mr. Binn, its chief executive.
The 53-year-old entrepreneur, called the "baron of barter" by a Japanese magazine, declines to disclose sales or earnings.
But he says Atwood has 128 active clients and each deal typically involves more than $1 million in goods and services. 

As a Japanese-style trader, Atwood takes a broad view of barter, which it says "is light years removed from simple, two-way exchanges of goods." Many U.S. deal makers merely collect commissions for matching buyers and sellers.
But Atwood takes title to goods and services, which it buys on speculation.
Its clients, paid mostly in trade credits rather than cash, can use the credits to buy any items in the diverse Atwood inventory. 

"I don't know of anybody else doing this -- Atwood Richards seems unique," says one client, Edmund S. Wright, president of North American Refractories Co. 

Certainly Atwood's deals, or chains of deals, can be dizzying.
Once, Atwood purchased the equivalent of about $4 million in Zimbabwe's currency that Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. had received for rubber belting.
Goodyear -- whose Zimbabwe funds had been blocked from transfer outside that country -- used Atwood trade credits to obtain chemicals and other products and services in the U.S. Atwood used the blocked funds to pay for the manufacture of towels in that country.
It exported the towels to U.S. hotels, in exchange for credits for rooms.
Goodyear, among others, wound up using some of the hotel rooms. 

Atwood, which says it sells about one-fifth of its goods and services for cash, took on its current outline because Mr. Binn admired the Mitsui and Mitsubishi trading companies in Japan.
Initially, he says, they mainly arranged deals for others.
Later, he says, they learned to take their own positions in commodities and manufactured goods.
Eventually, the companies had a client base big enough to support their own manufacturing. 

Mr. Binn made his first move to broaden Atwood by buying -- for credits good for radio time -- a chemical company's excess inventory of pesticide strips.
Broadcasters had no use for these, so Atwood had to find new clients, which included cruise lines that paid Atwood with credits toward ocean voyages.
Now the company trades such varied items as business forms, appliances, computers, cars, airplanes, sporting goods and toys.
To avoid bumping heads with the biggest commodities traders, Atwood grows mostly by handling manufactured items. 

And Mr. Binn loves to deal in odd products that others tend to shun, such as excess lollipop inventories.
He also boasts of a 20% profit earned in only four months by speculating on a frozen-food company's excess inventory of stuffed baked potatoes. 

In one high-profile deal, Atwood traded construction gear, safety nets and security service for the Eiffel Tower Restaurant in Paris -- which it disassembled and moved to New Orleans for a client, in exchange for an interest in the reconstructed restaurant.
The Atwood inventory -- which its clients hold in their warehouses even after Atwood takes title -- today includes $15 million in motors, $1 million in silk ties from Italy and $2.5 million in French wine. 

"This never gets boring -- it's like an adult candy store," says Mr. Binn, who as a child in New York traded comic books, marbles and guppies.
Later, after dropping out of an M.B.A. program at New York University, Mr. Binn started a career in marketing.
In 1974, he and three others bought Atwood, on undisclosed terms, from Cooper Laboratories Inc. (Today, Atwood has only one holder besides Mr. Binn.) 

For all his success, Mr. Binn has acquired some white elephants.
He recalls losing hundreds of thousands of dollars on books; such titles as "Dynamite" turned out to be less than dynamite.
Atwood lost even more on lawn-feeding devices. 

"At first, the things that Atwood had in the inventory weren't of any value to us," says Mr. Wright of American Refractories, which supplies brick used in the steel industry.
But the company, with Atwood's help, got a dozen of its own suppliers to join Atwood's barter network. 

Although Mr. Wright warns that corporate purchasing bureaucracies don't like the "loss of autonomy" implicit in working with barter firms, he says the process pays for companies that work hard to make their trade credits useful.
Barter deals sometime allow companies to make sales they couldn't make for cash, get rid of inventory quickly for more than a liquidator might pay, or satisfy foreign countries reluctant to transfer hard currency. 

Again following the Japanese, Atwood is considering going into manufacturing -- initially by making athletic wear in Poland and glass jars in Hungary.
Within two or three years, Atwood says, 20% of its revenue will be from manufacturing. 

