.START 

Researchers here reported promising results with a new imaging technique for detecting sites of infection and possibly some kinds of cancer. 

The experimental technique, developed at Massachusetts General Hospital, is easy, fast and cheap, and hence it might benefit tens of thousands of patients annually in the U.S. who get hard-to-spot pockets of infections, said Robert Rubin, a doctor who helped develop the technique.
Such patients include people who have had abdominal surgery, those with joint pain possibly due to infection and people with unexplained fevers suspected to be caused by hidden infections. 

The technique employs radioactive tracers linked to human immune molecules called IgG, which home in on inflamed areas stemming from infections.
When injected, the substance highlights sites of inflammation in pictures taken with so-called gamma cameras, which already are widely used for different imaging purposes.
The radiation exposure from an injection is comparable to that of an abdominal X-ray, the Massachusetts General researchers said. 

In a study of 128 patients with suspected infections, the technique correctly identified 51 who actually were infected, the researchers reported.
In five of the 51 infected patients, a commonly used imaging technique called CT scanning failed to reveal sites of infection.
The new technique didn't miss any of the infected patients, but it incorrectly indicated that five patients without infections had them. 

The study was reported in today's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.
In an accompanying editorial, doctors at the State University of New York at Stony Brook said the new technique's ease of use should allow it to be used "in a wider array of medical facilities" than other infection-screening methods based on radioactive tracers. 

The Massachusetts General researchers also reported that the new technique correctly revealed tumors in 13 of 16 patients who had them.
Dr. Rubin said the technique apparently shows tumors that are under attack by immune cells in a process that causes inflammation.
He added that the technique might someday be used to help detect the spread of cancer cells and to show which patients need immune boosters to help destroy their tumors. 

The technique has been licensed to Johnson & Johnson, which is conducting separate clinical trials on it, Dr. Rubin said. 

