.START 

Donahue begat Oprah, who begat Sally, who begat Geraldo. 

The already over-populated talk-show arena is about to get a bit more crowded with the entry of the Rev. Jesse Jackson and the actress Jane Fonda. 

Warner Bros.
Domestic Television Distribution, a subsidiary of Time Warner Inc., has called a news conference for this morning, where TV insiders say it will announce a weekly talk show hosted by the Rev. Jackson that it hopes to sell to television stations through syndication. 

Meanwhile, Coastline Partners, a joint venture of MCA Inc. and King World Productions Inc., is developing a weekday morning talk show for Ms. Fonda.
While it won't actually star the health-conscious actress/fitness instructor, Ms. Fonda will appear regularly and the title of the show will likely include her name. 

According to those with knowledge of the Fonda project, the show will not be designed as a forum for Ms. Fonda's liberal political views, or for her to demonstrate aerobics.
Sauter/Piller/Percelay Productions, an independent production company headed by, among others, the former CBS News president Van Gordon Sauter, is developing the program for Ms. Fonda. 

"Jane is supportive of the process," says one person involved in the show, "which could lead to the development of a quality morning program that fills an important market need and is consistent with both her professional and personal interests." In other words, it isn't likely to stoop to such topics as those covered on Geraldo Rivera's daily talk-show, such as "Couples Addicted to Sex," or "Women Who Marry the Men Who Rape Them." 

The Rev. Jackson, who got plenty of TV exposure from his own failed bid for the Democratic presidential nomination, is also unlikely to tackle some of the steamier topics on the talk-show circuit these days.
But sources familiar with the planned show say it won't be confined just to politics; entertainers and singers will appear with the Rev. Jackson as well. 

This is not the first time that the Rev. Jackson's name has surfaced as a possible talk-show host.
Earlier this year, executives from King World telephoned TV station managers and asked if they would be interested in such a show. 

The syndication market for one-hour weekly programs is not an easy one to crack and it is believed Warner Bros.
Domestic Television is going to rely on the Rev. Jackson's name value. "There is no doubt that the market for weekly shows is tight," said Mitchell Praver, vice president and direction of programming at Katz Continental Television, a station consultant. "But stations are always looking for strong programs" to air before or after their local newscasts on the weekends. 

While TV stations are always willing to listen to a concept that can help boost ratings, some TV executives are skeptical. "Jesse talks well," one TV station manager says. "He just doesn't listen too well." 

