.START 

When Imperial Beach, Calif., invested amounts averaging $195,000 over a recent four-month period, its broker generated $104,000 for himself and his firm, according to the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In the process, the city lost $10,120 plus its initial investment, which was turned over 20 times through various investments. 

The SEC, citing the Imperial Beach case and those of six other California cities with investments handled by two Los Angeles-area brothers, permanently barred the men from associating with any broker or investment concern.
The agency found the brothers generated outrageously high commissions -- a total of at least $1,750,000 -- by "churning" investments they were making for California municipalities. 

Among the victims: Rancho Palos Verdes, featured in a current Los Angeles magazine article as among the nation's richest suburbs. 

The SEC alleged that the brokers, William E. Parodi Sr., 47 years old, of Woodland Hills, and Frederick W. Parodi, 35, of Canoga Park, put the money of the municipalities, plus three local agencies, into high-risk bonds and "engaged in excessive and unsuitable trading." 

The SEC also said it suspended the brokers' supervisors at the former Little Rock, Ark.-based broker-dealer, First Investment Securities Inc.
It barred Gary W. Chambers and William F. Smith, founder of First Investment Securities, from supervising any broker, securities dealer or other investment adviser for a year.
The SEC said they failed to supervise the Parodis adequately. 

The brokers and their supervisors settled with the agency without admitting or denying the SEC's charges.
Attorneys for the Parodis, Mr. Smith and Mr. Chambers couldn't be reached for comment. 

Rancho Palos Verdes invested amounts averaging $1,120,000 between May 1986 and March 1987, the SEC said.
During that time, it said, William Parodi, who handled the account, generated $190,000 in commissions from the account, which turned over 46 times.
The city lost $68,140. 

Kevin Smith, the city's treasurer, said he complained to E.F. Hutton & Co., which in August 1987 agreed to pay the city its principal amount plus about 3% interest.
The Parodis worked both at E.F. Hutton & Co. and at First Investment Securities in 1986 and in 1987 while they conducted the trades, the SEC said.
E.F. Hutton wasn't cited in the SEC charges. 

