.START 

The United Airlines machinists union, in a move that could impede a $6.79 billion buy-out proposal from UAL Corp. 's management and pilots union, refused to back the plan and threatened an extended legal and public relations campaign to block the takeover. 

The move could undercut UAL's efforts to win Department of Transportation approval for the buy-out.
In the face of increasing department criticism of airline leveraged buy-outs and foreign stakes in U.S. carriers, UAL had been stressing that its proposal would result in majority ownership for employees.
A rupture with the machinists, United's largest union, could make that point more difficult to argue. 

"This is the most ludicrous transaction we have ever seen," John F. Peterpaul, vice president of the International Association of Machinists, told the House aviation subcommittee at a hearing yesterday in Washington on leveraged airline buy-outs. 

Mr. Peterpaul said the financial plan for the takeover is based on profit and revenue projections that are "totally unrealistic." For instance, UAL is projecting that yields -- the fare a passenger pays to fly one mile -- will increase 3.5% a year between now and 1996, though many industry analysts expect a downturn. 

The pilot-management group has said it can complete the transaction even without the machinists' participation.
However, wage concessions from United's 23,000 machinists in return for UAL stock would help the company pay down its debt more quickly.
UAL issued a statement late yesterday saying it is "prepared to explore ways" to persuade the machinists to participate in the transaction, but declined further comment.
Mr. Peterpaul said in an interview that UAL managers told him at a meeting Tuesday that they didn't intend to restructure the transaction to reflect changes the union had been seeking. 

Mr. Peterpaul quoted the managers as saying that items such as the per-share price of $300, the governance structure and the terms of management's 10% stake and British Airways' 15% stake were "not negotiable." The machinists have complained in particular that UAL management will be paying only $15 million for its stake and will receive new options in the airline valued at an additional $65 to $90 million without putting up any additional cash. 

Mr. Peterpaul said the union plans to "do whatever we have to" do to block the deal in its current form, including possibly seeking a temporary restraining order against UAL. However, he said, the union might reconsider its position if UAL alters the transaction to address its concerns. 

Despite Mr. Peterpaul's threats, the market appeared confident that the transaction will be completed.
UAL stock rose $3.125 to $282.75 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The machinists also failed to achieve one of their other stated goals -- to raise concern among the UAL buy-out group's lenders.
A UAL official said the transaction's bank financing is in no trouble as a result of the machinists' decision. 

"This doesn't make the buy-out impossible. (But) it means labor conflict is going to be a major part of future events," said Joseph R. Blasi, an expert on employee ownership plans. 

United management also appears to be losing ground with its flight attendants union.
The union has balked at the wage concessions management is seeking in return for granting the flight attendants an ownership stake.
The union says the highest paid flight attendants would be forced to take as much as a 24% pay cut, while others would lose 12% of their pay. 

Separately, Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner signaled at the House hearing that he may require debt-laden domestic airlines to meet the same kind of reporting requirements that he recently imposed on Northwest Airlines. 

Those requirements include notifying the department in advance of plans to buy or sell assets worth $50 million or more, and providing figures on maintenance and safety budgets. 

Mr. Skinner indicated that he may extend those requirements to airlines that aren't involved in leveraged buy-outs but have high levels of debt.
Airlines that could be affected include Continental Airlines, a unit of Texas Air Corp., Houston; Pan American World Airways, a unit of Pan Am Corp., New York; and Trans World Airlines, New York. "I think we want a level playing field" on that issue, he said. 

He also appeared to look favorably on legislation pending in both the House and Senate that would give him the authority to order restructuring of leveraged buy-outs before the transactions are completed. "It would be cleaner, more efficient" if the department had prior-approval authority, he said. 

"It is more difficult to unwind the transaction already put together than to be there at the beginning" of the transaction, he said at a Senate hearing yesterday, which also covered leveraged buy-outs and foreign investment in U.S. airlines. 

Mr. Skinner declined to discuss his views on the proposed UAL buy-out, or whether he plans to pressure British Airways PLC to reduce its $750 million equity investment, which is 78% of the total $965 million equity.
He already has forced Northwest Airlines to reduce a stake held by KLM Royal Dutch Airlines to 25% of the equity put up for the takeover of NWA Corp. 

