.START 

Like the nouveaux riches anywhere, Colombia's drug lords want social acceptability. 

Jose Santacruz Londono, a top capo of the Cali cocaine cartel, applied for admission to the city's elite Club Colombia, housed in a striking white building made of large concrete slabs.
He was blackballed. 

So Mr. Santacruz Londono built his own clubhouse, on a hilltop overlooking the ritzy neighborhood where many of the club's members live.
His house is white, too.
It's built with concrete slabs.
In fact, it's a replica of the Club Colombia. 

"It's a joke, it's in such poor taste," says a young club member. 

They have amassed enormous wealth, bought hundreds of thousands of acres for vast rural estates, and infiltrated high levels of the government and armed forces.
But so far, with few exceptions, Colombia's drug lords haven't penetrated respectable society, at least not so far as anyone knows. 

In the city of Medellin, shut out of "The Gray Dames," a traditional ladies' charity organization, the narcos' wives have formed their own, headed by capo Pablo Escobar's mother.
They've named it "Las Damas Plateadas," or "Moneyed Dames." 

The Moneyed Dames have built a church with donated cocaine profits, but so far the Catholic Church hasn't provided a priest.
Sometimes the social one-upmanship gets ugly.
In Pereira, a provincial city that boasts its own mini-mafia, the local country club had to cancel its annual ball, whose theme was "Paris, Paris," after the club's decorator got numerous death threats from the city's narcos. 

"The Cali cartel wants to be accepted," remarks the elegant wife of a leading Cali businessman as she watches her husband play polo at the elite Club Campestre. "They would love to be invited here." (Like many in Colombia today, she won't allow the use of her name for fear of reprisals.) 

Such concerns aren't the Colombian equivalent of American parvenus' attempts to crash the charity ball circuit.
In a country where corruption is so rampant and the rule of law is under constant siege, the integrity of Colombia's social institutions is a cherished vestige of civilization, however elitist they may seem to some. 

General Manuel Bonett, who heads the army's Cali garrison, says the drug lords have already all but overwhelmed the country's economic and political institutions. "The culminating step is social penetration," he says. "That's the one that's been denied them in Colombia.
Society has rejected them." 

Colombia's cocaine barons see themselves as members of the elite who deserve the acceptance they seek.
They portray themselves as successful businessmen and patriots who inject perhaps as much as $2 billion a year into Colombia's economy and provide employment for thousands.
The capos feel that their money is no dirtier than the fortunes made in bananas, coffee and cattle at the turn of the century by the ancestors of Colombia's present Establishment. "They want to be able to move around freely, have their sons accepted in the clubs and be accepted as part of society," says Bruce Bagley, an expert on Colombia and cocaine at the University of Miami. 

The latest developments in Colombia would hardly seem to enhance their quest for respectability.
Since declaring "total and absolute war" on Colombia last month, they are credited with setting off more than 100 bombs, damaging or destroying bank offices, political offices, a newspaper and other businesses.
They have assassinated a former mayor of Medellin, among others.
For many Colombians, the latest violence, beginning with the assassination of Luis Carlos Galan, a leading presidential candidate, has put the narcos beyond the pale. "We can't go back," vows Gen. Bonett. "Eventually we will kill them." 

But if not, the capos' latest assault may be the one that breaks the back of social resistance.
After all, terrorism and their vast wealth have allowed the drug lords to insinuate themselves into almost every other walk of life. 

In the congress, perhaps the most compromised national institution, Sen. Ivan Marulanda, who has often spoken out against the drug mafia, estimates that about 40% of the legislators have taken money for their political campaigns from the drug dealers. 

Some legitimate businessmen, too, have been compromised in varying degrees.
Sen. Marulanda, who represents Antioquia, the state where Medellin is located, notes that while not inviting the narcos to their clubs, many Medellin businessmen were glad to do business with them.
Some sold them houses, others were willing to act as front men. "Society became an accomplice in organized crime," says Sen. Marulanda. "Everybody feels guilty for helping to create this monster." 

"We've all done business with them -- sold them cars or houses," says a Cali banker and polo club member who sometimes has difficulty reaching his office floor because the narcos, who also have offices in his building, have bribed the elevator operators with soccer tickets to stop only at their floors. "It's very difficult to draw the line." 

After all, some drug money has gone to good works.
Mr. Escobar built a barrio of 500 small, brick houses for people who previously lived in cardboard shacks next to the city dump.
He has favored other poor neighborhoods with illuminated soccer fields.
Envigado, a municipality just outside Medellin where the Ochoa drug clan and Mr. Escobar reportedly live, is the only place in Colombia which provides unemployment benefits.
Schools are free, and health care costs one-fifth what it costs in Medellin. 

Due to such largesse and their entrepreneurial spirit, Medellin's coke barons at first met with a grudging admiration from most everyone in the city.
But admiration turned slowly to fear and loathing as the drug barons created schools for assassins and "put a $15 price tag on the value of a life," in the words of one newspaper columnist.
Now, as the fear of more bombs and assassinations persists, there is little love for them outside of the poor neighborhoods that they have benefited directly. 

Driving through Cali's tree-shaded streets, it is easy to see the narcos' influence on this once easygoing sugar and cattle center. "That's mafia," says a socially prominent young businessman, pointing to a sprawling new luxury apartment complex spilling down a hillside.
How does he know? "The buildings put up by the mafia never have signs saying they have been financed by mortgage companies.
No need.
They are built on cash." 

As the drive continues, he points out a furniture showroom featuring bizarre plastic chairs that look like miniature icebergs and a huge lamp modeled on an ostrich egg.
He looks disdainful. "Mafia taste," he sniffs. 

Later, over drinks at the Club Colombia, where the decor leans to tastefully shabby tartan-patterned rugs and prints of 19th century sailing ships rather than iceberg chairs, the businessman gives vent to his hatred of the emergent new class. "They are vulgar, tacky, outlandish, like the Vanderbilts at the turn of the century," he fumes. "Throughout Western history there has been a connection between evil and bad taste." 

So far the narcos may have failed to join high society, but that doesn't mean they don't try to mingle in it.
They so dominate the best restaurant in town, Don Carlos, that many businessmen refuse to go there anymore.
Many businessmen also shun functions at the Intercontinental Hotel, which many feel is a favored narco hangout.
One Cali grand dame would like the cash, but refuses to sell an antique cutglass chandelier out of fear the buyer will be a narco. "I won't sell it to those bandits," she says firmly. 

The cocaine capos have mostly invested their money in expensive real estate.
They also have a taste for discotheques, boutiques, soccer clubs and restaurants.
But they have largely stayed out of Cali's large businesses. 

One prominent exception is Drogerias La Rebaja, one of Colombia's largest pharmacy chains, which is owned by the Rodriguez Orejuela clan.
Because of their wellknown mafia connections, the family's members aren't members of the best clubs. 

Still, some worry that eventually the clubs and Cali's businesses will be penetrated by new generations of mafiosi, who they say are even now getting Ivy League educations in the U.S. "Murderous, with a Harvard degree, and with millions of dollars," mutters one leading businessman. "The combination is diabolical." 

On a recent evening at the Club Campestre, members watch two local polo teams battle for the "Rolex Cup" and discuss the sanctity of the club's membership rolls.
So far, no narcos have been allowed in the club, they say.
But they worry. "The moment they legalize cocaine, they will be in here the next day," says a player during a break in the action.
His wife chimes in that one narco has brazenly told her that in the future, his grandson will marry her granddaughter. 

Since the crackdown began a month ago, the narcos are much less in evidence.
Few luxury cars are parked outside Medellin's Our Lady of Sabaneta Church, where many narcos come to thank the Virgin after a successful drug shipment. "There were beautiful cars -- Mercedes, BMWs," recalls devotee John Garcia. "There were women dripping with gold, so beautiful they made you gasp.
Now they come with their servants' cars or hire taxis," says Mr. Garcia. 

Colombia's establishment has more immediate concerns these days.
At a recent funeral in Medellin for an official murdered by the mafia, there are dozens of bodyguards, an ambulance, a fire truck and a bomb squad.
A nervous industrialist watching the service from under a nearby tree worries that at the current rate, there won't be any respectable society left for the drug lords to infiltrate. "They are eliminating the ruling class," he says. 

