.START 

After the failed coup against Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega Tuesday, President Bush quickly denied that it was "some U.S. operation." His greatest fear apparently was new condemnation of Yankee imperialism.
Basing policy on such concerns is a good way to end up with no policy at all. 

It hardly needed saying that this was not "some U.S. operation." U.S. troops mostly had just watched.
But it could have been.
Well-trained American combat troops were on the scene, only 600 yards away from the fighting.
Noriega claims that the U.S. Army temporarily blocked his rescue units, but even in the unlikely event they had that in mind it did not affect the outcome. 

The result could have been different.
The Panamanian Defense Force, mainly a jumped-up police force, is in no way a match for the U.S. units now deployed in Panama.
U.S. forces were in a perfect position to decide the outcome. 

Quite interestingly, the President is winning little praise for his forbearance.
He has come under political attack not just from the likes of Jesse Helms but also from Democrats, Senators David Boren and Dennis DeConcini in particular.
Senator Boren, head of the Select Committee on Intelligence, came out of a CIA briefing saying, in effect, that the administration had muffed a golden opportunity.
Senator DeConcini said that the U.S. had every right to use force in Panama, a subject he knows something about, since it is spelled out in the "DeConcini condition" of the 1979 Panama Canal treaty. 

As wishy-washy as that treaty was, and however obsequious Jimmy Carter was toward General Omar Torrijos -- Noriega's similarly odious predecessor -- the U.S. didn't simply pull out of Panama.
It retains joint responsibility for the canal's security until the year 2000.
The DeConcini condition ratified by the Senate spells out that the U.S. can use force, even against Panama itself, if the security of the canal is threatened.
The fact that General Torrijos chose to unilaterally reinterpret that clause means nothing, other than what it says about the flimflam that surrounded the entire exercise.
The "new partnership" with Panama that Mr. Carter extolled has been worse than the old one.
Noriega has proved to be a bigger thug than Torrijos.
Indeed, with the treaty in hand, Noriega has thumbed his nose repeatedly at U.S. and world opinion and trashed any semblance of democratic process in Panama.
In 1985, he booted out a president of his own choosing, Nicolas Ardito-Barletta, for not being sufficiently subservient.
He has made common cause with Castro and Gadhafi.
More recently, he has intimidated Americans in Panama, with his troops at one point ordering American schoolchildren out of their buses at gunpoint because of "license plate violations." 

In May, his arrogance reached a new high when he invalidated the election of opposition leader Guillermo Endara.
Mr. Endara and a candidate for second vice president, Guillermo Ford, were beaten up, and one of Mr. Ford's bodyguards killed, by members of a Noriega "Dignity Battalion." 

President Bush has condemned these clear violations of the spirit of the treaty.
Noriega has been accused of complicity in the drug trade and in money laundering.
The U.S. has imposed economic sanctions.
Mr. Bush has persuaded the European Community to end high-level contacts with Noriega and has mobilized some support, most of it ineffectual, from the Organization of American States.
After Noriega stole the presidential election in May, Mr. Bush sent 2,000 additional U.S. troops, bringing the total U.S. force up to 12,000, and moved U.S. dependents onto bases. 

But Noriega is still there and we hear excuses for not acting.
Noriega's likely knowledge that another coup was imminent is one, but his military support could have been neutralized nonetheless.
Some high U.S. military officers still doubt the U.S. political commitment to the use of force, and have reason to do so after Vietnam, the Boland amendments and Iran-Contra.
But then why have a $300 billion defense budget?
The CIA hasn't been able to get money for covert action, which also raises doubts about congressional seriousness, but this one did not have to be covert.
Weakest of all is the argument that the Panamanian people would object to U.S. intervention; they have been signaling the opposite by voting against Noriega. 

Secretary Baker said yesterday that the U.S. does not rule out future use of force, on its own timetable.
At least Tuesday's events uncovered political support the President didn't know he had, or it seems so.
But there might not be any better opportunities than the one that presented itself Tuesday when Noriega's young officers tried to chuck him out. 

