.START 

The Soviet newspaper Izvestia is to publish, in interview form, an exchange between a state Gosbank representative and Wayne Angell, a Federal Reserve governor visiting last month.
Excerpts: 

What in your opinion is necessary to cure the ills of the Soviet economy, to put it "on new rails"? 

You cannot address the apparent ills of the Soviet economy without first introducing a monetary standard of value.
I believe the first thing your government should do is define your monetary unit of account, the ruble, in terms of a fixed weight of gold, and make it convertible at that weight to Soviet citizens, as well as to the rest of the world. 

A gold-convertible ruble is a most unusual proposal.
We have heard convertibility proposed as an eventual goal but not as a first step. 

Why do you think it should be done first? 

Your perestroika reforms face many difficult adjustment problems as you move toward market-oriented socialism.
These become impossible problems without a monetary standard of value that is recognized as having predictable value throughout the Soviet Union -- and the rest of the world -- now and in the future.
Having such a standard for your money would ease the difficulties of all your adjustment problems. 

Do you mean perestroika cannot succeed without a gold-convertible ruble? 

Some believe it might succeed with a mark-, yen- or dollar-convertible ruble, but they realize it would take many years for the Gosbank to obtain central-bank powers and credibility to enable the ruble to trade as a hard currency.
Yes, it is my belief that without an honest money, Soviet citizens cannot be expected to respond to the reforms -- as they do not have a meaningful incentive.
A gold-backed ruble would be seen as an honest money at home and would immediately trade as a convertible currency internationally.
Indeed, I have offered a prediction to several officials of the Soviet government that on the present slow course, the reforms run a very high risk of being set back by a general collapse of confidence in the ruble -- an inflationary disintegration. 

Why is that? 

As long as the Soviet economy was completely controlled at the center, the absence of a real money merely caused a gradual decline in efficiency of your economy relative to the Western market economies.
Now that you have decided to move toward growth and competitiveness with the West, opening up market opportunities through cooperatives and other market-oriented initiatives, your system has been divided in half.
One still relies on wage and price controls and a state budget allocations system in rubles; the other unleashes individual incentives and is dominated by an attempt to obtain hard currencies, especially the dollar. 

How does this affect the confidence of the ruble? 

The two systems compete and the market system every day wins new followers because it is more efficient.
So each day the ruble system loses a fragment of its utility.
The Soviet government, meanwhile, further subsidizes the ruble system by increasing the budget deficit.
The budget deficit is funded by issuing more ruble bank notes and accounts.
Thus, even as demand for the ruble declines, the supply increases.
Where you had been deteriorating at an arithmetic pace, you are on the verge of deteriorating a geometric pace. 

If this is so, inflation will accelerate? 

Exactly.
I have advised officials of your Gosbank of my analysis -- that unless something is done quickly, the Soviet economy will face increasing difficulties. 

Why do you say a gold standard for the U.S.S.R. is called for?
No other country is now on such a convertible standard. 

The Western economies have at least a history of gold convertibility which enabled their currency to start with a base value as they abandoned the Bretton Woods system in 1971.
So, the Soviet people can gain if their government issues an understandable monetary unit of value based on gold.
Besides, your State Bank does not have the power or authority to limit the growth of bank notes or ruble accounts so as to stabilize the ruble's value.
Even if it were to get that authority from the government, it is not likely to have the independence to use it. 

Why do you, a central banker in a country that has demonetized gold, select gold in advising the U.S.S.R.? 

For one thing, I believe gold and other commodity-price signals have become much more important to U.S. policy making in recent years, as we have experienced inflation pains under a floating exchange-rate system.
Gold, after all, remains the most monetary of all commodities, and therefore is the best single conveyor of information as to the appropriate scarcity of money.
Secondly, a single commodity with the universal monetary role of gold is much more simple than attempting to explain a properly weighted commodity price index base.
Thirdly, the U.S.S.R. has vast gold monetary reserves it is not now using effectively.
Your government is one of the largest holders of gold bullion in the world, which would give it great power to establish the credibility of such a policy. 

Wouldn't you fear these reserves would be stripped from the government as Soviet citizens sought to convert surplus rubles into gold? 

That depends entirely on two questions that the government could easily answer.
The first is the ruble/gold exchange rate that the government would announce it would accommodate and defend with its resources.
It cannot be too low or reserves will spill out.
It cannot be too high or it will force additional inflation on the society, robbing Soviet savers of rubles of the rewards of their past labors.
The second is the willingness of the U.S.S.R. to commit itself to the discipline of confining government deficits to the level limited by the gold payments of principal and interest required of the gold bonds.
You cannot go on a gold standard, then continue to fund unlimited budget deficits with State Bank money creation. 

Could you guarantee that by introducing ruble convertibility Soviet gold reserves would not flow out of the country? 

All gold reserves will not flow out of the country or flow into hoards held by Soviet citizens provided that the State Bank not accommodate the government budget deficit.
This means that the current domestic deficit must be financed with bonds, which of course become readily marketable in Moscow, Leningrad, New York and London if the bonds carry the promise to pay principal and interest in gold.
Indeed, I would expect the Soviet Union could step to the front of the line in seeking credit at the lowest possible interest rate.
I would bet such bonds would be snapped up around 3%, which would be the lowest governmental interest rate on earth, including Japan's.
As markets gain experience with Soviet gold-backed bonds, interest on the bonds could be expected to decline, perhaps approaching 2%, the going rate for U.S. gold-mining-company gold bonds. 

What interest rate would Soviet bonds need if the Gosbank had an independent monetary power similar to the Fed? 

The exercise of such independent monetary power would require years to gain credibility.
In the meantime, Soviet bonds would require an inflation-offsetting premium and an uncertainty premium of perhaps 4% to 6% over that of gold bonds.
For instance, if Soviet inflation is currently at 10%, then the expected interest rate would be initially around 18%.
If the inflation rate is higher, then it would take proportionally higher interest rates to stabilize the rate of inflation. 

Other experts in the West advise that the Soviet Union cannot move to ruble convertibility without more consumer goods in our stores, to "mop up" the surplus ruble overhang.
Does this not concern you? 

My point is that in a modern industrial economy, consumer goods will not be produced unless there is a predictable monetary value reward.
Once the government of the U.S.S.R. announces that it will maintain the ruble's gold value with its considerable resources, demand for the ruble will climb.
Soviet citizens and others around the world will want to acquire rubles -- not get rid of them.
The only way to acquire rubles is to work to get them or, as foreigners, exchange foreign work income for them in the form of foreign exchange.
Undoubtedly over time there would be a reserve currency demand for the gold ruble, particularly among countries with close economic and political ties to the 

How soon do you think it would be before we would see palpable benefits from your plan? 

My guess is that the simple announcement would generate instant enthusiasm, a feeling of well-being, among the citizens of the U.S.S.R. Street speculation would disappear overnight and the so-called ruble overhang would be willingly held in deposits by Soviet citizens. 

This sounds very optimistic.
Would this be all you think is required to assure the success of perestroika? 

Not at all.
There are important, critical questions of implementing market-oriented reforms leading to the role of prices in allocating resources, and of tax policies that will have to be set right as well.
But I advise that your government establish a monetary standard, so that you will be less likely to make unnecessary and costly errors on these other important decisions. 

