.START 

In the early 1970s, Zenith Electronics Corp. designed the ultimate portable radio: Matchbook-sized, it would be worn like a pendant, its antenna doubling as a chain.
An earphone carried music to the ear. 

But "My Radio" was owl-shaped, and Zenith executives thought it looked like a ridiculous toy.
They killed the project and donated thousands of the gizmos to veterans' hospitals.
A decade later, Sony started a revolution with its Walkman radio, and Zenith watched as Asian companies snatched away yet another chunk of the market it had pioneered since 

That kind of experience in the 1970s in consumer electronics led Zenith to diversify into computers.
In the last decade it built a profitable billion-dollar personal-computer business, at the expense of some of those same foreign competitors. 

Now Zenith suddenly is reversing course by chucking the computer business that became its crown jewel.
With the proposed $635 million sale of that unit to Cie. des Machines Bull of France, Zenith is returning to its roots.
It wants to focus exclusively on making a success of its struggling television business, pinning its fortunes on an emerging technology system -- high-definition television -- that promises pictures as clear as 35mm slides. 

The change of direction is risky.
Over the years, one after another U.S. TV maker -- from Motorola Inc. to General Electric Co. -- has left the business as foreign makers invaded the market with state-of-the-art sets and cut-rate prices.
Zenith has stubbornly held on, even as it posted losses totaling $42 million since 1985 and saw its share of the U.S. color TV market shrink to 12% from 18.5% in the past seven years. 

"The chances are 95% that they'll fail," predicts George Stalk, a consultant at Boston Consulting Group, which specializes in analyzing competitive strategies.
He questions, for instance, whether Zenith can keep pace with the rapid changes in TV technology, when stronger competitors far outspend it.
Last year, while Zenith spent $100.6 million for research and engineering, some of its Japanese and French rivals each spent nearly $1 billion on that. 

Not even Zenith Chairman Jerry K. Pearlman is all that confident.
The 50-year-old chief executive officer, asked in July when Zenith's business might turn around, said the answer clearly hinges on the direction of TV prices. "My crystal ball isn't clear.
It's been cloudy for 15 years." Zenith, he says, requires a "responsible pricing environment" -- something over which it clearly has no control. 

If Zenith can persevere, high-definition TV could be its savior.
Although Japanese firms took an early lead developing the technology, European and U.S. rivals are scrambling to come up with their own systems. 

Zenith is betting that Uncle Sam -- swayed in part by patriotic pride and a fear the U.S. electronic industry's future rests on HDTV -- will favor its system.
Zenith boasts that its system takes full advantage of unused TV channels for broadcasting, without affecting existing channels.
In any case, the Federal Communications Commission already has said the new system mustn't make current TV sets obsolete. 

While Mr. Pearlman insists Zenith is in high-definition TV to stay -- with or without government help -- it's clear the company can't do it alone.
Short on cash, Zenith already has reached to American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to help develop its system.
And in May, Mr. Pearlman asked the government to tax color television sales -- at $5 a set -- to raise $100 million for a trust fund for HDTV research in the U.S. (Zenith says it plans to spend some of the proceeds from the proposed computer-unit sale for such research.) 

Even with U.S. help, any reward for Zenith in high-definition TV is years away.
Consumers aren't expected to see the expensive sets in their local electronics store until at least 1993.
Then the technology could take years to catch on.
After all, it took color TV a decade to reach annual sales of one million units. (With 1988 sales of 20 million sets, color TV is now in 95% of U.S. households.) 

In the meantime, Zenith must survive the industry's perennial wars -- and history is against it.
In the last two decades, Asian nations took advantage of their low production costs to sell TVs in the U.S. at bargain prices.
That trend accelerated as the growing number of discount electronics store chains demanded special deals. 

Recurring predictions of higher prices were trashed, as foreign competitors found ways to make TVs more efficiently.
By last year, the average retail price of a color TV was $411 -- well below the $560 price tag in 1965. 

"The TV business today is a dog-eat-dog business," says Michael McLaughlin, a Booz-Allen & Hamilton Inc. consultant in Chicago. "There are more people entering this business than leaving it, principally from other Asian countries, such as Korea." 

Facing the brutal competition, most TV producers got bigger or got out.
Motorola sold its TV operation to Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. of Japan, opting to take on the Japanese in other areas such as electronic pagers.
GTE Corp. sold its Sylvania business to Philips Industries N.V. of the Netherlands to concentrate on the telephone business.
And General Electric acquired RCA before selling the combined consumer-electronics operations to Thomson S.A. 

As a result, giants like Thomson and Philips now market globally several brands over which they can spread research and development costs.
They and their Japanese rivals also can take advantage of sheer size to make key TV components like semiconductor chips. 

Thus, Zenith persevered in its sole U.S. market and with its one TV brand -- but not without cost.
Losing money year after year, the consumer-electronics unit was forced to buy its video-cassette recorders and camcorders from Victor Co. of Japan, which slapped the Zenith name on them.
In 1983, Zenith introduced the industry's biggest TV tube, a 27-incher, but since then, the Japanese have dominated the big-tube market.
And Thomson recently announced a $75 million effort to grab a share of that market. 

While it still benefits from a familiar name and a broad product line, Zenith now is a distant No. 2 in the U.S. TV market to Thomson.
And it's being chased from behind.
Some 33 brands, including Sony, Sharp, Goldstar and Samsung, vie for 95% of the U.S. market, according to TV Digest, which compiles market-share data. 

The sale of the computer business -- which still must be cleared by regulators and Zenith shareholders -- reflects Mr. Pearlman's dearth of options.
Although several companies in the past year or so have investigated buying Zenith's consumer-electronics business, they concluded it would take huge investments to turn it around.
When offers came, Zenith considered them far too low. 

And recently, Zenith's chance to get a good price for its computer business began to erode.
Although the Zenith Data Systems unit sits atop the fast-growing market for battery-operated laptop computers, its market share slips each time giants such as Compaq Computer Corp. and Apple Computer Inc. enter the fray.
An individual involved in Zenith's bargaining with Bull says price was the big sticking point on the computer unit's sale: The two sides had to keep lowering it as Zenith's outlook dimmed.
A Zenith spokesman says "ranges of value" were exchanged by the two sides, but declines to say if the figures were lowered over time. 

Proceeds from the sale would provide some breathing room for Zenith, laden with nearly $600 million of borrowing.
Lenders and vendors grew anxious, as rating agencies downgraded Zenith's debt and threatened to lower it another notch this fall. 

Erasing that debt, coupled with a recent modest upturn in TV prices and brisk picture-tube sales, gives Zenith a chance to turn a profit next year.
In fact, Zenith says it would have been profitable in the last 12 months if it hadn't incurred the hefty interest expense on its debt load.
But if TV sales slump or prices ease, Zenith could be back in a familiar position: losing money and market share.
For Mr. Pearlman, the cut-throat competition has taken its toll.
With little to show after six years at the helm, he laments: "We neglected along the way to find a cash cow." 

