.START 

When International Business Machines hit a 52-week low on Tuesday, it stirred some interest among bottom-fishers.
Many securities analysts think the opportunists are right: The stock may finally have neared its bottom. 

But so what?
That doesn't mean analysts are sanguine about the stock's prospects, at least for the next few months. 

"The risk is that an investment {in IBM} could turn out to be dead money," says Steve Cohen at SoundView Financial Group. "I just don't see any good news coming." 

He isn't the only one who thinks IBM shares could languish until the computer giant shows it doesn't have any more earnings disappointments up its sleeve. 

"Given the frustration and anger felt by many investors, the guy watching for a signal is going to wait until the fourth quarter comes and goes to see what happens," says Dan Mandresh, an analyst at Merrill Lynch.
And he's one of the bulls. 

The latest round of IBM-bashing started a week ago when IBM said that its third-quarter and full-year earnings would fall well below analysts' expectations.
Much of the disappointment was tied to a delay in the introduction of some high-end disk drives, which account for about $6 billion of IBM's $60 billion in annual revenue and which were expected to leapfrog IBM safely ahead of some cutthroat competition. 

And the delay seemed to fit a disturbing pattern: IBM recently postponed the introduction of some important workstations; it has had intermittent manufacturing problems in personal computers this year, and glitches developed early this year in making its flagship mainframes. 

"I've thrown in the towel for now," says Steve Milunovich at First Boston. "Any time you see something that should generate earnings momentum, they snatch defeat from the jaws of victory.
At this point, I'm willing to say there's a pattern here even though the individual events may seem to be unrelated." 

Looking toward next year, analysts generally don't see anything that will jump-start the stock.
Although IBM is expected to introduce slightly faster versions of its mainframes this year, the machines will be five years old next year -- long in the tooth by mainframe standards -- and competitors are expected to bring out new products.
IBM's AS/400 line, which has done spectacularly well in the first 15 months of its life, is seeing growth slow.
IBM is generating some enthusiasm in the personal-computer market, but market-share gains are hard to come by and profit margins are slim -- at least by IBM's historical standards. 

"I think 1990 is a very tough year for IBM," says Dan Benton at Goldman Sachs.
Mr. Benton, who hasn't had a "buy" rating on IBM for three years, says he thinks the shares could drop to 90 or 95 next year, after bouncing around near current levels through year-end. 

He says IBM's earnings have declined an average of 1% a year over the past five years even though personal-computer sales were strong, the economy was robust and IBM didn't lose any market share in mainframes.
And over the next five years, he says, personal-computer growth will slow, the U.S. may have a recession and IBM mainframes could lose market share to smaller systems. 

"I can't say they won't grow earnings," he says, "but it certainly will be more difficult." 

At the same time, many analysts don't think the stock will drop much further.
For one thing, it carries a dividend of $4.84 a share, which gives it a pretty healthy yield for a stock that closed yesterday at $108.25, up $2.25 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
In addition, IBM has been spending about $1 billion a year to buy back shares and is expected to continue to do so.
The stock has also shown considerable support any time it has fallen anywhere close to $100.
In trading yesterday, volume -- at about three million shares -- was about double the stock's daily average. 

"I'm bearish on the company's fundamentals, but I'm less bearish on the stock," says Mr. Cohen of SoundView. 

In addition, some analysts see signs of life in the business.
The new mainframes should help at least some.
Likewise the personal-computer business.
The disk drives should be winners, whenever they get out the door.
IBM continues to cut employment, albeit slowly.
And IBM is positioning itself to benefit from the industry's shift away from hardware and toward software and services -- though, here again, movement has been slow. 

Mr. Mandresh of Merrill Lynch, for instance, likes the company's fundamentals enough that he still rates the stock a "buy." It's just that, in a market where many of the seemingly well-positioned companies -- including Digital Equipment and Hewlett-Packard -- have hit or neared 52-week lows in recent days as the market sets records, "you have investors out there saying, 'I've been disappointed too many times, '" he says. "It's only when that attitude changes that things will turn around." 

*Reflects change in method of accounting to include finance subsidiaries. 

**Year-ago figure is restated. 

