.START 

Regarding your Sept. 8 page-one article "Street Dealers: In the War on Drugs, Toughest Foe May Be the Alienated Youth": Three cheers for Ben Gray's personal fight against drugs in Omaha.
It's terrific that Mr. Gray and other members of the business community, like Mike Walsh of Union Pacific Railroad, are doing something about the drug problem. 

While it is surely commendable that Mr. Walsh raised $700,000 to help Omaha's inner-city kids, his attitude is naive and disconcerting.
He charges that the youth's choice in earning $300 a day and up for selling crack rather than working in fast-food franchises is "a complete cop-out.
It's no different than a stockbroker saying he can make a whole lot more money if he cheats." I certainly did not grow up on the streets, and I can tell you it is different. 

A stockbroker by and large has choices.
Just for starters, he has a high-school diploma and a college degree.
But these kids attend schools where apathy is rampant among both the students and teachers.
Literacy among these kids is atypical.
They do not have the basic skills to survive in the world.
Role models are scarce and the economic realities of the world bury the ones who are there. 

While the stockbroker is taking his shirts to the dry cleaners and deciding if he is going to trade on insider information, these kids are trying to figure out how they will eat.
A kid with a family to support, making minimum wage, bringing home less than $150 a week, can easily be lured into drugs.
Contrarily, the stockbroker who cheats is lured by greed. 

Valerie B. Robin 

Law Student Boston 

Your story's message was clear: The distribution of illegal drugs through gang affiliations is an entrepreneurial opportunity for young black people whom society has decided in advance are incorrigible, without the self-discipline or skills to work in a legitimate business. 

Like many people, young blacks want to earn respect and obtain financial rewards in a vocation that allows them to achieve their dreams.
Such dreams are common to Americans of all colors: the dream of exercising our constitutional right to pursue happiness without hindrance, contribute to the betterment of our environment, and heighten our consciousness. 

Unemployment, especially among young blacks, in Omaha and other cities forces many people to seek other ways of earning a living.
It's unfortunate that some people are not exposed to better opportunities than welfare or criminal activities.
I agree with Ben Gray that President Bush's plan to increase law enforcement to fight his war on drugs does not address the problem-the disproportionate unemployment among classes of society. 

Marcus D. Perro 

Houston 

Your article suggests we know the cause of drug usage.
There is no conclusive evidence that poverty and alienation are factors that cause drug usage.
What we know so far is that it is more prevalent in such populations, but from that we cannot conclude the cause. 

Misconceptions about the causes lead us in the wrong direction in efforts to prevent drug abuse. 

Dorothy C. Siegel 

Vice President for Student Services 

Towson State University 

Towson, Md. 

