.START 

Five months after the U.S. government decided to proceed with the controversial development of the FSX fighter plane with Japan, the project remains mired in bickering. 

The lead Japanese company, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd., and the main U.S. subcontractor, General Dynamics Corp., still haven't signed a detailed agreement to begin basic development, and it could take three more months before work starts, according to people familiar with the project.
Earlier this year the companies tentatively set Oct. 1 as a target start-up date, the sources said. 

Government and industry officials from both countries said a major sticking point is how much freedom the U.S. company will have in using technology acquired from its Japanese counterpart.
General Dynamics apparently wants to be able to use the know-how in future planes it may sell to other countries.
But the Japanese seem to fear this would violate their longstanding policy against military exports. 

A Mitsubishi Heavy Industries spokesman declined to say much about the negotiations, explaining "we cannot disclose the contents of the contract." But he acknowledged that one issue involves whether "these technologies can be exported to other countries or not." He added that "it's a matter maybe to be discussed at a higher level." 

However, one insider insisted that "the resolution has to take place on the Japanese side . . . {The Americans} are not renegotiating the thing." When the Bush administration tried to persuade a hostile Congress earlier this year that the project could be beneficial to the U.S., it emphasized the transfer of technology to U.S. companies.
Any restrictions on that could upset support for the program in the U.S. 

The Bush administration considers the FSX project to have already started on the contractor level with Mitsubishi's payment of $25 million to General Dynamics last summer.
The payment is for the U.S. company's initial shipment of technical data on the F-16.
However, some officials in the administration say they aren't surprised that the contractors are having trouble agreeing on each other's responsibilities in the politically sensitive FSX venture. 

A senior Pentagon official said the U.S. is still trying to undo the "very damaging" effects of the acrimonious FSX debate in Congress. 

General Dynamics acknowledged that it has yet to complete a detailed plan for working with the Mitsubishi group. "There are continuing discussions between the two companies on various aspects of the agreement," a spokesman for the U.S. contractor said.
General Dynamics, though, is "sure that all such issues will be resolved satisfactorily," the spokesman added. 

The question of whether General Dynamics can sell Mitsubishi Heavy Industries-developed technology raises sensitive questions about the limits on Japan's military.
After World War II, the Japanese agreed to a ban on all weapons exports.
But in 1983, they signed a memorandum of understanding allowing the transfer of technology to the U.S. 

As part of that agreement, the Japanese government agreed to evaluate cases where the U.S. wants to export technology it acquires from Japan.
According to analysts, the FSX is the first major project that will test that rule. 

The first specific technology to force the question is Mitsubishi's advanced composite material for airplane wings.
No company has apparently used such material for high-performance planes before. 

The continuing behind-the-scenes fighting over details of the general FSX agreement will likely prolong the ill feelings stirred up by the political storm surrounding the issue.
U.S. politicians are angry that Japan isn't simply buying from the U.S. a replacement for the F-16, and opponents in the U.S. Senate last month narrowly lost an attempt to impose more restrictions on the contract. 

In Japan, meanwhile, officials are bitter that the Americans constantly seem to be changing the terms of the agreement.
Japan originally wanted to develop the plane by itself, but Reagan administration officials persuaded them that co-production would be more beneficial for both sides. 

Eduardo Lachica in Washington contributed to this article. 

