.START 

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration, under heavy budget pressure, has adopted a strategy of keeping the deployment of its $30 billion space station on track while delaying capabilities sought by Congress. 

Richard Kohrs, space station director, said NASA would hold firm to its initial launch date of March 1995 even if funding is cut steeply from the $2.05 billion sought by the administration for the current fiscal year.
But he said the agency would delay by a year having the station reach its full power capabilities.
Members of the House appropriations subcommittee overseeing NASA as well as other lawmakers want to make sure the station reaches its full power of 75 kilowatts so that it has adequate energy to conduct scientific experiments. 

"We want to make sure the station can actually do something -- that we don't lighten the car by taking out the gas," said a congressional aide. 

Currently, the House has approved $1.65 billion for the station, while the Senate has approved $1.85 billion.
A Senate-House conference to resolve the difference is expected in about two weeks. 

NASA plans to ask the administration for $2.7 billion for fiscal 1991 to keep its revised schedule on the space station. 

The decision to keep the launch firm but stretch out the project reflects the experience of NASA administrator Richard Truly.
As a young astronaut, Mr. Truly worked on an Air Force space station project, called the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, that never got built because the Air Force regularly delayed the launch date to accommodate budget cuts.
Mr. Truly has vowed to avoid that trap with the NASA space station. 

Under the revised plan, Mr. Kohrs said NASA would need about 22 space shuttle flights to assemble the 500-foot station.
The structure would be completed in August 1999 -- about 18 months later than planned.
To pay for the extension, Mr. Kohrs said the agency had scrapped plans to develop a new space suit for space-station astronauts, and also would use less exotic thermal and propulsion systems.
In addition, he said, astronauts would have to manage without a washer, dryer and dishwasher until later in the assembly sequence.
Astronauts are expected to begin visiting the station for extended periods in November 1996, about a year behind current schedule. 

