.START 

American Express Co. is making a new push to peddle investments to its millions of cardholders, touting a "savings certificate" that is "guaranteed" with eye-popping "introductory bonus rates" for people who act fast. 

But eager investors who find the company's promotional flyers tucked in their monthly charge-card bills need to look beyond the flashy headlines.
The certificates aren't certificates of deposit, the guarantee isn't federal deposit insurance, and the bonus interest rates are good for only the first three months on one- and two-year investments. 

Those distinctions are "really clear" if one reads the whole flyer, but "I don't think people do read," says Karen Schaeffer, a Bethesda, Md., financial planner. 

The new investments are actually debt instruments issued by an American Express unit and backed by a portfolio of securities.
Rates for the first three months are currently 12% on the two-year certificate and 10% on the one-year certificate.
But the annualized yield over the life of the investments is 9%. 

That's about three-quarters of a percentage point higher than the national average yield on one- and two-year CDs, according to the latest survey by Bank Rate Monitor, a North Palm Beach, Fla., publication.
But alert investors can find 8.5% CD yields at some banks and thrifts -- and they may find yields a bit over 9% on insured deposits if they scour the market. 

American Express, which has used its solid reputation with consumers to build itself into a major direct marketer of insurance, luggage and a host of other merchandise, is sensitive to any suggestion that some people might find its promotion misleading. 

"We are pretty particular about making it very clear this is not federally insured, this is not a bank product," says Ramesh N. Shah, senior vice president for investment products at American Express Travel Related Services Co. People who express interest in the certificates receive a detailed prospectus.
A company spokesman leaps to the offensive, with an interesting choice of words and a reminder of the financial problems at some of the federally insured competition: "You're banking on American Express, which is a pretty good deal," he says. "Certainly the savings-and-loan situation has created a lot of good will toward an American Express, which is seen as a solid financial-services firm." 

American Express obviously has a big interest in protecting that reputation.
The company also has good reasons for working to make the new certificates a success: It wants to add investments to the list of products and services it markets to cardholders -- particularly since they can be manufactured by such American Express units such as Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. and IDS Financial Services Inc. 

Some earlier efforts to sell investments to cardholders flopped.
In 1982 it tried, then quickly canceled, an attempt to sell a money-market fund and an individual retirement account. 

Last year it test-marketed a family of nine mutual funds as the "American Express Investment Management Account." But cardholders weren't bowled over. "The investment climate for equity and bond funds was very difficult" in the wake of the 1987 stock-market crash and "we were not happy with the results," says the company's Mr. Shah. 

He says the company has stopped marketing the fund family as a package and is instead promoting the two money-market funds in the group as stand-alone products.
After a few months the funds' assets are still tiny by money-fund standards -- $45.5 million in the regular money fund and $12.5 million in its tax-free cousin. 

Assets of the seven stock and bond funds together total only $12 million. 

The company's biggest success in marketing investments to cardholders comes from the often -- arcane world of insurance.
It's an annuity -- a type of tax-advantaged retirement savings plan -- whose appeal is augmented by an eye-catching first-year interest rate of 12%. 

The Privileged Assets annuity was test-marketed a year ago and offered to all holders of American Express Gold Cards this year.
It has just recently been offered to a sampling of Green Card holders. 

Consumer response has been "just so enthusiastic" and "so far in excess of what has traditionally been done" in selling investments by mail, says Sarah Nolan, president of the investment and insurance group of AMEX Life Assurance Co., San Rafael, Calif., the American Express unit that issues the product.
The company would not release a figure for the annuity sales. 

Now American Express is hoping to capitalize on the public's preference for conservative investments with attractive yields by offering the savings certificates. 

The certificates, which American Express is currently test-marketing to GoldCard and Green Card holders, are a quirky type of product technically called a "face amount certificate." They are governed by federal securities laws. 

By far the largest issuer of face amount certificates is American Express's IDS unit.
It issued $917 million in single-payment certificates in 1988 alone, and sold them through its army of financial planners. 

The certificates are issued by a unit called IDS Certificate Co., which takes the funds and invests in bonds and other holdings.
By law, those investment assets are segregated from the company's other assets.
Most of the securities are on deposit with IDS Bank & Trust, a Minnesota bank that is yet another American Express unit. 

The certificates being sold to American Express cardmembers, like bank certificates of deposit, include penalties for early withdrawal.
They offer interest rates that are fixed at the time of purchase.
The company is promising to offer rates that exceed Bank Rate Monitor's national average for bank and thrift CDs of comparable maturities. 

While the lack of federal insurance could deter some buyers, American Express officials refuse to concede a potential hurdle.
Indeed, the company boasts that in its 95-year history, IDS has never failed to meet certificate payments. 

