.START 

W.B. Doner & Co. confirmed late yesterday that it has been selected by Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co. to replace Grey Advertising as agency for its $15 million to $25 million B.F. Goodrich tire account. 

A spokeswoman for Akron, Ohio-based Uniroyal Goodrich declined to comment, saying an announcement will be made today.
However, Jerry Preyss, executive vice president and general manager of the Cleveland office of W.B. Doner, said his agency has won the account that has been under review since July.
Also pitching the account were Chiat/Day/Mojo, Los Angeles, and Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising, New York. 

The Uniroyal Goodrich spokeswoman declined to disclose the size of the account, but it's estimated that the company will spend in excess of the more-than-$15 million projected for this year.
Company executives say Uniroyal Goodrich will increase its marketing budget by more than $45 million over the next three years. 

Grey declined to comment.
Its loss of the account, however, was tempered somewhat yesterday by a gain of $6 million in additional billings from Thompson Medical Co., an existing client.
Grey also recently won the $15 million Sure deodorant account from Procter & Gamble and was chosen to handle advertising for Ernst & Young. 

Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising, a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi Co., was also awarded about $6 million in new billings from Thompson Medical. 

Uniroyal Goodrich's decision to yank its business from Grey, which has handled the company's advertising since 1972, follows an account review that surprised the industry.
Grey earlier this year broke a somewhat daring campaign for the usually conservative tire industry that used the slogan, "Athletic shoes for your car." The campaign was received well by tire dealers and by top executives at Uniroyal Goodrich, executives say. 

The Uniroyal Goodrich spokeswoman said the company decided to review the account to make sure it is receiving the maximum value from its advertising program.
She declined to elaborate.
In a surprising and somewhat unusual move, Uniroyal Goodrich doesn't plan to abandon the creative theme that Grey developed earlier this year, the spokeswoman added. 

"We're delighted to be on their team," said Mr. Preyss.
Mr. Preyss said the account will be serviced out of the agency's Cleveland office and Southfield, Mich., headquarters. 

The decision also follows Michelin Group's agreement last week to purchase Uniroyal Goodrich for $690 million.
That transaction will make Michelin the world's biggest tire concern.
The addition of Uniroyal Goodrich to Michelin's network will also boost its presence in the U.S., where it will be No. 2 to market leader Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. Industry executives said the purchase didn't affect the review.
Michelin's ad agency is DDB Needham in New York. 

For W.B. Doner, which created the humorous advertising for Klondike ice cream and Arby's restaurants, the account is another important victory for a regional agency whose creative reputation is on the rise.
Mr. Preyss said the victory over Chiat/Day/Mojo was particularly exciting, as it was a runner-up last year to Chiat/Day/Mojo in Advertising Age's ranking of the best agencies in the country. 

The Thompson Medical business was previously handled by Laurence, Charles, Free & Lawson, a New York shop.
Grey, which already handles Slim-Fast diet products, was assigned Aspercreme, Sportscreme, Aqua-Ban and NP-27.
Total Thompson Medical billings at Grey now run about $30 million, a spokeswoman for the agency said.
The agency earlier this year became Thompson Medical's media-buying agency. 

Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising, meanwhile, was awarded ad assignments for Cortizone-5, Caffedrine, Encare and Sleepinal.
In March, it picked up Thompson Medical's $20 million to $25 million Dexatrim account. 

At Thompson Medical, a spokesman for the company said it and the Laurence Charles agency split over "philosophical differences," adding that the move represents a consolidation of its business. "From our standpoint, it will be more efficient if our people are dealing with two agencies rather than three," he said. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

KRAFT USA: Joel Weiner, senior vice president for marketing at Philip Morris's Kraft USA division, resigned for personal reasons.
He will be succeeded by Charles F. Martin III, vice president of marketing for Kraft USA's grocery products. 

ANDERSEN CONSULTING: The consulting arm of Arthur Andersen & Co., which advertised for the first time last year, unveiled plans for its second year of advertising.
Its budget for the TV and print campaign is $11 million.
Young & Rubicam created the ads, which pitch the firm's information technology services. 

MERGING AGENCIES: Bergelt Litchfield and Ephron Raboy & Tsao Advertising, two small New York agencies, merged to form a $40 million shop that will be called Bergelt Litchfield Raboy & Tsao.
Terms of the transaction, which included an exchange of stock, weren't disclosed. 

TRACY-LOCKE: Tom Monroe was named chairman and chief creative officer and Mike Rawlings was appointed general manager and chief operating officer of the Omnicom Group unit's Dallas ad agency. 

