.START 

A bullish chairman of International Business Machines Corp. called the computer giant's earnings problems "short-term," and forecast continued strong sales growth outside the U.S. 

"We see our short-term challenges as a transition to our long-term growth," said Chairman John Akers of recently disclosed problems hurting IBM earnings.
He indicated IBM is fixing one problem, a costly delay in disk-drive shipments; and he suggested rapid sales growth in Europe and Asia will help compensate for troubles in the U.S. 

"We have a terrific business in Europe," he said, forecasting IBM's European revenue growth in 1989 at 15% "or better," measured in local currencies.
U.S. sales growth, however, will apparently be much less.
Though the IBM executive didn't provide a specific U.S. forecast, he said that U.S. computer-industry revenues in general are expected to grow at only half European rates. 

But Mr. Akers said at a news conference here yesterday that he doesn't think any major changes in corporate strategy or staffing are needed to hasten an IBM profit rebound.
He confirmed that IBM plans an early-retirement program to trim employment at four U.S. factories, but said he expects to continue hiring in the fast-growing Asian market and to make few, if any, job cuts in Europe. "The IBM management team feels that the strategy we are on and the actions we have taken are the right ones" and don't need substantial revision, he said. 

Mr. Akers's comments appeared aimed at soothing IBM's shell-shocked investors.
Last week, after months of encouraging comments, IBM abruptly warned that its profits for the third quarter and year will fall well below financial analysts' expectations.
It cited three problems: a strong dollar, technical problems in manufacturing an important computer disk-drive model, and a rise in customers leasing products instead of buying outright.
Analysts promptly slashed their 1989 per-share earnings estimates to as low as $9.30, a drop from 1988's $9.80, and some forecast more trouble ahead. 

Some analysts remained skeptical yesterday about IBM's prospects, despite Mr. Akers's upbeat remarks. "I don't think that's the last of" the problems at IBM, said Stephen Cohen, analyst at SoundView Financial Group Inc., Stamford, Conn.
Even when its short-term difficulties are resolved, he said, IBM faces rising competition in its biggest earner, mainframe computer sales.
Morover, he said, "they've got huge difficulties bringing products to market" on schedule.
The disk-drive problem was the third technical glitch in a product-line unveiled this year.
Some analysts have suggested IBM's early-retirement programs may have drained key people from factories, or hurt its management-information controls. 

But Mr. Akers rejected any notion that IBM's problems run deep.
Two of the disclosed hitches, currency swings and the trend to leasing, are general market problems "beyond our control," he said.
The technical problem with disk drives, he said, is already "in hand" and isn't unusual in the technologically complex computer industry. 

What's more, he said, customers still want what IBM has to sell. "The point I would like to emphasize is that we see no fundamental change in our economic assumptions or in demand trends -- nothing that alters our expectations for the longer term for IBM," he said. 

The IBM executive was especially bullish about European operations.
Yesterday's news conference, at an IBM complex outside Brussels, followed a Tuesday meeting in Paris between Mr. Akers and the managers of IBM's key non-U.S. businesses -- including operations in West Germany, Italy, Britain, Canada, France and Japan.
The management meeting, to review international operations, apparently cheered Mr. Akers.
He spoke repeatedly at yesterday's news conference of bullish European and Asian growth prospects.
In 1988, Western Europe provided 34%, and the Asia/Pacific area 15%, of IBM's world-wide revenue of $59.68 billion. 

