.START 

Having survived the class-warfare rhetoric of the Democratic House leadership, the capital-gains cut is now in the Senate.
It'll come up on the Senate floor, having been kicked out of the Finance Committee's bill Tuesday.
That's just as well.
Capital gains is probably too innocent a subject to be seen in the company of the pols and lobbyists who went into a feeding frenzy of loophole creation between midnight and 2:30 yesterday morning. 

After the committee had made daytime arguments about preserving the balance in the 1986 Tax Reform Act, night fell and the old, familiar revels began.
Shortly before midnight, Chairman Bentsen announced that the committee still had more than a billion dollars in revenue to give to special interests as loopholes, and the committee members started piling on amendments. 

When the Senators ran out of loopholes to suggest, they had to go outside to the lobbyists for more suggestions.
Oil producers, banana farmers, pineapple growers, cattlemen were among the objects of the committee's interests.
The oil-depletion allowance, income averaging, tax amnesty (for some tavern owners), favorable accounting changes, inventory depreciation rules (for tuxedo-rental firms) -- all the old gang showed up for the committee's blowout.
Perennial party animal Archer-Daniels-Midland is in for a potential $541 million tax break for its ethanol program.
For one night, the committee was for sale. 

It would theoretically offset all this largess with a long list of revenue-raising provisions over five years.
Witnessing the spectacle, Senator Bill Bradley remarked: "We end up raising $37 billion to meet a $5.3 billion" deficit-reduction goal for one year." 

Now, Senator Bentsen is a crafty fellow, and there may yet turn out to be some purpose in sending his committee's reformed loopaholics on this unedifying one-night binge.
The fact remains that at this point the Democratic leadership still needs something substantive on the tax issue to revive it from last week's debacle in the House.
We can think of no better vehicle than the one currently on the track: the capital-gains cut.
But what the Democrats need is a model that's better than the Bush-supported plan -- one that's bigger, longer lasting and more efficient. 

Here is the blueprint: a 15% capital-gains rate, instead of the House bill's 19.6%; coverage for all assets; and make it permanent and index it. 

With a stroke, Democrats would make a clean break from their past corruptions at the hands of the special interests and refashion themselves for the 1990s -- not as the party of redistribution but as the party of aspiration.
Our proposal would no doubt strike the George Mitchells of the party as too radical for their tastes, but it seems clear that on economic issues the party simply lacks credibility with the voters.
We doubt that Senator Bentsen's unearthing of IRAs will get the job done. 

Indeed, the mail to many congressional offices has been overwhelmingly in favor of the rate cut.
A lot of this support isn't coming just from "the rich," but from people who believe in upward mobility, who either own capital or hope to. 

These popular sentiments should come as no surprise to the Democrats.
In August they conducted focus groups with workers, and discovered many in favor of the rate cuts on capital gains. "I think it's a good idea because, in future, I may be able to buy and sell stocks," a warehouse supervisor told them.
That fellow was trying to tell the Democratic Party something.
We'll find out on the Senate floor if it is listening. 

