.START 

The job of unraveling the human genetic code took on a new clarity and focus this week as hundreds of scientists met to exchange proposals and progress reports on their common labor. 

Human Genome I, which convened in San Diego to ponder the $3 billion, 15-year project, featured a proposal for streamlining the work by adopting a common language in lieu of the prevailing scientific "Tower of Babel." The proposal is that scientists express their findings by giving the precise sequence of a short piece of DNA and its approximate location on a chromosome in a form called "sequence-tagged sites," or STS. 

Admittedly imprecise, the STS strategy "is like describing an intersection in New Jersey in perfect detail, and then saying it lies somewhere between Edison and Menlo Park," says proponent Charles Cantor, a Columbia University scientist moving this month to head the Department of Energy's genome work at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in California. 

But the STS strategy could yield a crude map of the entire human genome, or genetic code, in as little as five years.
Reducing all descriptions of key genetic landmarks to such shorthand also would let scientists meld their findings in a common database, and lessen if not eliminate the need to store vast fragile samples of actual DNA, the stuff of which genes are made. 

How fast the genome project moves is of more than academic interest.
There are, by current estimates, 4,000 inheritable diseases from sickle cell anemia to hemophilia, muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis.
Some 400 of those are linked to the X-chromosome and passed from mothers to sons. 

Francis Collins, a scientist at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute of the University of Michigan, recounted to the hundreds of scientists his "daunting" two-year quest to find the gene responsible for cystic fibrosis.
One of the more common hereditary diseases, cystic fibrosis is marked by faulty digestion, difficulty breathing and excessive loss of salt through the sweat glands. 

The team spent years searching through seven libraries of DNA samples before confirming the identity of the gene by using a piece of DNA made from the sweat glands of cystic fibrosis patients. "We're in the middle of the story," Dr. Collins says, adding that the next challenge will be to learn how to correct the defective gene through gene-therapy. 

Jean-Louis Mandel of the Institut de Chimie Biologique, in Strasbourg, France, reported modest progress and continuing frustration in his search for the gene that causes Fragile X, a syndrome of mild retardation affecting one in 1,500 males.
While he is painstakingly closing the circle around the gene, he admits, "Unfortunately, we are very far from the end." 

Thomas Caskey, whose team at Baylor College of Medicine in Texas has made great strides in the screening of Duchenne's muscular dystrophy, said he is using polymerase chain reaction technology to analyze mutations in the gene responsible for Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, an X-linked disease marked by severe self-multilation. 

To Dr. Caskey, completing the genome project means "a couple will know whether or not they carry the risk of, say, Friedreich's ataxia {a disease of the spinal column} as they initiate family planning.
We'll have the opportunity to limit the amount of disease through prenatal diagnosis, and we'll see the logical fashioning of pharmaceuticals" to block disease genes. 

Tasuku Honjo of Kyoto University in Japan and Hans Zachau of the University of Munich reported finding some surprising "acrobatics" in the genome, among them the ability of major clusters of immunoglobulin genes -- as many as five or eight at a time -- jumping from their home on chromosome 16 to chromosome 14. 

Berkeley's Dr. Cantor labeled the finding "extraordinary." In the immune system, such "cutting and pasting" of genes does happen as the body acquires immune response, but the gene shifts are smaller and more local. 

Translocations as huge as those described by Drs.
Honjo and Zachau are "usually lethal, but now we have the possibility it's part of normal function," Dr. Cantor said. "If these strange mechanisms are found in other systems, it could be the biggest thing to come out of the human genome project." 

In its sweep and scope, the genome project is hard to digest, even for scientists close to it. "Nothing Groucho Marx ever did is as zany as the Human Genome Project," said Daniel Koshland of the University of California at Berkeley. "It's a unique social experiment, controlled chaos." He warned that the risks of compiling genetic information on individuals, and its implications for jobs and insurance, will require confidentiality and care, bolstered by legislation, to prevent abuses. 

Dr. Cantor said that to work properly, the STS system and the gene bank it will fill, must be supported by scientists willing to publish and share -- after a reasonable period of, say, one month -- their genetic sequences with fellow scientists.
He said no less than our understanding of the history of the species is at stake. 

"You can sense a thrill and a sense of excitement that we're really going to identify the 100,000 genes that make up the software, the instruction set, that tells us why we're human," he said. 

