.START 

Gasoline futures plunged because of an industry report of a larger-than-expected rise in U.S. inventories of motor fuel. 

Unleaded gasoline for November delivery fell 1.23 cents a gallon to settle at 55.41 cents on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
December gasoline was off 0.91 cent to 54.17 cents a gallon. 

Other gasoline contracts were down lesser amounts.
But the declines led other petroleum prices down, interrupting the rally of recent days.
Still, few analysts and traders saw the setback as much more than a pause in relatively firm oil markets. 

"Gasoline gapped down because of the little larger than expected {inventory} build," said R.B. Hoover, a PrudentialBache Securities Inc. energy futures broker, "but there is good technical support somewhere around 54 cents {a gallon}." 

Also, crude oil is generally expected to remain strong until at least well into the fourth quarter because of increased petroleum demand.
And heating oil is gaining strength seasonally, with winter nearing, as well as from anticipated disruptions in production of the fuel in Norway and in the Soviet Union. 

An explosion reportedly closed one refinery in Norway yesterday while another remained closed because of a separate problem.
Also, according to Dow Jones International Petroleum Report, strikes in the Soviet Union have raised the possibility of inadequate heating oil supplies for the winter in Europe and could reduce the level of European exports to the U.S. 

Nevertheless, heating oil and crude oil prices were mostly lower yesterday.
In futures trading, heating oil for November delivery fell 0.69 cent to 58.99 cents a gallon.
West Texas Intermediate crude for November delivery was up two cents a barrel to settle at $20.15, but other crude contracts were down from two cents to 11 cents a barrel.
The report on higher inventories which caused the sharp drop in gasoline futures was released late Tuesday by the American Petroleum Institute.
It showed an increase last week of 4.5 million barrels in gasoline stocks. 

Motor fuel inventories usually rise seasonally at this time of the year.
But the increase cited in the API report was larger than had been expected.
Also, some analysts such as Robert Boslego, a Winchester, Mass., consultant, had been expecting a drawdown in stocks, continuing the pattern of recent weeks. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

COFFEE: Futures prices extended Tuesday's drop, when prices slid to a 14-year low.
The prospect of no new coffee agreement in immediate sight continued to weigh on the market.
The December contract fell to 73.03 cents for a loss of 3.47 cents.
According to William O'Neill, vice president, research, for Elders Futures Inc., New York, traders now expect that a "goodwill" communique will be issued Friday when the two-week International Coffee Organization talks end in London.
Such an announcement would try to gloss over the difficulties the 74-member countries encountered in trying to forge a new pact and would emphasize that a new agreement could emerge "at the right time," he said.
Mr. O'Neill added that the results of the meeting were negative for the market because traders were overly optimistic that delegates might come up with a new agreement.
However, he noted, the talks did serve to put the situation into perspective, especially with the tough and definite tone of the Brazilian chief delegate's statements that a new pact wouldn't be forthcoming soon.
Technically, coffee futures prices are in a weak position, he said.
Yesterday's drop below 75 cents a pound broke a low set in 1975 and the next support level on price charts is between 49 and 50 cents, he said. "That doesn't mean that the price is necessarily going to go that far down, but the danger is there," Mr. O'Neill said. 

COPPER: Futures prices rose.
The December contract advanced 1.65 cents a pound to $1.2760.
Futures prices early in the day were dragged down by weakness in London, particularly in the spot, or cash, position there, an analyst said.
But after the London market closed, the New York market began to firm, he said.
In part, it was attributed to an announcement by Donna Pope, director of the U.S. Mint, that the mint will continue to use copper in minting coins despite some supply problems and higher prices, the analyst said.
Another analyst said the Mint is scheduled to buy 10.3 million pounds of copper on Oct. 20.
In market action, strong demand, particularly from dealers, appeared in futures when the December price dipped below $1.25, he said. 

SUGAR: Futures prices rose on rumors that India may buy sugar.
The March delivery contract advanced 0.44 cent a pound to 14.37 cents.
According to analysts and dealers, India, which recently bought 200,000 tons of sugar after several false starts, may soon make further purchases.
The exact amount of sugar involved in such purchases is uncertain because the estimates are so wide-ranging, said Judith Ganes, analyst for Shearson Lehman Hutton, New York.
Also, she said, India wants to buy sugar on the condition that delivery is made by Oct. 20. "That's only two weeks away and apparently is an unreasonable request for sellers to meet.
It's expected that some change will be made in that requirement," she said.
The request was made because India wants the sugar to arrive before a major festival period and its general elections, Ms. Ganes said.
Another analyst said the Oct. 20 date for pre-festival use was known a month ago.
Its significance was discounted because India began crushing its cane a month early to process sufficient supplies by that time, he said. "Their sense of urgency at this late date, still requsting sugar to be delivered by that deadline, indicates a serious problem," he said. "Dealers are interpreting the demand as a sign that India's efforts must have fallen short and it may be in trouble." Sri Lanka bought an estimated 20,000 tons of sugar for November/December delivery, another analyst said.
Moreover, Europe, which has had good growing weather for its sugar beet crop, may encounter wet weather that could cause harvesting delays, according to James Roemer, meteorologist for Weather Traders Inc., of Des Moines, Iowa. "The Soviet Union is experiencing rain and cold weather in the Ukraine, but I expect that will only last a couple of days more.
The rest of Europe, however, could be in for significant amounts of rain beginning next week through the third week of October," Mr. Roemer said.
Harvesting of the beets starts this month and the heavy machinery can't operate in muddy fields. 

GRAINS And SOYBEANS: The prices of corn futures contracts settled mixed in the wake of the Agriculture Department's confirmation of widespread trade reports that the Soviet Union has purchased two million metric tons of U.S. corn.
The corn market hardly reacted to the government confirmation because prices had jumped on Monday on initial speculation about a big Soviet purchase -- and had held near that level since.
Corn prices also are under increasing downward pressure as the Midwest harvest progresses and rebuilds stockpiles that were depleted by the 1988 drought, said Ted Mao, a grain specialist at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., New York.
During the harvest, a price jump such as the type that occurred Monday can prompt corn farmers to engage in heavy selling of their crop.
Government confirmation of the corn purchase was significant because it conclusively doused speculation that Soviet Union, one of the U.S.'s biggest crop buyers, might lack the hard currency to be a big client this fall -- which is when it often conducts some of its biggest deals.
Because of the Soviet purchase earlier this week, some traders are speculating that it might buy as much as another two million metric tons of U.S. corn yet this year.
The prices of soybean and wheat futures contracts also settled mixed yesterday. 

