.START 

In your Sept. 7 article "Timber Firms Allowed by Court to Fell the Ancient Forests of Western Oregon," the word ancient is used to evoke emotion.
It has no accurate basis for use by definition, and it certainly has no biological connotation when referring to trees. 

You write of dwindling patches of virgin forest when millions of acres in Oregon are statutorily off-limits to harvesting forever.
You describe as underlying issues industry practices and federal policies that have accelerated the pace at which the nation's oldest and tallest trees are cut.
This is untrue.
The government sells timber on a sustained basis, never selling more than is grown.
The industry cuts more or less, depending on the market demand. 

Robert Freres Jr. 

Freres Lumber Co. 

Lyons, Ore. 

More than half of the government-owned forests in Oregon are permanently reserved as "wilderness," which prevents their being logged forever.
Logging activity is currently idled in most awarded sale contracts by court injunctions resulting from the specious legal attacks of the environmental activists. 

We have already locked up far more timberland than all the nature lovers will ever have a chance to see.
Timber is a crop that grows and dies -- often in a lifetime; it is meant to be used for the benefit of man -- it is "renewable forever." 

James L. Holland 

Portland, Ore. 

There are 7.5 million acres of old growth in the Northwest, including 6.2 million acres on national forests, about a million acres in national parks in Oregon and Washington and 400,000 acres on Bureau of Land Management land.
Just over four million acres of this are off-limits to logging -- parks, wilderness, scenic areas.
One can quibble over definitions, but the notion that the last old-growth forests are being cut or even could be cut is nonsense.
Foresters express great interest in knowing about the redwoods you mention in Oregon's Cascade Mountains, as redwoods grow in coastal regions of Northern California and Southern Oregon. 

The issues of land management in the Pacific Northwest are very important to many different interest groups, from timber companies and timber-dependent communities to environmental groups and other forest users.
The decisions need to be based on careful research and inventories of the resource.
Since we are dealing with a publicly owned resource, the decisions will be influenced by the beliefs of the more populous parts of the nation. 

John W. Mitchell 

Lake Oswego, Ore. 

