.START 

Investors anxious not to miss another rally boosted stock prices to a new high. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed 16.53, to 2771.09, in moderately active trading, setting a second-consecutive record.
Currency traders bid the dollar higher against the yen, but the U.S. currency was off against the mark.
Long-term bond prices barely budged as traders awaited key economic data scheduled for release tomorrow. 

Stock-market analysts said the surprise rally that sent stock prices to new highs Tuesday jolted money managers into action.
Fearful they may be left behind if a big new rally is getting under way, portfolio managers jumped into the market, sending the industrial average up more than 22 points by early afternoon.
Most of those gains evaporated in a brief mid-afternoon sell-off, but a late rally involving computer-assisted buy programs restored much of the lost ground in the closing half hour of trading. 

Traders took a mixed view of yesterday's action.
Trading volume, while continuing at better levels than prevailed through much of September, still doesn't signal a bull market.
More disturbing, only 831 issues on the New York Stock Exchange posted gains, while 656 issues fell.
Analysts look for more than 1,000 advancing issues to indicate broad support for a rally. 

But on the bright side, technology stocks, which have been lagging the overall market, perked up.
International Business Machines, dogged in recent days by expectations of poor third-quarter results, gained 2 1/4, to 108 1/4. 

The dollar continued to be the target of selling by central banks.
The U.S. currency was battered in overseas trading, but managed to gain against the yen in U.S. trading.
But with traders expecting West Germany's Bundesbank to push short-term interest rates higher today, the safe bet was to be light on dollars. 

The bond market idled through the day as traders worried about the possible effects on the dollar of a West German rate boost as well as what tomorrow's September employment report might show.
Economists expect a moderate gain of 182,000 new non-farm jobs and the unemployment rate remaining steady at 5.2%. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices rallied in moderately active trading.
Volume on the Big Board totaled 194.6 million shares. 

The dollar was mixed.
In late afternoon New York trading the currency was at 1.8813 marks and 141.60 yen compared with 1.8873 marks and 141.25 yen Tuesday. 

Bond prices were unchanged.
The yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond stood at 8.16%. 

