.START 

HURRICANE HUGO batters some vacation plans, leaves many on hold. 

Travel agents report a falloff in business to the Southeast and Caribbean islands.
Many honeymooners have changed plans, says Forster Joyce Travel, New York.
Carrier Travel Inc., New York, switches several groups to Hawaii, Jamaica and the Bahamas; an official calls Hugo's impact "worse than the Eastern Airlines strike." But customers with no immediate plans are waiting for damage reports. 

Bookings are off about 20% at Holiday Travel, Waterford, Conn.
Off-season travelers who normally visit Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, "aren't calling," says manager Janet Tien.
She sees a "wait-and-see" attitude among Christmas and winter travelers.
Stephen Taylor of Lifeco Travel, Houston, says cruise ships will be back in the Caribbean soon.
St. Croix, he adds, will be "damaged more by horror stories of marauding bands wielding machetes." 

Travelers intent on "sun and fun aren't going to change and go skiing," says Mon Valley Travel, Pittsburgh. 

HUGO'S AFTERMATH, perversely, may have some positive economic gains. 

Though the storm appears to be the costliest ever (almost $4 billion in insurance claims), it ultimately may bolster the region's economy.
Donald Ratajczak, director of economic forecasting at Georgia State University, notes insurance costs will be spread nationally while reconstruction jobs and spending will be local.
Hugo boosted aluminum prices by wiping out a smelter. 

"To the extent the losses are insured, there won't be that much economic loss," agrees W. Bethel Minter, first vice president and economist at Suntrust Banks, Atlanta.
But "in physical damage, it's worse than Sherman's march to the sea," declares Douglas P. Woodward, research economist at the University of South Carolina at Columbia.
He says South Carolina has lost $1 billion in timber and pulpwood. 

BANKS SCRAMBLE to keep from making Superfund deposits. 

Loan reviews and foreclosures require caution due to a 1986 federal court ruling that held Maryland Bank & Trust Co. liable for hazardous waste cleanup costs on property it acquired through foreclosure.
As a result, many banks won't move on real estate without an environmental clearance, corporate lawyers say. "We're much more aware of and sensitive to environmental issues," says Robert Payne, a vice president at Citibank. "We get environmental consultants hooked in from the beginning." 

Hiring consultants to assist banks is becoming more common, says George Pilko, head of a Houston environment consulting group.
He says some banks won't foreclose when potential cleanup costs are high.
Banks can protect themselves by maintaining a security interest in the property but not participating in management, suggests Margaret Murphy, a partner with the New York law firm White & Case. 

Banks are also adding clauses in which the borrower agrees to indemnify the bank from any lawsuits. 

PEDAL POWER moves the world.
Worldwatch Institute says the world's 800 million bikes outnumber cars 2-to-1.
And bike production, 100 million annually, outpaces auto manufacturing 3-to-1.
The report urges more bike use, says autos should "bear more of the full costs of driving." 

CHIPPING IN: Options traders at the Toronto Stock Exchange contribute pocket change to a "Robert Campeau Mortgage Fund." They're irked that Campeau Corp. options expired last month during a trading halt while Mr. Campeau found refinancing.
The Tupperware bowl held 70 Canadian cents "until somebody stole the silver for a cup of coffee," one trader says. 

CABBAGE CORNUCOPIA?
Cornell University gets a $15,738 state grant to explore a new process to produce milder and "more consistent" sauerkraut by removing glucose from brine.
New York produces 75% of the $75 million a year U.S. kraut crop. 

OVERSEAS STUDIES draw more interest at colleges this fall. 

The University of Oregon adds extra drill and classes in Japanese, a "real popular area," a spokesman says, noting the school's proximity to the Pacific Rim. "A lot of people are taking Japanese out of sheer interest," says Pace University's provost Joseph M. Pastor Jr. Other schools add Russian majors.
African studies have "broad appeal" at New York University.
International business blooms, often as a co-major.
The Wharton School adds international content without creating special classes. 

Ledger rejection?
Accounting departments lose students to finance, particularly classes slanted toward real estate.
Long Island University adds an MBA in real-estate finance.
And fewer graduate students take full schedules now that the IRS taxes tuition subsidies from companies.
Artificial intelligence and robotics beef up engineering departments, but electrical engineering "has remained the most popular for decades," Marquette University says. 

Soviet openness leads NYU to drop classes on dissident writer Solzhenitsyn as an "anachronism." 

BRIEFS: The Japan Times translates the Nonsexist Word Finder dictionary into Japanese. . . . A.R.A. Food Service, Chicago, donates 25 cents to the American Heart Association for each low-fat, low-cholesterol hamburger sold at Monday's NFL game. . . . Theater chain Cineplex Odeon agrees to more carefully explain when coupons, passes and "VIP tickets" won't be honored at New York City movies. 

