.START 

The Senate Finance Committee, in a series of last-minute moves, filled its long tax-and-spending bill with billions of dollars of giveaways to wealthy individuals and narrow business interests. 

The big vote in committee was a 10-10, largely party-line rejection of an effort by Republicans to reduce the capital-gains tax in line with the wishes of President Bush.
Democratic leaders argued that such a tax reduction would disproportionately benefit the rich.
They replaced it with an expansion of individual retirement accounts, and the fight now goes to the Senate floor. 

Rejection of the capital-gains provision was a major victory for Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas), giving the Democratic leadership the upper hand.
Sen. Bentsen said he intends to use special Senate rules to force advocates of the capital-gains cut to come up with 60 votes rather than the usual 51 votes to approve their provision.
Proponents of cutting the tax are confident of getting a majority, but 60 may be too high a hurdle. 

But in the same legislation the committee approved dozens of tax subsidies for interests that run from timber growers to oil drillers, from insurance companies to small businesses, from farm cooperatives to sports stadiums.
The bill also blows holes in the federal estate tax, which is paid by fewer than 100,000 of the nation's wealthiest people each year.
It even gives a special tax break for rental tuxedos. 

The last two hours of the panel's drafting session, which ended yesterday at 2 a.m. EDT, was an orgy of special-interest legislating by lawmakers of both parties.
This largess was added to other narrow benefits, valued at more than $4 billion over five years, that Sen. Bentsen had appended to his basic bill earlier in the evening after private consultations with his colleagues. 

At the end of the drafting session, an obviously pained Sen. Bill Bradley (D., N.J.) -- a principal architect of the 1986 Tax Reform Act, which excised many special breaks -- said he would vote to send the measure to the Senate floor only reluctantly. "The bill has become increasingly more troubling," he said. 

During the full Senate debate on the bill, perhaps this weekend, efforts will be waged to add a provision cutting the capital-gains tax.
At the same time, attempts are likely to be made to remove some of the narrow tax breaks. 

For his part, Sen. Bentsen said that he was proud of the overall package and that the narrow tax breaks were written generically and approved in public session.
He said he wished there were fewer such amendments, but he added, "That's the way the process works." He said that he would try to detail the major beneficiaries of the amendments but that he couldn't promise the list in time for the floor debate. 

Late Tuesday evening, Sen. Bentsen distributed an 84-page explanation of "miscellaneous tax provisions." The document covered more than 50 narrowly focused and mostly revenue-losing tax-law changes that weren't part of an original plan Mr. Bentsen floated last week.
After the committee accepted those, it added more than a dozen more, which over five years cost more than $500 million. 

Outside the committee room, aides to members briefed lobbyists about the developments.
Many lobbyists said they had gotten more than they had ever expected. 

Some of the biggest new loopholes would be opened in estate-tax laws, which affect only the richest Americans.
The committee agreed to make permanent and widen a soon-to-expire exception once pushed by the wine-making Gallo brothers of California but that would help any multimillionaire with grandchildren.
The provision would allow grandparents to continue to pass on to each grandchild as much as $2 million tax-free, and, in addition, would shield those funds from tax throughout the life of the child. 

In addition, the committee agreed to repeal a 1987 estate-tax law that made it difficult for owners of businesses to avoid estate taxes through the use of preferred stock.
That provision would cost the Treasury $878 million over five years.
The repeal would be retroactive to the date it became effective, Dec. 31, 1987. 

In an interview, Sen. Bentsen, who is a millionaire and a grandfather of five, said none of the estate-tax changes were designed to help himself.
He is a longtime critic of the generation-skipping tax, which he considers confiscatory; he added that his family is in "no way" involved with the kind of transaction that involves the transfer of preferred stock. 

Individual companies would reap substantial benefits from some of the provisions.
An amendment by Sen. Thomas Daschle (D., S.D.) would give a tax credit to a new ethanol-based gasoline additive at a cost of more than $170 million over three years.
According to senators, the big beneficiary would be the major ethanol maker, Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., which would have a new market for its product.
But Daschle aides said the provision was meant to widen the market to other producers, and the direct recipient of the tax break would largely be gasoline refiners. 

Another late amendment, offered by Sen. David Boren (D., Okla.), would give tax relief to farmer cooperatives generally, but a major beneficiary would be the Farmland Industries co-op.
According to staffers, the provision would allow Farmland Industries to reduce its tax liability by millions of dollars by offsetting, with tax losses, a gain from its sale of an oil refinery. 

Thanks to Sen. David Pryor (D., Ark.), timber farmers would get at least two benefits: relief from anti-tax-shelter regulations and the ability to spread income over several years through the reinstatement of a tax break for farmers called income averaging.
Oil interests won a plethora of breaks, especially for marginal wells.
The largest break, for $685 million over five years, would give tax benefits to companies that try to extract oil or gas from tough spots known as "tight sands." 

Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D., Hawaii) helped the home folks by restoring to pineapple and banana growers the ability to use a special method of agricultural accounting called the annual accrual method -- a benefit that has been available since last year only to sugar-cane growers. 

The bill would give local authorities wide power to issue tax-exempt bonds, particularly to finance sports stadiums.
It also would grant lots of little help to lots of small businesses. 

Liquor retailers would get relief from an 1866 tax that many of them had never heard of until the government recently stepped up efforts to collect it.
Some stores got bills for thousands of dollars of taxes and penalties going back 50 years or more.
The committee approved a 1985 statute of limitations proposed by Republican Sen. John Heinz of Pennsylvania. 

Also thanks to Sen. Heinz, rental tuxedos could be written off in two or three years, rather than the current five. 

