.START 

With the Dow Jones Industrial Average and other indexes setting records last week, Wall Street would like nothing so much as to push the October 1987 stock market crash deep into the history books.
But two years later the crash still looms large in how investors think about stocks. 

What didn't happen is undeniably noteworthy: The widely predicted recession, if not depression, never appeared.
And the bull market turned out to be stunned, not dead. 

"The recovery from the crash has gone way beyond what I would have expected and way beyond what the vast majority of analysts thought would happen," says Kenneth Spence, director of the technical analysis group at Salomon Brothers. 

But the negative legacies haven't been erased by new records in the market indexes.
For example, individual investors think a lot less about investing in stocks these days.
Although individuals have been only a minor part of the stock market for years, their presence was reassuring testament to the possibility that the little guy could amass wealth by owning a piece of corporate America.
And the sharp rise in stock prices in the summer of 1987 stoked investor enthusiasm to a fever pitch. 

But the shock of seeing so much wealth evaporate so fast -- an estimated $975 billion in share value vanished in the fourth quarter of 1987 -- is apt to linger for years to come.
In the wake of the crash, individuals fled the stock market in droves.
Some have returned, but very cautiously.
In a recent survey of 500 "active" investors, 61% said they weren't trading much but were "just sitting." 

"I'm not so sure there's a tremendous reservoir of investable funds among individuals," says Charles Clough, chief portfolio analyst at Merrill Lynch, the world's biggest brokerage firm.
Although individuals can be caught up in the emotions of a runaway bull market, at heart they're averse to risk, he says. 

"Sure, at the margin we're all speculators and we'll go after the big killing," says Mr. Clough. "But the individual investor is a saver.
He's more interested in yield than in speculation.
To get an individual to invest in stocks today the broker has to call him.
He's not calling us." 

It is true that many individuals are investing in stocks via the professional managers of mutual funds.
In August, the latest month for which data are available, assets of mutual equity funds stood at $242.1 billion, only a little shy of the record $242.9 billion in August 1987, the peak of the precrash bull market.
But most of that increase came from the market's 30% appreciation over the past year rather than from investors' pockets. 

It's much more difficult to get a reading on how professional money managers feel these days.
They certainly didn't fare much better than frightened individuals in the midst of the crash.
Though they posture themselves as cool-headed professionals, they were infected with speculative fever right up to the crash, and then they ran for cover along with everyone else. 

Only a few money managers could muster the courage to buy stocks in the weeks immediately after the crash.
And their interest in stocks wasn't fully restored until it became apparent in 1988 that the crash wouldn't send the economy into a recession. 

One key to restoring money managers' confidence in the stock market was the frenzy of takeovers, share buy-backs and leveraged buy-outs that grew out of the crash.
With stock prices tumbling 36% from their August 1987 highs to post-crash lows, corporations saw buying back their own stock as a relatively cheap way to stage of show of confidence.
In the 10 days beginning Oct. 19, 1987, corporations announced 314 buy-back programs totaling $23.82 billion.
And in the ensuing months, raiders and executives gorged themselves on a smorgasbord of corporate assets marked down to fire sale prices. 

Once the corporate buyers and the more courageous institutional investors began to bid prices up in 1988, some of the timid money managers saw that they would be left behind unless they put more money into stocks.
And as prices continued rising, the latest investment fad -- computerized tactical asset allocation models -- began signaling portfolio managers to shift more money from cash and bonds into stocks.
With that, the stage was set for a 10-month rally that drove the Dow Jones industrials from 2077.17 to 2785.52 on Friday. 

Mr. Spence of Salomon Brothers also notes that the methods of valuing companies has changed radically in the two years since the crash.
Instead of looking at interest rates, inflation and earnings projections, the leveraged buy-out and merger offers that drove the stock market were based on how much cash a target company could generate to pay off the loans that financed the acquisition.
The 1986 tax reform act encouraged such valuations because it made debt at least equally attractive as equity in financing mergers and takeovers.
As investors saw raiders and buy-out artists applying cash flow valuations to companies, they did, too, with a consequent rise in stock prices. 

"The yardstick that investors were measuring companies against was a different yardstick" in 1989 than before the crash, says Mr. Spence. "They put a tremendous premium on prices over and above earnings." 

But now some managers and analysts are wondering if the lessons of two years ago are being forgotten.
They worry that the same buy-outs and mergers that helped restore confidence in the stock market may have gotten out of hand.
They point to Campeau Corp. 's recent trouble in meeting debt payments as only the latest of a string of problems encountered by heavily leveraged companies that took on debt to pay lofty prices for corporate assets. 

Some of the money managers who were first into the stock market after the crash are among those most worried about the effects of the heavy borrowing and hefty prices that were part of the recovery from the crash.
Brett Brubaker, a money manager at Abraham & Sons in Chicago, went on a buying binge and "felt like a kid in a candy store," he recalls.
But today he's selling stocks to reduce portfolios to 70% to 75% invested levels, and he's even selling short such classically defensive issues as Coca-Cola and Philip Morris. 

"The leveraging of balance sheets and the Ponzi scheme that says you can buy a company at a premium price then sell off the pieces to someone else at an even bigger premium is beginning to unravel," says Mr. Brubaker. "When the music stops, there aren't going to be enough chairs for everyone." 

Caution hasn't been totally thrown to the wind.
There's evidence that the people ultimately responsible for the investment of billions of dollars of institutional cash remain skittish about stocks.
SEI Corp., a search firm that finds money managers for pension funds and other institutional investors, says that in 1987 some 60% of its searches were for equity managers -- typically stock-pickers -- while only 17% were for fixed income managers and 16% were for managers of balanced funds, which include both stocks and bonds. 

But in 1988 and so far in 1989, only 29% of the searches SEI has done have been for equity managers.
And the demand for searches for alternative investments such as real estate and international equities has grown sharply since the crash, says David O'Donovan, manager of the search division. 

Friday's Market Activity 

Optimism about the prospects for lower interest rates helped push the Dow Jones Industrial Average up 11.96 to 

For the week, the Dow industrials climbed 92.70 points -- the biggest weekly point advance since 114.86 points in the week ended June 3, 1988.
However, last week's 3.4% rise was only the second best this year; the Dow industrials gained 3.9% during the week ended Jan. 27, when they rose 87.50 points. 

Prices rallied Friday after the September employment report proved weaker than expected, and the gains held.
There was speculation that the Federal Reserve would soon take another step to lower interest rates. 

Chevron continued its climb on takeover and restructuring speculation, including rumors that British Petroleum may be accumulating the shares and may have an interest in buying the company's West Coast oil refineries.
The stock rose 1 1/4 to 66 on Big Board composite volume of 2.8 million shares, bringing its rise last week to 4 7/8, or 8%.
BP declined comment. 

Stocks of other major oil companies also rose sharply, with traders citing the Chevron rumors and favorable comments on several issues from Dean Witter Reynolds analyst Eugene Nowak.
Texaco advanced 1 5/8 to 53 1/4 on 2.6 million shares, Exxon rose 5/8 to 45 3/8, Mobil gained 2 to 59 3/4, Amoco added 5/8 to 49 3/8, and Phillips Petroleum gained 7/8 to 27 1/4. 

Philip Morris jumped 3 5/8 to 178 5/8, and Procter & Gamble added 2 1/8 to 129.
Aluminum Co. of America rose 1 1/8 to 79 5/8. 

Banking issues rallied as the outlook for rates improved: Citicorp added 3/8 to 34 1/4, Manufacturers Hanover gained 7/8 to 44 1/2, Bankers Trust New York climbed 1 1/2 to 56 7/8, Chase Manhattan advanced 1 3/8 to 44 1/4, and J.P. Morgan rose 1 1/2 to 48.
Also, Federal Home Loan Mortgage went up 2 3/4 to 102 3/4. 

AMR, the parent of American Airlines, rose 3 7/8 to 103 1/4 on 3.9 million shares in adding to its gains following New York developer Donald Trump's $120-a-share takeover offer.
The stock jumped 16 7/8 Thursday on news of the bid.
The Dow Jones Transportation Average gained 5.86 to 1504.62, its first close above 1500 since Sept. 6. 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, which has been on the decline since agreeing to sell its theme parks for less than expected, fell 3/4 to 8 7/8.
The Wall Street Journal reported that analysts believe results for the company's publishing business may also be disappointing.
Separately, the company said it would report a $550 million fourth-quarter gain on the theme parks sale and take $130 million in third-quarter write-offs. 

National Education fell 3 3/4 to 8 1/4 as 1.8 million shares changed hands following the company's estimate that it would post a loss of about $6 million for the third quarter.
Also, the company said fourth-quarter revenue at its Applied Learning unit is expected to be down "significantly" from a year earlier. 

(See related story: "Firms Still Struggle Despite Big Rally" -- WSJ Oct. 9, 1989) 

