.START 

In response to the Aug. 25 letters on my Aug. 9 article, "Pro-Family but Divorced From the Facts": The letters dispute my assertions concerning the effect of female-headed families on the poverty rate for black families and how two-parent black children have a lower standard of living than white children with one parent. 

Everyone admits that female-headed families multiplied in the 1970s and that they are more likely to be poor than two-parent families.
The question is how much poverty is caused by female headship and can be addressed by attempts to "revive the traditional family." 

If there had been no changes in the age, race and gender of household heads since 1950, the poverty rate in 1980 would have been 23% lower than it was.
This leaves 77% of poverty associated with non-familial factors.
It also overstates the effect of change in family arrangements in at least two ways.
First, it includes race and age factors not caused by family dissolution.
Second, it assumes that people who moved into female-headed families in the 1970s had the same basic characteristics as those who were married.
In fact, marital dissolution and illegitimacy tend to occur among those who are more vulnerable to poverty anyway; much growth in female-headed families may be a "reshuffling" rather than a root of poverty. 

Additionally, family structure does not explain recent growth in poverty rates. "Family composition changes contributed almost nothing to the increase in poverty between 1979 and 1983," writes Harvard researcher Mary Jo Bane.
The incidence of pre-transfer poverty was higher in 1985 than in the 1970s or late 1960s, reports Isabel Sawhill in the Journal of Economic Literature.
This trend was almost as strong for male-headed families as for all non-elderly families, suggesting that "demographic changes . . . are not driving this result." 

Deterioration in the position of American blacks is real, and not to be blamed simply on collapse of the black family.
The gap in employment rates between blacks and whites has risen steadily since 1955, with especially sharp increases in the 1970s.
Black poverty rates rose as sharply among married couples after 1978 as among female-headed families, with particularly steep increases among families headed by a person aged 25 to 34.
Black family incomes were further behind white ones in 1987 than at any point in the 1970s, and the income gap between black married-couple families and white ones had widened. 

Black poverty rates were significantly higher in 1987 than in 1978, even though most of the increase in female-headed families occurred before 1978.
Since 1978 there has been a 69% increase in the number of blacks living at a level below half of the poverty line; this increase has occurred equally for black married-couple and female-headed families. 

My statement that children in black two-parent families have a lower standard of living than children in one-parent white families was in error.
Nonetheless, author Martha Hill analyzed data collected by the University of Michigan's Panel Study on Income Dynamics on 5,000 representative families over a decade.
She found that the long-term family income of black children in two-parent families was lower than the long-term income of non-black children who spent most of the decade in mother-only families.
Ms. Bane reports that the majority of the difference in black and white poverty rates "comes from higher poverty rates for blacks within household types." 

Stephanie Coontz 

Evergreen State College 

Olympia, Wash. 

