.START 

Sanford Sigoloff, chief executive officer of financially troubled L.J. Hooker Corp., said he will accelerate the sale of the B. Altman & Co. department store chain. 

Mr. Sigoloff said he hopes to have B. Altman sold before the end of the year. "There has been interest in acquiring B. Altman & Co. since January," Mr. Sigoloff said in an interview. "By making this announcement, we hope those interested will become keener." 

Although L.J. Hooker doesn't have the cash necessary to continue its investment in the B. Altman chain, Mr. Sigoloff said he believes the name still has consumer value. "We've kept it from death's doorstep, and hopefully somebody can take it to another level of growth," he said. "For us, it's not in the cards." 

B. Altman operates seven stores, primarily in the New York metropolitan area.
In September, Mr. Sigoloff decided not to open a new, completely fixtured B. Altman unit in Buffalo, 

Mr. Sigoloff emphasized that Bonwit Teller, L.J. Hooker's other fully owned retail chain, isn't for sale. 

L.J. Hooker acquired the chain in 1987 for a little more than $100 million.
Mr. Sigoloff declined to disclose B. Altman's sales but noted that during the summer months, B. Altman suffered from low inventory levels. 

The company most frequently cited as a potential buyer for the B. Altman chain is Pyramid Cos., a mall developer based in Syracuse, N.Y. Robert J. Congel, managing partner, was unavailable for comment. 

Some retail observers believe that B. Altman has poor prospects. "The chain has lost its customer base," said Kurt Barnard, publisher of Barnard's Retail Marketing Report in New York. "The leases have value, certainly, but I expect the stores will be acquired by other chains and operated under a different name.
Turning it around would be a long, enormously costly process, with little assurance of success." 

In Houston, Robert Sakowitz, chief executive of Sakowitz Inc., said he is continuing to discuss the possibility of buying L.J. Hooker's majority interest in the specialty chain. "We're in the process of talking with potential investors, both U.S. and foreign," said Mr. Sakowitz. 

L.J. Hooker filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in August.
Its parent company, Hooker Corp. of Sydney, Australia, is being managed by a court-appointed provisional liquidator.
L.J. Hooker has already sold its majority interest in Parisian Inc., a Southern department store chain, to management. 

