.START 

{Second of three articles on going public.} 

Roger Ferguson was outnumbered, 19 to 1. 

The Network General Corp. chief financial officer looked around the room at the "all hands" meeting where details for taking the company public were being hammered out.
He was the only company insider.
The other "hands" were pricey investment bankers, attorneys, and accountants. 

"The sound of meters clicking was deafening," he says, only partly in jest. 

Mr. Ferguson isn't alone in dreading those meters.
Costs topped the list of headaches from initial public offerings in a survey of chief executive officers who took companies public last year, say consultants Carter Valin Pollen.
No wonder: The tab for an IPO generally starts at $250,000 and swells with the size of the offering. 

Worries about stock market conditions ran a close second in the poll.
And the IPO process is fraught with other frustrations, as well: the tedium of drafting a prospectus, the shock of having to disclose company secrets, the long hours necessary to juggle business and the IPO. Still, it's the unknown and the unknowable -- costs and the vagaries of the market -- that many say make going public such a harrowing experience. 

"A great deal of uncertainty" permeates the process from start to finish, says Jay R. Ritter, a University of Illinois associate professor who has studied IPOs.
The final tally on costs remains a question mark until the night before the offering -- often winding up many hundreds of thousands of dollars above initial estimates.
And when market conditions change, Mr. Ritter adds, "it's not at all unusual to have offerings postponed, perhaps even for years." 

With all its potential pitfalls, an IPO isn't "an undertaking for the faint of heart," says Harold Hutchings, president of newly public Cortex Pharmaceuticals Inc.
For the uninitiated, adds Martin Weiss, a consultant who has written a book on going public, it's like "walking into a bear trap." Take the experience of Andy Buttacavoli, president of Cattleguard Inc.
The 40-year-old Houston restaurateur admits that he didn't "know what it entailed" to go public. "I was learning it from zero." The education proved costly.
Mr. Buttacavoli says Cattleguard's $4 million initial public offering ran up $900,000 in expenses, including more than $550,000 to the investment banking firm D.H. Blair & Co. 

Among the many documents a would-be public company must file with the Securities and Exchange Commission is a set of audited financial statements.
Cattleguard, now expanding in four states largely as a Sears, Roebuck & Co. concessionaire, was a one-restaurant company until two years ago and hadn't had auditors. "My wife kept the books then," Mr. Buttacavoli says. "This was a kitchen-table situation." The company's board of directors -- Mr. Buttacavoli, his wife and his dad -- met once a year. 

"We had to go back in our records and prove what business we did in every single month" for the auditors, Mr. Buttacavoli says.
Fortunately for Cattleguard, he recalls, Mrs. Buttacavoli was trained in accounting and "kept boxes and boxes and boxes of meticulous records." 

There were more surprises.
Early on, Cattleguard and D.H. Blair talked about pricing the offering at $6 a share.
But when it came time to set the actual price, D.H. Blair pointed to "all the negatives in Houston" -- mainly the economic slump -- and said it could sell the one million shares better at $4 each.
The stock "went from $4 to $8 in 20 minutes" of trading, Mr. Buttavacoli recalls.
He doesn't fault D.H. Blair, acknowledging that the underwriter wanted to guarantee activity in the stock.
Still, he says somewhat wistfully, "I think they would have done OK at $6." 

The IPO for Network General, though still plenty nerve-racking, was exceptional for its smoothness.
The $15.2 million offering underwritten by Alex.
Brown & Sons and Hambrecht & Quist cost only $385,000. "That's on the low side for completed offerings," Mr. Ferguson says. 

The Mountain View, Calif., maker of computer networking systems went public in February, when the IPO market was sluggish and services were relatively cheap.
Even printing, a major piece of IPO costs, "was negotiable because not much else was going on" and companies wanted the business, Mr. Ferguson says. 

Dick Franyo, head of corporate finance at Alex.
Brown, says companies backed by venture capital, such as Network General, are already run much like public companies, so IPOs aren't nearly so stressful for them. "They've got the right lawyers, the right accountants.
They ask the right questions," Mr. Franyo says.
He estimates that nearly three-fourths of Alex.
Brown's IPOs are for companies with venture-capital backing. 

Many companies spend a lot of time selecting the underwriter that will take them public.
Mr. Ferguson had discussions with eight investment banking firms, and six gave presentations to Network General's board, which chose two.
By contrast, Mr. Buttacavoli went with D.H. Blair because some private investors in Cattleguard, including its chief financial officer, had done business with the firm before. "We didn't shop around one bit," Mr. Buttacavoli says. 

For some executives, going public means giving up a lot of private time until the offering is completed. "It's almost like having two jobs," says David Treiger, chief financial officer of EnClean Inc. Mr. Treiger remembers 90-hour workweeks, including some all-nighters, when he helped take the environmental cleanup company public earlier this year. 

The most onerous task is drafting the prospectus that's the centerpiece of the registration statement filed with the SEC. "It seems unproductive for a businessman who likes to get things done" to sit around a table for hours quibbling over where to put commas, says Mr. Treiger.
Network General's Mr. Ferguson remembers impassioned discussion at one point on whether to use "extremely" or "very." 

Even worse for some than the writing itself is what they're being forced to say. "It was traumatic for us," says Dave Torrey, vice president of investor relations Octel Communications Corp., a Milpitas, Calif., maker of voice processing systems that went public for $14.7 million. "We were proud of our profitability, but we would rather have had competitors underestimate us.
We also knew that the success we were having could attract other competitors." 

Dr. Hutchings of Cortex was dismayed when a trade magazine reprinted a page on new product development from the company's prospectus. "Your innermost secrets are revealed," he says. 

Once the paper work is finished, the underwriter escorts the company's executives around the country to drum up interest in its shares.
This road show often hits eight or more cities in about a week. "We did a breakfast in Minneapolis and a lunch in Chicago," recalls Mr. Torrey of Octel.
The grueling schedule is "a very stressful exercise," calling for presentations several times a day, he recalls. 

For some time after the offering, the very executives who worked so hard to take the company public are prohibited from selling their own shares.
This "lockup" period, usually 90 days, exists so "investors don't have to worry about insiders withholding information, then dumping the shares before the bad information comes out," says Mr. Ritter, the Illinois professor. 

Just because executives aren't buying and selling shares in the new company doesn't mean other employees won't.
Octel's chief executive, seeing his company's work interrupted with each surge or fall of Octel's stock, sent a message to all 800 employees over the company's voice-mail system. "He told everyone, 'Here's how you handle the variances in the stock price, '" recalls A.J. Sekel, director of corporate communications. "And he explained to everyone that you can't sit back and watch the ticker." 

After weathering the rigors of the IPO, executives find that subsequent public offerings, by comparison, are easy.
Network General just sold additional stock.
Mr. Ferguson says the whole thing took two weeks and was "a virtual breeze." 

The Challenges of Going Public 

How chief executives rate the various aspects of initial public offerings 

Before the Offering: 

Registration statement 

After the Offering: 

Monitoring shareholder 

Corporate/investor 

Proxy solicitation, 

Source: Based on a 1989 survey by Carter Valin Pollen, New York 

