.START 

Young & Rubicam Inc. and two senior executives, including the head of its New York office, were indicted by a federal grand jury on conspiracy and racketeering charges for allegedly bribing Jamaican officials to win the Jamaica Tourist Board ad account in 1981. 

Jamaica's former minister of tourism, another Jamaican and a former Young & Rubicam executive were also charged. 

The indictment levels sweeping charges that the big New York ad agency paid a Jamaican official kickbacks totaling $900,000 between 1981 and 1986 to secure the account.
It contends that the Jamaican official in turn bribed the then-Minister of Tourism, Eric Anthony Abrahams, on behalf of Young & Rubicam.
And it holds that the agency bribed or attempted to bribe two other individuals so they would keep quiet about the arrangement. 

The indictment, returned by a federal grand jury in New Haven, Conn., seeks $4.75 million from Young & Rubicam, including a $1 million fine and the $3.75 million the agency earned from the account over four years.
That amount indicates that the ad account billed just $4 million to $5 million a year, not the almost $10 million industry executives had estimated.
The individuals named, if convicted, face fines ranging up to $500,000 and prison terms of up to 25 years.
Young & Rubicam vigorously denies all the charges. 

The charges center on Young & Rubicam's hiring of Arnold Foote Jr., a Jamaican executive, as its liaison in Jamaica.
Young & Rubicam paid Mr. Foote a third of its 15% commission, or about $180,000 a year, mostly between April 1981 and May 1985, with checks made out to Ad Ventures, a Cayman Islands company Mr. Foote set up.
The U.S. government contends that Mr. Foote acted in an official capacity as an adviser to the tourist board, and therefore Young & Rubicam violated the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which bars paying officials to get business.
Both Young & Rubicam and Mr. Foote maintain that Mr. Foote wasn't a public official. 

"The indictment has characterized every payment to Foote as a kickback because they have decided to characterize him as a public official," said R. John Cooper, a Young & Rubicam executive vice president and general counsel. "If that's the law, any time you do business with a person in a foreign country, you're at risk." 

Mr. Foote also denied he was a public official, denied making payments to Mr. Abrahams, and added, "In any event, the award of this contract was not within the province of the minister of tourism." Mr. Foote last week sued Young & Rubicam for $300,000 in back pay. 

Industry executives say the indictment, whether or not the charges prove true, deals a damaging blow to the reputation of Young & Rubicam, one of the grandest old names in advertising.
It also gives an indication of just how competitive the new-business efforts of agencies have become.
Agencies in today's tough ad environment are only too anxious to hire people with close ties to an account in order to help win it -- usually a perfectly legal move.
Young & Rubicam itself, one of the most agressive agencies, hired a retired Army colonel in 1986 to help it successfully pitch for the U.S. Army account.
The incident prompted a conflict-of-interest complaint from a competing agency, but the colonel was cleared by the Pentagon. 

Young & Rubicam's Mr. Cooper said the agency had no knowledge of any payments Mr. Foote may have made to others, including Mr. Abrahams, the Minister of Tourism from 1981 to 1984.
But the indictment alleges a laundry list of payments to Mr. Abrahams and others, which it charges were made at the bidding of Young & Rubicam.
It alleges that a middleman, Frederick W. Sturges, was paid $9,000 after he threatened to expose the conspiracy.
It also says the agency unsuccessfully attempted to "buy {the} silence" of Noel C. Mignott, a manager at the Jamaica Tourist Board's New York office.
Neither man could be reached. 

Also named in the indictment were Arthur R. Klein, an executive vice president and head of the New York office; Steve M. McKenna, who had been a senior vice president and who now is head of business affairs at the agency's Wunderman unit; and Thomas Spangenberg, a vice president and account executive who has since left by mutual agreement unrelated to the indictment.
Mr. McKenna is indicted on only one count of perjury relating to his grand jury testimony. 

Attorneys for Messrs.
McKenna and Spangenberg maintained their clients' innocence.
The other defendants' lawyers couldn't be reached.
Young & Rubicam has been paying for the three men's lawyers, but Mr. Cooper said it hasn't yet determined whether it will continue paying for Messrs.
Spangenberg's and McKenna's. 

Also playing a role in the indictment is author Robin Moore, who wrote "The Green Berets" and co-wrote "The Happy Hooker," and who the indictment says acted as a middleman.
Mr. Moore first approached Young & Rubicam in 1981 about pitching the account, and introduced agency executives to Mr. Foote, who was close to the administration of Prime Minister Edward Seaga.
Mr. Moore, who was convicted of tax evasion in 1986, has been cooperating with authorities and hasn't been charged. 

Mr. Cooper readily admits that the agency hired Mr. Foote because of his contacts.
But he said Young & Rubicam won the account purely as the result of a 1981 competition in which Benton & Bowles -- the predecessor agency to D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles Inc. -- as well as Intermarco Advertising Inc. participated.
The indictment charges that Young & Rubicam was awarded the account "minutes" after Mr. Klein discussed paying kickbacks to Messrs.
Foote and Abrahams "through an 'advertising agency' controlled by Foote." It also alleges that kickbacks were required by Mr. Abrahams. 

Young & Rubicam's Mr. Cooper denies those charges, saying the agency won the account based on its presentation. 

