.START 

BMA, an odd corporate combination of insurance, laboratory testing, real estate and broadcasting businesses, isn't widely followed.
But analysts say it should be. 

Last year, the Kansas City, Mo., concern bought back 112,000 of its shares and adopted a holding company structure, giving it added flexibility.
This year, it has sold one of its two television stations and agreed to sell the other. 

Analysts think they see a pattern. "I get the impression something is going on at this company," says Kidder Peabody's Herbert Buchbinder. "They're raising cash.
One possibility is they'll make a bid to buy their own stock." 

Some analysts suspect that BMA's real estate holdings might be put on the block next. "They're up to something," says Fred Shahrabani at Fox-Pitt Kelton.
One guess: "They might go private." 

Oscar Klein, BMA's chief financial officer, shrugs off the speculation with a boilerplate response. "We continue to look at various strategic alternatives," he says.
And as to specifics? "No comment." 

The speculation, of course, could be totally off base.
However, the reasons for suspecting that BMA might launch a buy-out -- its fundamentals are improving and its price is below its book value -- would seem to recommend the stock even if a buy-out doesn't occur. 

BMA was quoted Friday at $34.25 a share, up 25 cents, in over-the-counter trading, a small discount from its book value of $34.69 a share. 

But its prize asset is its nearly 70% ownership of Home Office Reference Laboratory, which conducts blood tests for life insurance companies.
BMA owns about one share of Home Office for each BMA share outstanding.
It carries its Home Office investment on its books at about $3 a share.
However, Home Office closed Friday at $17.75 a share, up 37.5 cents, in national over-the-counter trading. 

Home Office's business has prospered as life insurers have expanded the range of customers that they test for acquired immune deficiency syndrome or other diseases or for signs of illegal drug use.
Competition forced it to cut prices last year, but it retains an estimated 70% of the life insurance testing market.
Analysts predict it will have a slight dip in earnings this year and an upturn in 1990. 

BMA's big group life and health insurance line, which consists mostly of group health policies sold to dairy farmers, has taken it on the chin in recent years.
It had a pretax operating loss of $5.2 million in 1987, which widened last year to a $10.3 million loss. 

The good news, perhaps, is that the business is highly cyclical.
In the two years before 1987, the group had total pretax earnings of $17.9 million.
And premiums are rising now.
Thus, Frederick Sandburg of brokerage concern Legg Mason Wood Walker predicts a "dramatic improvement" in earnings for the operation, and BMA's Mr. Klein says, "Let's hope {group health} is in the black in 1990." 

BMA's individual life and health insurance business is steadier, but it too has had some tough competition.
Elizabeth Malone, an analyst at Alex.
Brown & Sons Inc., says the worst is over.
She predicts pretax earnings of $13 million from the business this year, compared with $9.5 million in 1988. 

The parent company earned $1.92 a share before investment gains and extraordinary items in 1988.
Ms. Malone forecasts a jump to $2.05 a share this year and $3.35 in 1990.
But she is neutral on the stock, citing its fairly high current price of almost 18 times last year's per-share operating earnings and nearly 17 times her own forecast for this year's earnings. 

Other analysts, however, are bullish.
With its group health insurance business "coming out of a serious downturn," Mr. Buchbinder says, BMA's insurance operation is worth "substantially more" than its stock market valuation. 

Friday's Market Activity 

The Nasdaq Composite Index rose 2.98 on strong volume to 483.64, its sixth consecutive record close.
The over-the-counter market's seven-session streak of gains is its longest rally since a 10-session skein in July. 

Friday's advance gave the composite index a 2.2% gain for the week, largely on the strength of resurgent technology stocks. 

Apple Computer, second on the most active list, surged 2 5/8 to 48 1/8.
Intel gained 1/2 to 33 1/2, and Microsoft rose 1/2 to 79 3/4. 

Jaguar was the most active issue for the second day, rising 1/4 to 11 7/8 on volume of more than 4.5 million of its American depository receipts.
Ford Motor, which has announced it intends to buy as much as 15% of Jaguar, received federal clearance to start acquiring the British car maker's shares but wouldn't say whether it had bought any. 

Also on the active list, Daisy Systems tumbled 1 1/4 to 1 1/8.
The company said it expects to report an operating loss for its fourth quarter, ended Sept. 30, because revenue was substantially below its third quarter's $44.9 million.
It also said it is having a "significant liquidity problem" and retained Bear Stearns to help it consider "financial alternatives." 

First Executive climbed 3/8 to 13 on nearly three million shares.
A filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission disclosed that Fort Worth, Texas-based Airlie Group was the main buyer of a three million-share block of First Executive's when-issued convertible preferred in late September. 

The group was formed by Dort A. Cameron III, a former aide to junk bond king Michael Milken when he worked at Drexel Burnham Lambert.
Other partners in the group are understood to include Texas investors Sid and Lee Bass.
First Executive's chairman, Fred Carr, declined to comment on the disclosure. 

Airlie isn't the only one interested in First Executive's shares.
Rosewood Financial Partners last week asked First Executive to waive standstill restrictions on a 20% First Executive stake held by I.C.H.
In a letter to Mr. Carr, Rosewood asked that First Executive respond to its request by Friday.
But Mr. Carr said Friday that First Executive's board hadn't yet met to consider the request and hadn't responded to Rosewood's letter. 

