.START 

Journalist Seymour Hersh won a libel suit brought against him by former Indian Prime Minister Morarji Desai. 

Mr. Hersh had identified Mr. Desai as a paid informant of the Central Intelligence Agency in the Johnson and Nixon administrations in a book about former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. 

After a three-week trial, a federal jury found that Mr. Desai could prove neither the falsity of Mr. Hersh's statements nor any malice or doubts on his part in making them.
The 94-year-old Mr. Desai, who had sought $100 million in damages, remained in Bombay during the trial.
He was prime minister of India from 1977 to 1979, and filed the suit in 

The case raised eyebrows when Judge Charles R. Norgle Sr. ruled that Mr. Desai would have to show only a preponderance of evidence to establish that Mr. Hersh's charges were false, rather than the usual standard of clear and convincing evidence. 

"We won the case on truth," said Mr. Hersh's attorney, Michael Nussbaum. "And that's the most wonderful victory you can have in a libel case." Mr. Nussbaum, of the Washington firm of Nussbaum, Owen & Webster, represented Mr. Hersh with his brother, Bernard J. Nussbaum, of the Chicago firm Sonnenschein Carlin Nath & Rosenthal. 

Mr. Desai's lawyer, Cyriac D. Kappil of Chicago, was hired by the ad hoc Indians Abroad for Truth.
Sources familiar with the group said that it brought the suit in Chicago, Mr. Hersh's birthplace, because they thought it would provide the greatest challenge to Mr. Hersh's reputation. 

In "The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White House," Mr. Hersh, a former New York Times reporter, described Mr. Desai as a $20,000-a-year informant to the White House up to and during the India-Pakistan war of 1971.
Testifying at the trial for Mr. Desai, Mr. Kissinger said he doubted Mr. Desai was a CIA source but claimed he would have no way of knowing the names of the agency's sources. 

Mr. Hersh, who won the Pulitzer Prize for reporting about the My Lai massacre during the Vietnam War, said the case was a vindication of the use of confidential sources in reporting on national security matters.
He was not compelled to release his sources at the trial, but he did submit notes from his interviews with six U.S. government officials to establish his state of mind while writing the book. 

Mr. Kappil said that he would notify Mr. Desai of the verdict and would decide whether to appeal or seek a new trial. 

AN OHIO LAW FIRM that had great aspirations folds. 

Smith & Schnacke, a Dayton firm that expanded rapidly in recent years, has dissolved.
Most of its lawyers have joined Cleveland-based Thompson, Hine and Flory, which becomes the second largest firm in the state. 

At its largest, Smith & Schnacke had 170 lawyers and offices in Dayton, Cincinnati and Orlando, Fla.
The firm had fewer than 100 lawyers near the time it dissolved.
About 45 partners and 36 associates will join Thompson Hine, bringing that firm's total to 342 lawyers in eight offices in Ohio, Florida, Washington, D.C., and Maryland. 

Thompson Hine's managing partner, John H. Gherlein, said his firm wanted to expand its practice to Dayton and along the Interstate 75 corridor and build its government contracts expertise, one of Smith & Schnacke's strengths. 

According to Richard F. Carlile, Smith & Schnacke's former managing partner, about 15 lawyers were not asked to join or declined invitations to join Thompson Hine.
Mr. Carlile will run Thompson Hine's Dayton office. 

Mr. Carlile said he expects most of Smith & Schnacke's clients to retain Thompson Hine.
Those clients include Mead Corp., Duriron Co. and Amcast Industrial Corp. Thompson Hine represents Society Corp., Alltel Corp. and Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. 

Smith & Schnacke aspired to become a regional firm with offices along I-75 from Ohio to Florida.
But after partners started fleeing the firm, Mr. Carlile said, "we felt at the size we were it made sense to affiliate with another firm." 

"Our plan -- if there was a plan -- really never worked out," he said. 

BAHAMIAN PRIME MINISTER drops libel suit against NBC and correspondent. 

Sir Lynden O. Pindling filed suit in Canada in 1984, alleging he was defamed by NBC programs in 1983 and 1984.
The broadcasts linked the prime minister to drug smugglers who were allegedly paying off Bahamian officials. 

The case marked the first time a non-Canadian had sued a U.S. network in Canadian court.
Lawyers had feared the suit might prompt other public figures to bring libel cases in Canada to circumvent First Amendment press protections. 

In the U.S., Supreme Court decisions dictate that public officials and figures can win libel cases only if they prove that a statement was false, defamatory, and published with knowledge of its falsity or reckless disregard of whether it was true or false. 

Canadian libel law is based on English common law, which doesn't offer such strong protections to the press.
The burden is on the defendant to prove that factual statements were true. 

Sir Lynden had sought $2 million each in compensatory and punitive damages against NBC, a unit of General Electric Co., and correspondent Brian Ross. 

NBC said it didn't pay Sir Lynden any money and didn't apologize.
In a news release, NBC News president Michael Gartner said, "This is a complete vindication of our journalism.
This lawsuit should never have been brought in the first place." 

Sir Lynden's attorney, F. Lee Bailey, couldn't be reached for comment. 

NBC said Sir Lynden will appear on NBC's "Today" program Wednesday.
The network said that prior to dropping the suit, he had declined NBC's requests for interviews. 

SUNDSTRAND CORP. names new board members in preparation for legal battle. 

As it girds for a fight over its involvement in a recent defense procurement scandal, the company appoints David C. Acheson, a retired attorney who has served as U.S. attorney in Washington, D.C., and assistant to the secretary of the Treasury; Robert H. Bork, who has served as U.S. solicitor general, acting U.S. attorney general, and a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia; and Charles Marshall, the recently retired vice chairman of American Telephone & Telegraph Co. 

They will serve as a "special independent litigation committee" in connection with pending shareholder suits.
A spokesman said the current nine board members have been named as defendants in the litigation and the new directors will be able to objectively evaluate legal developments. 

Sundstrand last year pleaded guilty to five counts of fraud against the Defense Department and agreed to pay $126.3 million in fines, damages and penalties for violating defense-contract accounting and pricing regulations.
The company earlier this year also settled civil charges brought by the Defense Department for $71.3 million earlier. 

Shareholders have filed five separate derivative suits -- in which holders sue the company on behalf of itself -- charging that certain former and current officials were responsible for Sundstrand's involvement in the scandal. 

Sundstrand is contesting the suits, which have been consolidated into one action in federal court in Chicago. 

COMPANY WINS A ROUND in dispute with insurer over costs of toxic cleanup.
Broderick Investment Co. won a key point in its dispute with an insurance carrier over who will bear the costs of complying with a government-ordered cleanup of a toxic waste site near Denver.
Federal Judge Zita L. Weinshienk in Denver ruled last week that the insurance policies' pollution exclusion was ambiguous and should be interpreted in Broderick's favor. 

A jury trial is set to begin next Monday.
The verdict could be critical because the jury will base its verdict in part on the judge's interpretation of the Hartford Fire Insurance Co. 's policies. 

Only a handful of coverage disputes concerning cleanups under the federal Superfund law have been tried before juries.
Under Superfund, those who generated, transported or disposed of toxic waste are liable for its cleanup. 

The case involves toxic waste at a former wood-treating plant operated from 1947 until 1981 by the company's predecessor, Broderick Wood Products Inc. 

Hartford Fire, a unit of ITT Corp. of New York, has argued that its policies don't cover the cleanup because Broderick knew it was polluting the environment.
A Hartford spokesman said the company disagreed with the judge's interpretation of its policies.
Several other insurance companies settled with Broderick before the trial. 

Broderick has conceded that waste was intentionally disposed on the site.
But the company did not expect the waste to seep into the groundwater and contaminate neighboring property, says Brooke Jackson of the Denver law firm of Holland & Hart, representing Broderick. 

Judge Weinshienk ruled that since the policies only cover damage to property owned by third parties, the dispute should not turn on whether the company polluted its own site. 

Instead, the jury will determine whether Broderick expected the waste to enter the groundwater. 

A GRAND JURY in New York has found no evidence of criminal conduct in the crash of a USAir jetliner last month at New York's LaGuardia airport.
District Attorney John Santucci said the panel had interviewed 25 witnesses who challenged allegations that the pilot of Flight 5050 behaved strangely and disappeared after the Sept. 20 crash, in which two people died after the plane slid off the runway and partly into the nearby East River.
But a spokesman for Mr. Santucci said the grand jury investigation will continue. 

