.START 

Is this company's stock a good bet? 

Managers have staked their reputation on a blockbuster project.
They have piled on $1.3 billion of debt, much of it falling due in the short term, and effectively have been borrowing to pay interest and dividends. 

The company is mired in scandals over its pricing and testing practices.
And since December it has written off $300 million on secret projects, knocking shareholders equity down to $914 million. 

This company isn't a riverboat gambler.
This is Northrop, the leading contractor on history's largest defense order, which is valued as high as $70 billion.
The big payoff Northrop is awaiting is full production in coming years of the B-2 stealth bomber, dubbed the "batmobile" after its successful test flight in July.
The B-2, which already kicks in about half of Northrop's sales, could make or -- some say -- break Northrop. 

That's why some investors call Northrop "the B-2 play." Several bears in Los Angeles, Northrop's home town, are betting Northrop stock will dive on any bad news about the B-2.
Last week, Northrop stock took a knock after one of Rockwell International's B-1s made an emergency landing in California.
Some Los Angeles radio stations mistakenly said a B-2 had crashed. 

Northrop finished the week at 21 3/4, up 1/2 Friday.
But the stock has lately eroded on fears that Northrop might have to cut its fat $1.20-a-share annual dividend rate. 

"If they cut the dividend, the stock cracks," says Drexel Burnham Lambert analyst Phil Friedman.
But Jack Campbell, Northrop's chief financial officer, says, "I see no reason why we can't sustain the current payout." 

Later this month, Congress is expected to approve spending about $4 billion in 1990 for B-2s.
Northrop would get about half that amount and subcontractors the rest, analysts say.
If the program goes forward as planned and the planes work, they say, Northrop could make big profits on the B-2s, whose average price tag is $530 million each. 

But the B-2 program is a political minefield.
The Air Force wants 132 planes over 10 years, and Northrop says it's counting on those orders.
Yet many defense experts contend the U.S. needs only 60 B-2s.
In August, the influential Armed Forces Journal International advocated, "Let's bag this $70 billion bird." The B-2 can't find mobile missiles, "the targets that count most," the publication said, though its chairman, former defense secretary nominee John Tower, later came out in support of the B-2. 

Even some analysts who are mildly positive on Northrop stock are worried. "Northrop could get caught in the crossfire," says Wolfgang Demisch of UBS Securities in New York. 

If Congress cuts or halts the B-2 program, a big chunk of Northrop's sales would evaporate.
If Congress sets tough performance hurdles on the planes or demands costly warranties, some analysts say Northrop's potential profit on the contract might shrink.
But Northrop's debt wouldn't automatically disappear. 

"They already have a cash crunch," Drexel's Mr. Friedman says.
In 1989's first six months, Northrop had to borrow $283 million, boosting short-term debt by 63%, to $729 million, partly because of delays in the B-2 program.
Recently, Northrop renegotiated its loan covenants so senior debt could go as high as 150% of equity, but "they're already bumping up against that limit," Mr. Friedman says. 

It can be risky to leverage a company that sells to Uncle Sam, as defense contractor Tracor's financial problems show. "As a policy, we don't want to be in debt," says Northrop's Mr. Campbell.
But the government expects contractors to invest more of their own money in defense programs, he says. 

In 1991, Northrop must pay lenders $180 million, along with annual interest of about $120 million.
Chriss Street of the Reorganized Securities Group in Los Angeles, a big bear on Northrop stock, says Northrop's finances aren't well understood, but if the company tried to refinance in the public market, "the risks would have to be detailed." Based on some analysts' 1990 profit estimate of $2 a share for Northrop -- it now is showing losses -- the stock is considered expensive for a defense issue. 

Some say the bears are all wet.
Congress isn't expected to debate the B-2's virtues again this year, so there might not be any bad news on the plane for a while.
Moreover, if Congress cans the B-2 through no fault of Northrop, the company would get a cancellation fee, which it could use to reduce debt.
Meanwhile, analysts say Northrop might get federal funds for other projects, such as the advanced tactical fighter, scheduled to start flying next year. 

Rick Wartzman in Los Angeles and Andy Pasztor in Washington contributed to this article. 

Northrop 

(NYSE; Symbol: NOC) 

Business: Defense contractor 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Sales: $5.80 billion 

Net Income: $104.2 million; or $2.22 a share* 

Second quarter, June 30, 1989: 

Net Loss: $78.1 million vs. net income: $21.9 million; or 47 cents a share 

Average daily trading volume: 

138,415 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 47 million 

*Includes credit of $135.1 million;or $2.87 a share from cumulative effect on prior periods of an accounting change. 

