.START 

The chairman of Kloeckner Werke AG, faced with the prospect of weaker European steel demand just as his company's financial recovery takes hold, says the group will stick to its game plan of branching out of steel and moving further into markets for higher-quality steel products. 

The now widely diversified West German steelmaking concern this week reported that operating profit more than doubled during the year ended Sept. 30, while its sales increased by what the company described as a "double-digit" figure. 

Kloeckner Chairman Herbert Gienow, in an interview during an industry conference, acknowledged that the burst in profit growth was "largely due to very strong steel demand." But even as the company's steel businesses led the way last year, Kloeckner is cautious about relying too much on steel in the future. 

"We don't want to increase capacity," Mr. Gienow said. "We are concentrating on improving margins." 

Kloeckner in recent years has undergone a major restructuring as unprofitable steel mills have been closed and the group's focus has swung firmly toward quality and specialty steels, which command higher premiums. 

Kloeckner's recent turnaround comes from the better productivity provided by capacity cuts, Mr. Gienow said, rather than simply being a reflection of stronger steel demand. "The word 'boom' {in steel demand} seems to suggest that our success was undeserved," he said. 

The latest year's profit rise adds to the record of sharp improvement of the past three years.
In fiscal 1988, Kloeckner made an operating profit of 130 million marks ($68.9 million), compared with a slim one million marks a year earlier. 

The company has gone more than a decade without paying a dividend, but Mr. Gienow said he is now "fairly confident" that the company will be able to resume dividend payments in fiscal 1990. 

Profit from fiscal 1989 would be used to continue "strengthening the company's inner structure," Mr. Gienow said.
The company's investment efforts will be focused on improving technological processes to produce higher quality products that have superior strength and mechanical qualities. 

Through the 1980s Kloeckner has rid itself of blast furnaces and raised to 95% the proportion of production through the more efficient "continuous casting" method.
That compares with a world average of 60%. 

Analysts say Kloeckner hit its nadir in 1987, with the group suffering the combined effects of a dismal business climate, undercapitalization and poor earnings power.
In that year the company took a 380 million mark write-down on Maxhuette, a Bavarian ironworks that filed for bankruptcy, in which it had a 49.6% stake. 

In its efforts to regroup, the company diversified away from steelmaking so much that steel now contributes only around 50% total group sales.
The company has entered into areas such as the capital goods and food industries in an effort to get away from the ups and downs of the steel business.
Mr. Gienow indicated that the push away from steel isn't over. 

"We want to continue diversifying," he said.
Non-steel interests, which currently contribute 3.5 billion marks to group sales, are planned to rise to 5 to 6 billion marks by the mid-1990s, Mr. Gienow said. 

