.START 

For a company that nobody wanted four years ago, Spanish truck producer Enasa is enjoying a startling change in fortune. 

Four European giants, Fiat S.p.
A. of Italy, AB Volvo of Sweden, MAN AG of West Germany and DAF Trucks B.V. of the Netherlands, are all competing to take it over. 

Despite its small size and doubtful future as an independent company, each regards Spain's state-owned Empresa Nacional de Autocamiones S.A. as a useful acquisition that they don't want to see snapped up by others. 

Though officials at Instituto Nacional de Industria, the state holding company that owns Enasa, refuse to divulge details of the negotiations, sources familiar with them say a decision may be made within a matter of weeks. 

The sale of Enasa, in a transaction similar to Volkswagen AG's purchase of the Spanish state-owned automobile manufacturer SEAT three years ago, would be designed to guarantee the company's industrial future in an increasingly competitive international market, these sources say. 

With 33% of the Spanish heavy truck market and growing sales in other European countries, Enasa and its Seddon Atkinson Ltd. subsidiary in Britain are regarded as valuable growth vehicles. 

Fiat, which turned down a chance to take over SEAT in the early 1980s, appears to be particularly eager not to be left behind this time, Spanish government officials say. 

For Enasa, the transformation in its fortunes is remarkable. 

After building up more than 100 billion pesetas ($839 million) in losses since the mid-1970s, almost equivalent to its 1988 revenue of 116 billion pesetas, the truck company expects to announce its first profit in a decade this year, reflecting the results both of extensive cost-cutting and improved sales. 

Created in 1946 as a state-owned company out of the ruins of Spain's once-prestigious Hispano Suiza automobile company, Enasa began hunting for a partner in the wake of the economic crises of the 1970s. 

In 1980, International Harvester Co. of the U.S., now called Navistar International Corp., took a 35% stake in Enasa, with a view toward gaining eventual full control.
But then Harvester was hit by its own financial crisis, and in 1982 it pulled out of Enasa. 

In the years that followed, the Spanish government tried unsuccessfully to find other buyers, including Toyota Motor Corp. and General Motors Corp., and in 1985 the cancellation of two major sales to Egypt and Sudan left Enasa reeling.
In 1986 and 1987, it was so poorly off that the only annual report it could afford to publish was a printed list of figures circulated to a restricted group. 

Now, with a Spanish work force of 5,000, half of the 10,100 which it employed in 1982, plus an additional 1,000 at Seddon Atkinson in the United Kingdom and sales subsidiaries in other European countries and Latin America, Enasa has at least temporarily revived. 

