.START 

Lincoln National Corp. 's managed-care operation, where losses have been narrowing in recent periods, is expected to show a third-quarter profit, Ian M. Rolland, president and chief executive officer, said. 

The managed-care unit's rebound, combined with "significant" capital gains from Lincoln's investment portfolio, will more than offset deteriorating property-casualty results at the nation's seventh-largest insurance holding company. 

Lincoln's property-casualty business, which is in the midst of a cyclical industry downturn, still will show a third-quarter profit despite a $10 million to $15 million after-tax loss from Hurricane Hugo, Mr. Rolland said in an interview. 

While the company hasn't yet reviewed September's results, Mr. Rolland said Lincoln anticipates it will report third-quarter operating income "at a range that would be between $1 a share and $1.15 a share." That would indicate operating income of $41.9 million to $46.1 million. 

In terms of net income, which adds in realized gains and losses from investments, Mr. Rolland said it's still too early to project a final figure.
But "our best judgment" is that the just-ended period's operating figure will bolstered by "substantial capital gains." 

On an operating basis, Lincoln's projections would represent a modest decline from the year-earlier $55.7 million, or $1.25 a share, that the company reported exclusive of a $61.7 million charge associated with the disposal of its money-losing health maintenance organizations in Florida.
After a $21.1 million loss on investments, the final net loss in the year-ago period was $27.1 million, or 72 cents a share. 

Mr. Rolland cited "two significant trends" currently affecting the company: "The improving picture in our employee life-health operations," which has been a question mark in some analysts' eyes, and the fact that the "property-casualty business is on the downside" of its cycle.
The company's managed-care operation, which runs HMOs in about 40 urban areas, has been unprofitable since 1986.
But Mr. Rolland said HMOs are typically unprofitable in the early years, and "a number of the plans are now coming up to a critical size," where revenues have grown sufficient to support costs.
Having shed the Florida operations, the company thinks that "in our portfolio now we have a group of HMOs that have the prospect of being very successful, and the results so far this year demonstrate that, he said." 

Mr. Rolland also said that a complex information system, designed to enhance the company's ability to fine-tune pricing and other cost factors, will start going on line by year end, and that full installation is expected by late 

Lincoln's traditional health insurance operations, which have been operating at a loss in recent periods, also were profitable in the third quarter, Mr. Rolland said. 

"The health insurance business has been going through enormous change," he said, "impacted by rapidly increasing medical costs and increasing utilization of services.
For a period of time, the entire industry hasn't been able to maintain pricing that reflects these costs." But the health insurance industry "in general is getting its pricing up," added Mr. Rolland, who says Lincoln doesn't anticipate that the employee health-insurance section will lapse back into the loss column. 

On the property-casualty side, Mr. Rolland said, "We've had about a three-year upturn," which peaked last year. "We're seeing deteriorating earnings this year" in that cyclical segment, and "we expect they will continue through 1990" before hitting bottom in 1991. "Our view of this cycle is that it is going to be less severe than the last one," Mr. Rolland said. 

The executive said Lincoln hasn't been able to more precisely determine the size of the approximate $1 to $1.25-a-share gain it projected it will receive from the sale of its National Reinsurance unit, which is expected to close about year end.
Proceeds of the $390.6 million transaction will be used to retire some debt, and "to strengthen our balance sheet and improve our debt-to-equity ratios." The money will also permit the company to consider buying back some of its shares, Mr. Rolland said.
But he cautioned that no decision has been made about reviving an earlier discontinued share-repurchase plan. 

Mr. Rolland said the company's investment product business, which sells annuities and manages pension money, is showing "significant growth," with assets under management currently at $9.6 billion and growing at an annual rate of about 30%.
The growing revenue from such non-cyclical lines "contributes a lot of stability to Lincoln National's earnings picture," he said. 

