.START 

The nation's big retailers reported modest gains for September, reflecting consumers' enthusiasm for fall fashions and a strong back-to-school performance. 

The September sales figures rose an average of 5% for stores open at least a year.
Revenues at the big chains were generally modest compared with their strong performances a year earlier. 

Analysts say they believe the September results portend a healthy Christmas selling season, especially for retailers whose business depends primarily on apparel. 

"The numbers reinforce our belief that this will be a strong Christmas," said Jeffrey Feiner, an analyst with Merrill Lynch & Co. "It's good news because most of these retailers generate at least half of their annual earnings in November and December." 

Mr. Feiner noted that mass merchandisers that rely heavily on sales of durable goods -- such as Sears and Montgomery Ward -- performed below expectations.
Given a slowing in the growth of personal income, continued high personal debt levels and high interest rates, durable-goods sales are likely to continue to be sluggish, he added. 

Jeffrey Edelman, an analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., said that the month started slowly but that sales developed strength in the last two weeks.
Women's apparel remains the strongest single category, he said.
Mr. Edelman noted that retailers generally did good business in October 1988, however, which means the gains this month may not be as impressive. 

Gilbert Harrison, chairman of Financo Inc., a New York investment banking company specializing in retail acquisitions, said a drop in purchases of big-ticket items like automobiles, houses and furniture is generally accompanied by a rise in apparel spending. 

"This shift is finally starting to happen now, but whether the trend is permanent or not is too early to tell," he said. "Still, I expect a good Christmas." 

Drexel's index of 40 companies' sales at stores open at least a year showed that growth in the specialty apparel area has slowed somewhat, basically because the comparison is with a strong year-earlier period.
Drexel's overall index rose 5.7% for September, compared with a 5.3% gain in August.
Sales at the apparel specialists and shoe stores rose 5.3%, compared with a 7.2% increase in August, and sales at department stores and discount chains rose 5.9%, compared with August's 5.3% rise.
But sales at specialty stores that carry appliances were up 4.6%, an improvement from August's 2.7% gain. 

PaineWebber Inc. 's index of 20 companies' sales at stores open at least a year rose 5.1% in September from year-earlier levels.
Seasonally adjusted, it rose 1.5% from August. 

As expected, Sears, Roebuck & Co., the nation's largest retailer, reported disappointing results.
In September, comparable-store sales fell 1.8%, the third monthly decline in a row.
Michael Bozic, chairman and chief executive officer, said Sears continued to have soft sales in major home appliances, furniture and other durable goods.
Yesterday, Sears' stock fell 82.5 cents a share to $43.125 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. 

At K mart Corp., the nation's second-largest retailer, domestic U.S. sales rose 6.1%.
Comparable-store domestic sales figures aren't available.
Joseph Antonini, K mart's chairman and chief executive, said the company's emphasis on everyday low prices is hurting profitability. 

"We're encouraged by the favorable customer response to our low-price position," said Mr. Antonini. "However, gross margins have been affected by this pricing strategy in both August and September and, as a result, we anticipate a decline in earnings in our 1989 third quarter," compared with the 63 cents a share earned in the 13 weeks ended Oct. 26, 

J.C. Penney Co. same-store sales rose nearly 11%.
The Dallas company attributed the gains to strong interest in women's sportswear and back-to-school merchandise. 

At Wal-Mart Stores Inc., same-store sales increased 16% for September and 11% for the first eight months of the year ending Jan. 31.
The company now operates 1,326 Wal-Mart stores, 110 Sam's Wholesale Clubs, 14 DOT discount drug stores and three hypermarkets.
Dayton Hudson Corp. 's same-store sales rose 8.6% in September. 

supermarkets, from continuing operations; b-Based on exact sales. c- Excludes sales of Caldor and Venture discount chains, which May considers discontinued operations because it is seeking a buyer for them. d-Limited sold its Lerner Woman division effective April 29, 1989. e-Ames results include Zayre discount-store division. supermarkets, from continuing operations; b-Based on exact sales. c-Excludes sales of Caldor and Venture discount chains, which May considers discontinued operations because it is seeking a buyer for them. d-Limited sold its Lerner Woman division effective April 29, 1989. e-Ames results include Zayre discount store division. 

