.START 

The government's latest employment statistics highlight severe weakening in the country's manufacturing sector and signal softening in the economy as a whole. 

A sharp decline in factory jobs last month helped push the nation's civilian unemployment rate to 5.3% of the work force from 5.2% in August, the Labor Department reported.
Government analysts said the change was statistically insignificant but they said overall the report suggests the economy is weakening. 

According to a survey of businesses, employers added 209,000 new workers to their payrolls during the month.
But more than a third of them were the 75,000 telephone company employees returning to work after strikes in August.
Factory payrolls shrank by 103,000 in September, the largest monthly decline since December 1982, when the country was emerging from a recession.
A separate survey of households actually showed a drop in overall employment. 

The deterioration in manufacturing employment disappointed some economists, who had viewed a recent report of a big increase in factory orders in August as a sign that manufacturing was on its way to regaining some health.
The new report also suggested that a spurt in automobile production and sales late in the summer was temporary, as many analysts had suggested. 

The unemployment report "delivered an unambiguous message," said Joseph Carson, senior economist at Chemical Bank in New York. "The economy is weak, and the decline in the manufacturing sector is broadening and deepening." 

About a third of the fall in manufacturing jobs came from layoffs of auto workers, but declines swept over much of U.S. industry: 16 of the 20 major manufacturing industries showed declines in employment after analysts adjusted for normal seasonal fluctuations. 

The commissioner of labor statistics, Janet Norwood, called the drop in factory jobs "the most disturbing feature" of the new data. 

"Real growth in overall factory employment ended last March; since then, we have lost 135,000 jobs," she told Congress. 

But in a sign that consumer demand remains hearty, the Federal Reserve Board reported that consumer installment debt grew $3.48 billion in August, or at a 6.0% annual rate, after a rare decline in July of 0.9%.
Automobile loans, which showed declines in previous months, grew $400 million, or at a 1.7% annual rate.
Revolving credit, which includes bank and retail borrowing, swelled at a 22.5% annual rate, or $3.57 billion. 

The numbers in both reports were adjusted for seasonal fluctuations. 

Although the new employment statistics pinpointed a slide in manufacturing, Richard Berner, an economist at Salomon Brothers, said, "There are unmistakable signs of slowing in this report" in the economy overall. 

"The report indicates there are severe weaknesses in manufacturing which may very well ripple out to other sectors," added Rudy Oswald, director of economic research at the AFL-CIO.
He cited services related to manufacturing, such as trucking. 

Employment in the construction industry stayed basically at its August level and, Mrs. Norwood told Congress, "Since the beginning of the year the number of construction jobs has increased only by about 50,000." 

While employment in the service sector grew significantly, much of it came from strikers returning from the picket line and teachers returning to the classroom for a new school year.
Jobs in business and health services grew substantially, but Mr. Berner noted, "If you look in other areas you start to see deceleration." The retail trade industry, for example, added only 4,000 employees. 

"That's very, very weak," said Mr. Carson. 

The unemployment rate for adult males jumped 0.4 percentage point last month, to 4.8%. "People who are laid off first often are on assembly lines and they tend to be adult men," Mr. Berner noted. "So a jump in that rate also tells me we're talking about an economy that is showing signs of slowing." 

The unemployment rates for blacks and teenagers also showed large increases during the month.
For blacks it grew to 11.6% from 11.1% in August; for teenagers it climbed to 15.1% from 14.5%. 

Here are excerpts from the Labor Department's employment report.
The figures are seasonally adjusted. 

