.START 

Bank of New England Corp. is negotiating the possible sale of some or all of its leasing operations, and Bank of Tokyo Ltd. is a leading candidate to buy the business, according to sources familiar with the talks. 

One official of the U.S. bank reached at home said that no agreement had been struck as of Friday and that talks with at least one other potential buyer were continuing as of late last week. 

Bank of New England listed $2 billion in leasing assets in its most recent annual report, but the sources indicated that some assets may be excluded from the sale.
Still, the assets involved in the talks could fetch a premium of about $100 million, according to the sources. 

In Tokyo Monday, a spokesman for Bank of Tokyo said the bank is "in the process of negotiating" the possible purchase of "some portion of the assets" as well as the "organization and business rights" of Bank of New England's leasing subsidiary. 

Bank of New England's chief financial officer, David Payne, had suggested in an interview in August that the bank was contemplating the sale of its equipment-leasing operation. 

Mr. Payne couldn't be reached to comment.
But other sources within Bank of New England indicated the decision to sell the operations stemmed from several factors. 

While the leasing operations have been profitable, tax changes have made the leasing business generally less attractive to U.S. banks.
Also, Bank of New England management has been seeking to concentrate more on the company's core banking business in New England.
And the company has been looking for ways to strengthen its finances after soured real estate loans and other factors caused its earnings to fall sharply in the first two quarters of this year. 

In the first six months, Bank of New England had profit of $78.8 million, or $1.12 a share, compared with $135.4 million, or $1.96 a share, a year earlier.
The company has said it expects to report third-quarter profit above the first quarter's $42.3 million, or 60 cents a share, but below the $72.3 million, or $1.04 a share, recorded in the 1988 third quarter. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday, Bank of New England shares closed at $19.875, unchanged. 

Bank of New England disclosed last week that, some time after second-quarter earnings were posted, it had entered into a formal agreement with the comptroller of the currency's office to take steps to improve its operations.
The bank didn't announce details of the agreement but indicated the action stemmed at least in part from the regulators' concern over the bank's exposure to the deteriorating New England real-estate market. 

With $32 billion in assets, Bank of New England is second in size only to Bank of Boston Corp. among New England-based banks. 

The bank, in its latest annual report, describes its BancNewEngland Leasing Group as the nation's fifth-largest bank-affiliated leasing organization, with 28 offices in the U.S. and Canada.
Lease placements in 1988 included commuter rail cars, aircraft and alternative energy projects, according to the report. 

Most of the leasing assets are outside New England, according to one Bank of New England official. 

