.START 

Investors in bond mutual funds were dealt a double blow in the third quarter. 

Funds that hold high-risk, high-yield junk bonds were roiled by credit squeezes at several debt-riddled companies.
Meanwhile, many government-bond funds found their portfolio values eroded by rising interest rates. 

Overall, fixed-income funds averaged a total return of just 0.6% for the quarter and 7.5% for the nine months, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc. 

"Compared with stocks, (bond-fund returns) look horrible," says Tyler Jenks, research director of Kanon Bloch Carre & Co., a Boston fund-research firm. "When you look at what happened over the past three months, you're basically where you started." 

Investors managed to eke out a positive total return -- price change plus interest income -- only because of the interest checks they received in the quarter.
Fixed-income funds account for more than half the nation's total of $950 billion in mutual-fund assets. 

The most-recent period became the fourth quarter out of the past five in which many taxable bond funds fell in value.
On average, the funds even failed to beat out money-market funds, which rose 2.1%.
And stock funds soared 9.2% in the three months. 

Junk-fund investors were hard hit.
The value of these funds' shares fell a steep 4.25% for the three months.
If interest payments are included, their losses narrowed to 1.27% -- still the worst quarter in nearly two years. 

The major reason: price-corroding turmoil in the junk market, stemming from the financial woes of several heavily indebted companies. 

The performance shows that investors in junk-bond funds can get hammered even when the economy continues to hum along.
Previously, junk-fund investors' major concern was an economic slowdown that would curtail revenue at many of the debt-laden companies that make up the $200 billion junk market. 

"There is a common perception that there's a direct linkage between the economy" and the fate of companies that went private in debt-financed buy-outs, says Aiden Hatton Jr., portfolio manager for Alliance High Yield Bond Fund. "But a badly managed company will manage to bury itself" even in good economic times. 

Several poor-performing junk funds were battered by only a handful of credits.
Mr. Hatton says about 90% of the Alliance fund's 7.9% drop for the quarter, for instance, stemmed from five issues: Interco, Southland, Federated Department Stores, Payless Cashways and the building-products company USG. 

"All you need is five of those and it just blows you right out of the water," he says. 

Like many other junk funds, Alliance has raised its cash position, which currently stands at 9% of the $222 million portfolio, double the level of earlier this year. 

Some junk funds have slashed the dividends they pay to shareholders.
The $502 million American Capital High Yield Fund has cut its payout 15%, effective this month, and has raised its cash holdings -- to 7% from 1% in June -- to meet expected withdrawals of investors' money. 

"I don't want to be in a position like the second week in September where we have to raise money," says Ellis Bigelow, who has managed the fund for six weeks.
It fell 6.2% for the quarter. 

Several fund managers said the worst of the junk carnage is over.
But they aren't buying much just yet.
One reason: "There are quick triggers on the selling the minute something happens on any one issue," says Donald Keller, head of high-yield research at Keystone Corp., whose $1.1 billion Custodian Fund Series B-4 portfolio fell 4.2% for the three months. 

Rising interest rates, meanwhile, battered government funds, whose value fell an average of 1.37% for the quarter before interest payments. (Values of most government bond funds fall as interest rates rise.) 

Hardest hit: Zero-coupon bond funds, which invest in bonds sold at a deep discount and don't pay any interest until they mature.
These funds are affected more by interest-rate fluctuations.
Benham Target 2015 and Benham Target 2010, two of the second quarter's winners, fell 4.2% and 3.4%, respectively, in the most recent three months. 

But the Benham funds still top the list of government funds for the 12-month and year-to-date periods, as shown in today's Mutual Fund Scorecard. 

Playing it short and safe paid off for the three months.
Money-market and other short-term funds dotted the top of the accompanying table (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ Oct. 9, 1989).
With interest rates rising a bit during the quarter, those funds with shortest maturities -- and hence least interest-rate risk-benefited most. 

Other winners included convertible securities funds, which invest primarily in bonds and preferred stocks that are convertible into common shares.
They were buoyed by the strong stock market. 

But municipal bond funds were banged up a bit by supply congestion, particularly in August and early September, that knocked down prices.
Some fund managers see that situation easing. 

"It appears that the supply problem is over in municipals, and I'd expect to see some kind of rebound there," says Ian MacKinnon, senior vice president who manages several bond funds at Vanguard Group Inc. 

Government funds probably will bounce back too, albeit with a few bumps along the way, some fund specialists predict.
The major reason: expected softening of the economy, accompanied by lower interest rates.
This bet will backfire, of course, if interest rates rise further instead. 

How about bottom-fishing for junk funds?
Not yet, says A. Michael Lipper, president of Lipper Analytical.
For that to be appropriate, he says, "We may have to wait until the next recession." 

