.START 

It was mid-1987, and William P. Lyons, investment banker and professor of business administration at Yale University, was nosing around for financial opportunities. 

When the right idea hit him, a light bulb went on over his head.
A Duro-Test Corp. light bulb to be exact. 

"Duro-Test was not an accident.
I had found it and a number of others before I started acquiring the stock," Mr. Lyons says.
Confident of the theories he propounded in a seminar on valuing corporate acquisitions, the soft-spoken but extremely self-assured Connecticut native launched an $85 million takeover for Duro-Test.
In January 1988, he took over as chairman and chief executive officer.
Now, 22 months later, he reflected on the takeover and his methods. 

The company struck him, he says, as an opportunity to apply his theories of valuation and leadership in the most direct way.
At the same time, textbooks don't teach experience, and Mr. Lyons, 48 years old, considers his work as an investment banker and a holder and director of other companies a major asset in his takeover of Duro-Test.
He is sensitive to media portrayals of him as an ivory-tower type, for whom the adage "those who can't do, teach" was coined. 

"The banks wouldn't have backed me on this" if he were only an academic, he says. 

Why Duro-Test?
Mr. Lyons says he was seeking a lower-tech company with an established history and product line. "To do a leveraged acquisition, you need a stable and consistent earnings stream," he says. "High-tech companies are boom-and-bust situations.
We are a blades company, not razors.
Part of the stability comes from the fact that bulbs do burn out." 

Researching Duro-Test, Mr. Lyons says, "It was clear to me on a perusal that Duro-Test was sleepily managed and needed new blood," Mr. Lyons says.
Its "highly entrepreneurial distribution method was being abused," he says.
And Robert F. Delaney, a 25-year veteran at Duro-Test whom Mr. Lyons named vice president of sales, says that under the former regime, "I couldn't get a decision made, couldn't get an answer to anything." The 60-year-old company is a major seller of long-life bulbs for what Mr. Lyons calls the "hard-to-fit socket." Duro-Test bulbs are found in places such as high-ceilinged hotels and the illuminating systems for Niagara Falls. 

Some Duro-Test bulbs are strangely shaped: One has a recessed dome at the top and another is twisted rather than a straight cylinder.
Cost is also an issue: Some bulbs cost five times as much as those sold by competitors General Electric Co., GTE Corp. and N.V. Philips. (The bulbs Duro-Test makes for the space shuttle launch area at Cape Canaveral cost $6,000 apiece.) 

But Duro-Test's bulbs are rated to last nearly 10 times as long as competitors' products -- the dome, for example, is designed to help dissipate heat, extending the bulb's life.
Duro-Test also designs its bulbs to produce more-natural light, reducing eye strain.
Between the odd shapes and longer-range economics, "This is a bulb that needs to be sold," Mr. Lyons says. 

Mr. Lyons says that when he took over, the sales force's morale was in the tank: "We'd had a dominant position and we were losing it." He stressed to the sales staff that he'd put his money where his mouth was, buying his initial stake in Duro-Test with his own cash.
And he tried to build what Mr. Delaney calls the trust factor. "What does a salesman have?
He has his company and his product" and must trust both, Mr. Delaney says. 

Duro-Test also had been confusing customers by having two separate -- and competing -- sales forces promoting identical products under its own name and that of its Luxor subsidiary. "Duro-Test was actually two companies," he says.
Mr. Lyons unified the sales force and the products under the Duro-Test name; the parent and units in Canada, Mexico and Puerto Rico now employ 1,300 sales agents, joined by distributors in Europe and the Pacific Basin. 

Mr. Lyons eliminated management contracts -- disconcerting some people, including his new vice president of sales, Mr. Delaney. "How well you knew" previous top managers might get a salesman "a rent-free office or an extra bonus.
But even if you got a special deal, you worried whether someone else got a better special deal," Mr. Lyons says.
Contracts "are 180 degrees opposite from the concept of a meritocracy," he adds. 

The company eliminated a low-margin business, that of selling bulbs to other wholesalers, which would resell them in competition with Duro-Test's own salespeople.
The business "came back to bite us in the rear end," Mr. Lyons says; dropping it "brought an immediate rise in operating profits." 

Sales in the year ended July 31, 1988, were about flat with the $65 million of fiscal 1987.
Fiscal 1989 sales rose 15% to 20% from 1988 -- indicating as much as $78 million -- and Mr. Lyons foresees 1990's sales 50% above 1988's, bumping $100 million.
Regarding profit, the company will say only that pretax earnings doubled in fiscal 1989 from 1988 and are likely to rise 50% in 1990 from 1989. 

What textbooks can't address often is as important as what they can.
On Oct. 19, 1987, at 7 a.m., Mr. Lyons was preparing to sign off on a $16-a-share offer for DuroTest.
Then, an equity investor decided that he couldn't keep his commitment to the deal. 

"After leaping out the window and landing on my feet," Mr. Lyons jokes, he dropped the $16 plan and "spent the day with my family." A few hours later, the stock market crashed -- and Duro-Test's stock price went from $16 to $6. 

"During that disaster scenario -- I owned a lot of stock -- my mindset was, 'This is a disaster but . . . the crash may be an opportunity to come to agreement, '" Mr. Lyons says.
The company's inherent value hadn't changed, he says, but he cut the offer to $13 a share because of the overall uncertainty in the financial system.
He and the company ultimately agreed on a bit more than $14 a share. 

Duro-Test hit a bump when it consolidated its North Bergen operations into its Clifton plant.
The company shouldn't have "forced the move to coincide with the natural slowdown period in the summer," Mr. Lyons says. "We might have done it on a staggered basis." 

Among "thousands of details" was moving the bulb-making machines from a wood floor at North Bergen to a concrete floor in Clifton. "A minor imbalance" in a machine "throws off a whole {production} line," Mr. Lyons notes, adding that although Duro-Test "thinks in terms of 10% breakage, some machines were running much higher" than that. 

Also, "I think I underestimated the enormity and complexity of rebuilding the infrastructure" at Duro-Test, Mr. Lyons says.
Duro-Test is being brought out of "the quill-pen era," he says. 

And with all the sweat that went into taking Duro-Test private, Mr. Lyons sees "strong strategic business reasons to return to public life.
We are examining that alternative." 

