.START 

An investment partnership with a 9.9% stake in Lionel Corp. began a hostile tender offer of $8 a share, or $95.4 million, for as much of 90% of the stock in the specialty toy retailer. 

The move by Robert I. Toussie Limited Partnership follows the group's unsuccessful offer to Lionel last month to acquire the shares it doesn't already own for $8.25 a share, or about $100 million. 

The New York partnership also is offering as much as $28.1 million for $34.8 million principal amount, or 90% of Lionel's 8% convertible debt due 2007; the group is offering $807.06 per $1,000 principal amount of debt.
All told, the cash offer totals about $123.5 million. 

The partnership said the remaining 10% shares outstanding would be converted into rights to receive shares of payable in kind preferred, designed to have a value equal to $8 for each share of Lionel common exchanged in the transaction.
With 1.3 million of the company's 13.5 million shares outstanding, the Toussie partnership is Lionel's largest shareholder. 

Lionel said it would consider the Toussie group offer and would make some recommendation to holders by Oct. 20.
Meanwhile, the company asked holders to refrain from tendering shares. 

In a letter to the partnership last Monday, Lionel rebuffed the offer made by the investment group last month.
The letter expressed Lionel's judgment that "the company's shareholders and other constituencies will be best served by keeping Lionel independent." The letter also questioned "the commitment of certain" partners, whom it said had affiliations with Lionel's main competitor, to Lionel's strategic plan.
When it made its initial offer, the Toussie group said it had hired Ronald Tuchman, a former Toys R Us Inc. executive, to serve as chief operating officer of Lionel if a transaction were completed.
The group has said it wants to work with current management.
Lionel, once a premier name in toy trains, doesn't make the trains anymore but licenses its name to another company that does.
Lionel's principal business is operating more than 90 toy stores in 17 states under the names Lionel Kiddie City and Lionel Playworld. 

Robert I. Toussie, general partner of the investment group, said, "The board's unwillingness to meet with us has forced us to reduce the price by 25 cents a share" from the previous offer to defray part of the expense of making the tender offer.
Mr. Toussie also said that although officers and directors own about 2% of the shares outstanding and until now have sought to block an opportunity for other holders to "realize significant value for their shares," the group reaffirmed its commitment to work with management. 

In composite trading on the American Stock Exchange Friday, Lionel was trading below the offering price.
It closed at $7.375, down 25 cents.
But Richard Goldberg, an attorney for the partnership group, noted that the shares were trading "in the low $4s" before the group's original offer and that the stock might fall if the partnership loses interest.
He also said that, based on telephone calls from shareholders, the group thought "there was a lot of support" for its bid. 

