.START 

This truncated holiday week doesn't bring any planned indicators until Friday when readings on September inflation and consumerism are reported. 

The September producer price index is thought to have risen about 0.7% due largely to a jump in energy prices, according to a survey by MMS International, a unit of McGraw-Hill Inc., New York.
And retail sales during the month are believed to have eked out a bare 0.1% gain due to weaker auto sales. 

But economists note that the indicators are being overshadowed by speculation over what the Federal Reserve Board may do to credit policy in the wake of Friday's surprisingly weak report on manufacturing employment. 

"Whatever we see on the PPI is going to be rightly discounted as a temporary rebound in gasoline prices and (seasonal) increase in apparel prices," said David Resler, chief economist at Nomura Securities Ltd., New York.
Besides, he and others noted, the drop-off in factory jobs pushed fears of recession to the forefront of concerns. "We're in far more danger of a recession than I thought we were," Mr. Resler said. "It makes me less concerned about inflation." 

In both July and August, producer prices dropped 0.4%.
But energy prices rose sharply in September, tugging the PPI upward, analysts said. 

Samuel D. Kahan, economist at Kleinwort Benson Government Securities Inc., Chicago, noted that the jobs report "highlights the vulnerability of the economy." Because of that vulnerability, economists are keeping a close eye on auto sales, which are faltering despite continued incentives. 

Friday also brings the first reading on new 1990 model car sales, with totals for the first 10 days of October.
However, Mr. Kahan pointed out that some auto makers are offering unusual incentives on new-model cars this year in an effort to stimulate sales.
What's more, some of the promotions on old 1989 models stretched into the early part of October. 

"The auto makers always want to start off the new year well.
So, there may be a bunching of orders to make things look good" in the first October tally, Mr. Kahan said.
He expects overall September retail sales to show a decline of about 0.3%, largely because of weaker car sales. 

Early sales reports from chain stores last week indicated only a modest 5% gain for September.
Women's apparel led the way on higher clothing sales, inaugurating the fall fashion season.
But sales of bigticket items such as furniture and household appliances flagged. 

Some retailers, however, are sacrificing profit margins for sales gains.
K mart Corp., the nation's second-largest retailer, noted that its domestic sales rose 6.1% in September.
But it added that its emphasis on everyday low prices is hurting profitability. 

