.START 

The Federal Reserve is resisting domestic and international pressure to reduce interest rates to bring down the dollar, causing escalating tension between it and the Bush administration. 

Treasury officials for weeks have been urging the Fed to ease rates to stem the dollar's rise in international exchange markets.
But Fed officials are defying Treasury pleas, arguing that the central bank's policies should be geared toward fighting inflation rather than bringing down the dollar. 

In a surprise move, two top Fed officials even voted late last month to oppose the Treasury's efforts to sell dollars to drive down the currency in international exchange markets.
According to minutes of a meeting released Friday, Fed Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson and Governor Wayne Angell both voted against raising the Fed's limit on dollar sales.
The vote was particularly significant because Mr. Johnson in the past has been one of the administration's closest allies at the Fed. 

Signs of a weakening economy, such as Friday's report that the unemployment rate rose in September, still may lead the central bank to lower interest rates in the coming weeks. "I think the handwriting is on the wall," says David Jones, an economist for Aubrey G. Lanston & Co. "The Fed will ease later this month." 

But by delaying action now, Fed officials are making it abundantly clear that they aren't focusing on the dollar, and that they won't dance to the Treasury's tune. 

The tension between the Fed and the Treasury, which has been building for weeks, is rooted in the independent powers of the two institutions.
The Treasury largely controls decisions about buying or selling dollars in foreign exchange markets, a tool it can use to influence the currency's daily movements.
But the Fed sets interest rate policy, which can cause much larger and more lasting movements in exchange rates. 

Lower interest rates reduce upward pressure on the dollar by making dollar securities less attractive to foreign investors. 

At a meeting Sept. 23, the finance ministers and central bankers of the seven major allied industrial nations agreed to intervene in exchange markets in a coordinated effort to drive down the dollar.
That effort has succeeded in cooling the dollar's rise somewhat.
European central banks also helped relieve upward pressure on the dollar by raising their interest rates last week.
But the Fed, so far, has refused to change its monetary policy. 

To support the international dollar effort, the Fed did agree Sept. 25 to increase its limit on holdings of foreign currencies to $20 billion from $18 billion, giving the Treasury more room to intervene.
But Messrs.
Johnson and Angell dissented from that move, arguing it was a mistake for the Treasury to try to drive the dollar lower by intervening in exchange markets.
Such efforts only "confuse market participants" about the Fed's commitment to fight inflation, they said. 

Messrs.
Johnson and Angell also suggested that the Treasury's efforts to drive down the dollar, by raising fears of inflation, may actually lead the Fed to delay moves toward lower rates. "Intervention to drive the dollar lower," they argued, "can work to limit flexibility in the exercise of fundamental monetary policy options that depend on evidence of improvement in the future inflation environment." 

Mr. Johnson has been a consistent advocate of lowering interest rates to help the domestic economy.
His recent vote, however, suggests he thinks the Bush administration's dollar policy is making his task more difficult. 

Moreover, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan and other Fed officials are known to be concerned about any moves to limit the central bank's independence.
By cutting rates now, some officials fear, the Fed would appear to be bowing to administration pressure. 

For their part, Treasury officials believe the Fed should be concerned about the dollar's strength. "Monetary policy in the mind of a central banker is first and foremost a domestic responsibility," a senior Treasury official told reporters last week.
But "that doesn't mean that international considerations can't play an important part from time to time." 

Despite the Treasury-Fed feud, most private analysts believe signs of a slowing economy will lead the Fed to ease rates soon. "There's nothing to argue against easing right now," said Judy Mackey, an economic consultant in Williamsburg, Va., "and there's reason to think it might be beneficial." 

The newly released Fed minutes also disclose that the central bank's policy-making open-market committee voted 10-1 at its Aug. 22 meeting to leave monetary policy unchanged but to lean toward lower interest rates if economic conditions warranted.
The minutes show that while some Fed policy makers were worrying that the economy might slow more than desired without some easing of credit, others were more interested in maintaining a tight grip on credit to bring down the inflation rate. 

In fact, the Fed didn't alter policy in the following six weeks.
The committee met again last week; minutes of that meeting won't be released until mid-November. 

At the end of August, Fed policy makers generally agreed that the economy looked "somewhat stronger on balance" than it had earlier in the summer and that chances of an imminent recession were very slim.
They noted with approval that the money supply had begun growing more rapidly. 

The policy makers also agreed that price pressures weren't intensifying and that the expansion of the economy "appeared to have stabilized at a moderate and provisionally acceptable pace." 

They differed on the most likely future course of the economy, however.
Some expected to see early indications that inflation was abating, and subsequent government reports confirmed those expectations.
But others worried that the strength of the economy and "indications of growing labor militancy" suggested that the inflation rate won't fall further. 

Roger Guffey, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, dissented.
He objected to his colleagues' decision to lean toward an easier policy.
Mr. Guffey cited his fear of "undesirably high rates of inflation both current and prospective" and said he was concerned that the Fed "could give a misleading indication of the weight" it places on reducing the inflation rate further. 

The voting members of the open-market committee are the six current Fed governors and presidents of five of the 12 district Fed banks. 

