.START 

The economy's unexpected sluggishness and the dollar's continued strength are likely to force the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates in coming weeks, analysts say. 

While Fed officials have adamantly resisted pressure from the Bush administration to ease credit, the Fed probably will reduce short-term rates by 1/4 percentage point to 1/2 percentage point by year end, investment managers and bond traders predict.
However, even that prospect hasn't aroused much enthusiasm for long-term bonds. 

Bonds may be heading for turbulence because of a huge wave of Treasury borrowing expected early next month, several traders say.
Also, a new government agency is expected to sell a large volume of bonds soon to help bail out the nation's savings and loan associations.
Thus, many investment managers are buying mainly shorter-term issues, those due in five years or less, because they think long-term interest rates won't fall as much as short-term rates. 

"There's a tremendous amount of new supply" of government bonds coming soon, says E. Craig Coats Jr., vice chairman of Voute Coats Stuart & O'Grady, an investment company in Greenwich, Conn. "I think we've already seen the majority of the rally at the long end" of the bond market. "I see more value in the short end." 

Another reason many individual investors are shying away from long-term bonds is that they still can earn the same or slightly higher yields on shorter-term government issues.
For example, six-month Treasury bills yielded 8.02% as of late Friday, while two-year Treasury notes were quoted at 8.09% and 30-year bonds at 8.02%. 

Speculation that the Fed will ease credit grew Friday after a government report painted a darker picture of the economy than analysts had expected.
The report indicated severe weakening in the manufacturing sector. 

"It looks like the Fed will have to do some easing," says Joel D. Kazis, a managing director and head of U.S. government securities trading at Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co.
He expects the Fed to drive down the interest rate on federal funds, or overnight loans among banks, to 8 3/4% from 9% in coming weeks.
But he also expects shorter-term bonds "will outperform the long end." 

The employment report was so bleak that several bond traders thought the Fed might cut rates immediately.
Some economists think the Fed is making a mistake by keeping rates as high as they are, and that a credit-easing move already is long overdue. 

But several Fed officials fear that inflation still is too high, and they have refused to bow to outside pressure to ease credit.
Moreover, a government report to be released this Friday is expected to show a surge in September producer prices.
Some analysts are bracing for an increase of 0.7% to 1%. 

However, a separate report Friday is expected to show little or no increase in September retail sales.
That could arouse renewed concern that the economy's long-running expansion is nearing an end -- and intensify pressure on the Fed to ease credit. 

The Fed's next move "will be to ease, although it won't come right away," says Ian A. MacKinnon, senior vice president and head of the fixed-income group at the Vanguard Group of Investment Cos. in Valley Forge, Pa.
Even when the Fed does ease credit, though, he predicts that "most of the move down in yields will be on short-term and intermediate-term" issues. 

One of the most surprising elements in the September employment report was a sharp decline in factory jobs last month.
Factory payrolls shrank by 103,000, the largest monthly decline since late 1982.
That and other statistics convinced some economists that they had overestimated the economy's strength. 

"'Recovering' Economy Stumbles Into Black Hole" is the title of the latest report by Robert A. Brusca, chief economist at Nikko Securities Co. International Inc.
His report begins: 

"If employment reports were given titles, the title for this one would be: 'Who turned out the lights? ' The glimmer of rebound that some had seen shining in recent economic data hasn't just faded, it has been abruptly snuffed out as though the economy has plunged into a black hole." 

Thus, the Fed "will be easing sooner than most people thought possible," Mr. Brusca concludes. 

The labor figures "should make it clear the economy really is slowing, especially the manufacturing sector," says Nancy R. Lazar, a senior vice president at Cyrus J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc. "And that certainly increases the odds that interest rates will move lower soon." 

However, some analysts remain skeptical about bonds. 

Despite last week's bond rally, "we continue to be relatively bearish" about the interest-rate outlook this quarter, says Elliott Platt, a senior vice president at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp.
For one thing, he doesn't expect the Fed to ease to the extent that already appears to be factored into short-term rates.
He also expects the dollar to decline in the foreign-exchange markets, and he fears inflation will "ratchet up as the year ends." 

One reason several bond traders are leery of bonds is the Treasury's quarterly financing operation, expected early in November.
By some estimates, that will consist of about $30 billion of three-year notes, 10-year notes and 30-year bonds.
Traders say such a huge amount of borrowing could drive up borrowing costs, at least temporarily. 

In addition, the markets will have to absorb a massive amount of borrowing by the Resolution Funding Corp., or Refcorp, which was created to bail out the thrift industry.
Government officials have indicated the first batch of Refcorp bonds will be sold sometime this quarter.
But they still haven't provided details on how many will be sold or even what maturities the bonds will have. 

"All this uncertainty {about details of the Refcorp bonds} just compounds the problem," says Mr. Coats of Voute Coats. "It's really a shame they {government officials} haven't clarified it.
The market doesn't like surprises.
Surprises cause market disruptions." 

Friday's Market Activity 

Interest rates tumbled on news that the September employment report showed unexpected economic weakness. 

Rates began dropping immediately after the government's gloomy figures hit news wires at 8:30 a.m. EDT. Short-term interest rates fell especially sharply.
For example, rates on Treasury bills fell as much as 1/5 of a percentage point. 

Six-month Treasury bills were quoted late in the day at a rate of 7.61%, for a bond-equivalent yield of 8.02%.
Late Thursday, these issues were quoted at a rate of 7.81%, to yield 8.22%.
Among other actively traded issues, the yield on the government's two-year notes dropped to 8.09% from 8.29% Thursday. 

Bond prices, which move in the opposite direction as yields, surged in brisk trading.
Long-term issues posted gains of about 3/4 point, or $7.50 for each $1,000 face amount. 

The Treasury's latest 30-year bonds were quoted late in the day at 101 6/32, up from 100 15/32 Thursday, while the yield fell to 8.02% from 8.07%.
The government's 10-year notes rose to 99 22/32 from 99 1/32, while the yield fell to 8.04% from 8.12%. 

The benchmark 30-year bond now yields only 0.19 percentage point more than the bond-equivalent yield of the three-month Treasury bill, which was quoted late Friday at 7.83%.
Late Thursday, that spread stood at only 0.06 percentage point. 

Falling rates also sparked a large outpouring of new corporate debt issues.
A total of about $1.5 billion of new debt was issued. 

"The Friday before a long weekend isn't the time you generally see this kind of activity, but what you had here was a flurry that was really prompted by the numbers," said Robert Shapiro, executive vice president and head of the new-issue department at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. 

In the corporate bond market, traders said prices of intermediate-term corporate issues closed 1/4 of a point higher, while longer-term bonds finished 1/2 to 5/8 of a point higher. 

Municipal bonds also rallied, although they generally posted smaller gains than Treasury issues.
Some large issues posted gains of about 1/4 point. 

For example, the New Jersey Turnpike Authority's 7.20% bonds of 2018 climbed 1/4 point to 98 1/4 bid, 98 3/8 asked, to yield 7.34%.
The Florida Board of Education 7 1/4% issue due 2023 also rose 1/4 point, ending at 99 3/8 bid, 99 1/2 asked, to yield 7.29%. 

Municipal bonds also were helped by indications that the volume of new issues will be moderate this week.
The calendar is dominated so far by a $450 million issue of California general obligation bonds. 

In the mortgage securities market, prices rose 11/32 to 16/32 of a point in moderate trading, but trailed gains in the intermediate Treasury market. 

