.START 

The third quarter was a mixed one for the mining industry.
Many U.S. copper producers are enjoying higher-than-expected earnings, but profits of aluminum and gold producers, suffering from increased costs and lower prices, are expected to decline. 

Copper prices rose significantly through the third quarter because of continued strong world-wide demand and supply disruptions at several overseas mines and mills.
Strikes at Canadian and Peruvian mines and terrorist activity in Papua New Guinea helped to prolong the recovery in copper prices that began in late 1987, said John Gross, a metals consultant in New City, N.Y. 

Analysts have now boosted their projections of third-quarter earnings for the top three copper producers, Asarco Inc., Phelps Dodge Corp. and Cyprus Minerals Co. "In most cases, copper companies will be earning 10% more than last year," said John Tumazos, analyst for Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette. 

"The supply-demand situation was delicate during the first half, and now demand is outstripping supply," largely because of the mine strikes, said a spokesman for Cyprus. "Now we're anticipating that the fourth quarter could be as strong as the first quarter." Cyprus had net earnings in the first quarter of $2.94 a share, compared with $1.03 the year before.
Some of the increase was from acquisitions.
The company declared a 3-for-2 stock split in May.
The favorable supply and demand picture gave U.S. producers, who have restructured their operations and lowered costs throughout the decade, the price incentive to keep their refineries and mines humming to meet demand.
With prices at least double production costs at some operations, the companies have been raking in enough profit to begin diversifying their businesses to buffer themselves from the next downturn in the copper price cycle, said Mr. Atwell. 

The continued strength of copper prices in the third quarter surprised many companies and analysts, who had projected at the beginning of the year that they would fall to 85 cents in the second half.
That appeared likely when prices dipped below $1 a pound early in July.
But they rebounded to more than $1.40 by quarter's end, with a quarterly average of about $1.20, according to several sources. 

Aluminum companies also geared up over the past two years to take advantage of good demand for aluminum sheets used in aerospace materials and cans.
But, running at full capacity, aluminum refiners began building inventories as demand slipped about 4% to 5% in the quarter.
Aluminum ingot prices on the Commodity Exchange in New York fell from about 93 cents a pound in the second quarter to about 81 cents a pound in the third quarter.
In addition, a shortage of alumina, a material used in aluminum production, began to eat away at profits of some companies. 

Analysts projected that earnings of most aluminum producers would drop in the third quarter.
For example, Peter Anker, analyst at First Boston Corp., said he expects Amax Inc. to report operating earnings of $1.10, down sharply from $1.61 a year ago.
However, Aluminum Co. of America, which is a net seller of alumina, probably benefited from the shortage, analysts said. 

Gold producers are also likely to report lower earnings for the third quarter compared with a year ago.
Gold prices fell below $370 an ounce recently, compared with an average price of $434 an ounce in the year-earlier third quarter.
With costs of production averaging about $300 an ounce, the drop wiped out half the year-ago pretax profit for gold operations, on the average. 

Some producers, such as Newmont Gold Co., increased production, masking some of the price decline, analysts said.
Nevertheless, analysts are estimating that gold producers' third-quarter profits fell 30% to 50% from last year's third quarter.
Those earnings may come as a surprise to goldstock investors, says Mr. Tumazos. "The market hasn't fully digested" the increase in costs, he said, including higher exploration costs, environmental expenses and the cost of some raw materials used in gold leaching. 

Among coal producers, only Pittston Co. is likely to suffer significant lingering damage in its third-quarter earnings from the bitter United Mine Workers strike in the second quarter, says Marc Cohen, analyst for Kidder, Peabody & Co. Losses in the coal group are likely to wipe out earnings in the company's other operations, said Mr. Cohen, producing a break-even quarter for Pittston, where the strike began in April.
A company spokeswoman said the company isn't ready to release its estimate of third-quarter earnings yet. 

Other major coal producers will probably have relatively flat earnings compared with a year ago, and an improvement in earnings from the second quarter, when many coal mines were affected by the spread of the Pittston strike.
Westmoreland Coal Co. is expected to show a profit compared with a third-quarter loss last year, analysts have projected. 

Third-quarter earnings of the nation's largest independent iron ore producer, Cleveland-Cliffs Inc., should be flat to slightly higher than last year, analysts say, but the good times may be ending for a while.
While demand for iron ore has remained steady, allowing the company to increase its output, demand for steel has started to tail off.
Earnings may do likewise in 1990 and 1991, says Mr. Tumazos. 

