.START 

For Wall Street firms, the October 1987 stock market crash never ended. 

Despite this year's spectacular rallies in the stock and bond markets -- including a record high for the Dow Jones Industrial Average and a one-percentage-point drop in interest rates -- the good times haven't returned.
The securities industry is on the defensive and still retrenching. 

"The crash came two years ago, but for many people it seems like yesterday," says Jean-Louis Lelogeais, a principal at the consulting firm of Booz, Allen & Hamilton, which has completed an analysis that paints a depressing picture of Wall Street's problems. 

Trading volumes in stocks and bonds -- and therefore the commissions brokers earn -- have plummeted from their 1987 peaks.
The instant dissemination of market information through news services and other vendors is robbing firms of the proprietary information that enabled them to charge fat fees.
Commissions from underwriting new issues of stocks and bonds have nose-dived.
And commercial banks increasingly are competing for whatever business is left. 

Meanwhile, Wall Street's biggest firms -- Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., Salomon Inc., Merrill Lynch & Co., Goldman, Sachs & Co., Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., CS First Boston Group, PaineWebber Group Inc., Bear Stearns Cos., Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. and Morgan Stanley Group Inc. -- show no signs of ending the 18-month-old payroll-paring process that has already lopped off an estimated 20,000 employees. 

"This is an industry that's definitely in turmoil," says Eugene Wong, a former executive at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. and Drexel who started his own investment-banking partnership, International Harvest Group, earlier this year. "The retail side," which includes thousands of brokers who cater to individual investors, "is bleeding." The only bright spot, as the retail brokerage firms see it, is that they at least have had more success recently at corralling investors' assets.
Even though investors aren't playing the stock market as they used to, they're letting Wall Street have more of their money. 

PaineWebber, for example, says the $40 billion of individuals' money it held at year-end 1987 grew to $60 billion by this past June.
Donald B. Marron, PaineWebber chairman, says that shows that "even with the crash of 1987 and all the problems, individuals were liquid; they had their money and they were willing to entrust it to the securities industry." But he says it will take at least "a couple of more years" before individuals will want to trade securities as actively as they used to.
Meanwhile, much of the money is stashed in brokerage firms' money-market funds, which don't give the firms big commissions. 

Hardwick Simmons, head of Shearson's 10,600-broker retail network and chairman of the Securities Industry Association, says, "Are investors falling over themselves to get in the equity market?
No.
But things of this kind take time." 

Like PaineWebber, Shearson has rounded up more money from investors -- $190 billion as of now, compared with $150 billion early in the year. "That bodes well" for the future, Mr. Simmons says. 

Still, it is the so-called boutiques, including some old-line Wall Street firms that missed the boom trading days of the pre-crash 1980s, that suddenly are the rage.
Dillon, Read & Co., for instance, was considered the epitome of the stodgy, white-shoe investment bank that would never survive because its capital was puny and it lacked trading muscle.
But the 159-year-old firm, which became a unit of Travelers Corp. in 1985, says it is having its best year ever by picking business niches, such as mergers and acquisitions and other corporate advisory work, that require little overhead and generate large fees. 

Some big firms, such as Salomon, that relied heavily on trading to earn double-digit returns on their multibilliondollar capital bases, are shifting their emphasis to investment banking.
Morgan Stanley, a traditional heavyweight in investment banking, now restricts its full-service stock-market coverage to only its largest trading customers -- after substantially expanding its securities operations during the past decade. 

"People treated {the securities industry} like it was a growth business," says John Birkelund, Dillon Read's chief executive. "But it's a cyclical business.
Anyone who built a substantial apparatus on the assumption that growth would be continuous has a lot of problems." 

In the U.S. government bond market -- which witnessed one of its biggest rallies ever between 1982 and July 1986 -- daily customer transactions are down 30% from their peak in 1987 and hovering at a fiveyear low, according to Booz Allen.
It's difficult to make money trading bonds -- for example, the spread between the bid and offer prices on long-term Treasury bonds is only one-fourth as wide as it was in 1980. 

In the stock market, commissions have tumbled to nearly five cents a share from almost 15 cents in 1983 and 25 cents in 1975. "Market share doesn't necessarily correlate with profitability any more; in fact it is quite often the opposite," says Mr. Lelogeais of Booz Allen. "These trends were clearly under way well before the crash, but they were masked by the huge trading volume of the mid-1980s.
When the volumes collapsed, the industry suddenly was hurting on all fronts," he says. 

Where Wall Street has been making money -- lots of it -- is in the business of helping clients take over and restructure corporations.
As long as the takeover boom continues, that's fine. 

But some wonder if investment bankers' well-paid role in the takeover frenzy will come back to haunt Wall Street. 

James Harmon, a 30-year veteran of the securities business and chairman of Wertheim Schroder & Co., says, "Wall Street today generally has placed {the pursuit of} its own fees above the best interests of its clients.
Corporations in the U.S. don't trust investment bankers, and we don't have any strong leadership in the investment-banking community." 

Will Wall Street be forced to act humble?
Brokerage-firm executives are already saying that the pet phrase of the 1990s will be "customer service." 

(See related story: "Abreast of the Market: Investors Recall Downside Risks" -- WSJ Oct. 9, 1989) 

