.START 

Move over, Lee Iacocca and Donald Trump] Here comes Kim Woo Choong. 

Mr. Kim, chairman and founder of the world's 46th-largest industrial corporation, Daewoo Group, started out making and exporting textiles, then moved on to cars, computers and everything from "A to Z," as a recent Asian newspaper ad put it. 

Now he plans to export advice. 

A collection of inspirational essays Mr. Kim wrote for young Koreans just might sell well in the U.S., he believes.
After all, "It's a Big World and There's Lots to be Done" is the year's surprise literary hit in Korea, topping the best-seller lists there since it was published in August. 

So far, about half-a-million copies have been sold, and by Christmas, sales should reach one million, a spokesman for the entrepreneur predicts.
For, as Mr. Kim writes in his book, "When it comes to making money, I'm an expert." 

But Messrs.
Iacocca and Trump, also best-selling businessmen-authors, don't need to worry too much about the literary competition; this import's message probably won't appeal to young Americans.
Mr. Kim, 52 years old, says he sleeps less than five hours a night and has taken only half a day off since founding Daewoo more than 20 years ago.
He advises the young to be like him: an unabashed workaholic. 

"Invest all your sweat and effort when you're young like we did at Daewoo," he writes. "If you live by the old Korean song, 'Have fun, have fun, have fun when you're young, for you can't have fun when you're old, ' and dissipate your time, you'll regret it by the time you're my age." 

The book skips over some of the ways Daewoo rose from a tiny textile exporter to an industrial giant in 20 years, such as its close ties to a past dictatorial government, easy government credit, low wages and protectionist barriers.
But Mr. Kim does offer anecdotes about how he rose from an impoverished youth in Seoul after the Korean War to a position of prominence in the nation's business community. 

Mr. Kim worries that young Koreans are getting lazy because they want to work from 9 to 5, rather than 5 to 9.
He also touches on how he turned around several failing operations by, what else, hard work. 

And true to form, Mr. Kim hints there may be a sequel. 

