.START 

A year ago, in the thick of the 1988 presidential election, Detroit-area antiques dealer Patricia Biggs had this to say about Barbara Bush: "I could not see myself in her circle.
I cannot even imagine what this lady does all day." 

Today, not only does Mrs. Biggs have a much higher opinion of the first lady, but she adds, "My mother has started wearing her pearls again." 

Mrs. Bush has done more than just make the world safe for pearls, her trademark accessory.
Against great odds, much of the public seems smitten by the self-deprecating wife who refers to herself as "no Marilyn Monroe" and delights in her fan mail from all the "fat, white-haired, wrinkled ladies" -- presumably just like herself. 

She is in some respects an anachronism, very likely the last first lady of her kind.
A well-born finishing-school graduate, she dropped out of college at 19 to marry the first boy she ever dated.
She left family and friends to move across the country in pursuit of someone else's dream -- moving, not always ecstatically, 29 times in 44 years of marriage.
She learned to quell her opinions, subordinate her own needs and stand in the background as she supported her husband in his rise, ultimately to the highest office in American political life. 

Yet somehow in her first nine months in the White House, Barbara Pierce Bush, the 64-year-old daughter of an affluent publishing executive, has managed to cross the the wide barriers of age, class, and genteel values, and to win the approval and affection of broad segments of the American population -- especially women.
And unlike her predecessor Nancy Reagan, who carefully calibrated her image with the help of pollsters and public relations experts, Mrs. Bush has achieved this popularity with what seems a notable lack of effort. 

Mrs. Bush's analysis of her own popularity with Americans is typically straightforward. "I know they find me no threat and they know I care about them -- I hope," she says. "I don't have to make any major decisions; I don't have to take stands on issues I don't want to take them on.
I have chosen the cowardly route, which is to pick issues I'm very interested in and work for them. . . . I'm leaving the controversy to my husband." 

A few years ago more might have scorned the choices Mrs. Bush has made.
But at a time when American women in particular feel stressed by competing demands of work, family and relationships, some suggest her appeal rests in the fact that she seems comfortably at peace with herself. "She's not a woman recreating herself all the time," says Columbia University government professor Ethel Klein. 

"People like Barbara Bush because she is who she is and doesn't appear to be proselytizing about that," says Ruth Mandel, director of the Center for the American Woman and Politics at Rutgers University. "She isn't leading a campaign for women to do what she does and she isn't out apologizing -- ever -- for doing what she's done.
She just comes across as the genuine article, which is an important quality for anyone in politics." 

How popular is Barbara Bush?
A recent Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll found that 10 times more Americans have a positive opinion of her than have a negative one.
Moreover, though the questions aren't directly comparable, a number of groups have a more favorable opinion of her personally than they have of her husband's job performance. 

Among liberals, 60% have positive views of her, while 50% approve of the president's job performance.
In part, this may reflect the fact that "she speaks a more progressive language" than her husband, as Columbia's Professor Klein puts it.
Among professionals, 76% have a favorable opinion of her, compared to 62% who approve of her husband's performance.
While a quarter of black voters disapprove of Mr. Bush's handling of his job, only 15% have a negative view of his spouse. 

Mrs. Bush's popularity ratings are in line with most other first ladies at this stage in their careers.
But they are in conspicuous contrast to those of Nancy Reagan, who in her first year won the sobriquet "Queen Nancy," and who suffered at that point from what Reagan pollster Richard Wirthlin acknowledges were "noticeable negatives." 

The public's impressions of Mrs. Bush are more remarkable when compared with earlier views of her, especially during the last two presidential campaigns.
As she admits, her spicy sense of humor has occasionally made her appear sharp edged. "Sometimes it gets the best of me," she concedes, "and I'm sorry about that." 

Sorry indeed was her husband's campaign in 1984, when she made her instantly notorious characterization of Geraldine Ferraro, as something that "rhymes with rich." Although Mrs. Bush later said she considered the remark off the record, she was forced to call Ms. Ferraro to apologize. 

And last year she was remembered mainly for her sour comment that the openly affectionate relationship between Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis and his wife Kitty was "phony" and "fake." She took it one step further, rehearsing a routine with her husband in which they appeared to mock the Dukakises' relationship.
It wowed the GOP convention in New Orleans but added to an aura of bitterness and negativism surrounding the 1988 contest. 

But such bad impressions may not have sunk deep because to most voters, Mrs. Bush was simply an enigma, rarely considered and often dismissed.
When The Wall Street Journal brought a group of Detroit-area women together to discuss the election in September 1988, Anna Gendron, 47, a special education teacher, had difficulty remembering Mrs. Bush's name. "Bush's wife, I don't think I've ever seen her.
She's so much in the background," she said.
Elinor Ancinec, 65, a retired librarian said, "Kitty is on our side and Mrs. Bush is just kind of in the background, not saying anything." 

A year later, these two women, both Democrats, have dramatically changed their views.
Now Mrs. Ancinec thinks it's Mr. Bush who is in the background. "I've seen more of her than I've seen of him," she says, "you don't see too much of George anymore." 

And what she sees of Mrs. Bush, she likes. "I really admire the woman and what she stands for," says Mrs. Ancinec. "Before, we didn't know, it was just ol' grandma." Now she identifies with Mrs. Bush, noting that she's "more like me.
I'm not a feminist, I'm for equality." And she adds, "I really think she cares about everyone." 

Adds Ms. Gendron: "Now that she's in, I'm really pleased with her." In contrast with Mrs. Reagan, "She's showing the person, not the clothes or the glamour -- that's a real change." 

Mrs. Bush once laughingly compared herself unflatteringly with her predecessor by observing that Mrs. Reagan is a size three, and "so's my leg." But many believe the comparison redounds to Mrs. Bush's favor: According to the Journal/NBC poll, voters by a ratio of 3 to 1 say they like Mrs. Bush as first lady better than Mrs. Reagan. (The former and current first ladies never socialized much, and have scarcely spoken since Mrs. Bush took over.) 

Columbia's Prof.
Klein observes: "Here's a woman who spends a lot of time with her family.
She isn't wearing Christian Dior clothing.
She isn't flash and she isn't greed." She adds that Mrs. Bush's refusal to diet, dye her hair or buy expensive designer outfits except for the most formal state occasions is deeply appealing even to college students who are years away from concerns about their hair color, because "they feel they live in a culture where everybody has to look like Jane Fonda." 

Historian Betty Caroli, author of a study of first ladies, says that the public has long had highly contradictory expectations for a president's wife. "At times they want her to be the very model of style and elegance and the epitome of the very best that can be offered, and at other times they feel she should be just like us," she says.
This ambivalence about the degree of royal airs tolerated among first ladies dates to the founding of the republic.
The press chronicled the number of horses drawing Martha Washington's carriage, what she wore and whom she visited.
Later, Woodrow Wilson's first wife, Ellen, published her clothing bills in the newspapers to counter charges that she spent too much.
And Theodore Roosevelt's wife, Edith, saved for her scrapbook an editorial criticizing her for spending too little.
Mrs. Bush, says Ms. Caroli, has so far successfully managed to straddle the conflicting public demands on her. 

Mrs. Bush says her increased visibility as first lady has a lot to do with her improving public image.
She points out that her much-lauded visit to Harlem Hospital earlier this year -- where she cuddled babies with AIDS -- was actually her second such visit. "I did that as the vice president's wife; nobody really cared," she says. 

Since becoming first lady, she has continued to sometimes get out front of the policy makers.
For instance, condemning the racially motivated killing of a black teen-ager in New York's Bensonhurst neighborhood in August, weeks before the president did so.
She denies rumors that she pushed her husband to ban imported semi-automatic rifles, but she has a long history of supporting gun control measures. 

The public often resents a first lady who calls the shots behind the scenes.
Both Mrs. Reagan and Rosalynn Carter suffered from that perception.
But so far, though Mrs. Bush has used her influence, she has done so sparingly and with a directness that seems to have defused criticism.
Unlike Mrs. Reagan, for instance, she rarely uses intermediaries on the White House staff to convey her wishes, preferring to deal with Mr. Bush directly -- as when she asked to have governors' spouses included in the working sessions during the recent education meeting in Charlottesville, Va. 

Aides say the first couple maintains an easy working relationship, with Mrs. Bush apt to pop into the Oval Office if she has a visitor Mr. Bush might want to see, or Mr. Bush likely to join her and their dog for a quick midday stroll around the Rose Garden. 

As with most recent first ladies, Mrs. Bush has taken a special interest in one issue.
In her case, it is literacy, an issue that combines her personal interest with a sense of political savvy.
With five children, including one son who struggled with dyslexia, she had always had an interest in education.
But she also adds: "I knew George was going to run for office in about '78 and I really worried . . . I ought to have an issue." 

Mrs. Bush frequently uses her own family as a frame of reference for social problems.
She does so despite the fact that, as President Bush himself acknowledges, the family is far wealthier and more socially connected than most -- with affluent and powerful figures on both sides and with means enabling the women not to work outside the home. 

Perhaps as a result, Mrs. Bush's comments on work and family issues occasionally seem out of date, as when she told National Public Radio last month that a woman probably couldn't be a bank president and a mother and still give her children the time they need. "If a bank president just works the regular eight hours, then you can do both.
But if you're going to work 14 hours a day, it just isn't fair when you've had children." 

Mrs. Bush's spokeswoman later insisted her comments applied equally to men, although she spoke directly of women.
And in fact, Mrs. Bush suggests that if she were starting over today, she would finish college and pursue a career herself, perhaps in nursing. 

But because the Bush family and Mrs. Bush herself are so atypical of the way most Americans live, some suggest that she is far less of a role model than her predecessors were.
Susan Ware, a New York University history professor who has written widely about Eleanor Roosevelt, says that today's young women "don't have to look up to the first lady.
They can look up to Pat Schroeder, they can look up to Nancy Kassebaum.
The world has changed in that there are a lot more women exercising their own political power." 

It's a change Mrs. Bush herself acknowledges.
She recounts her feelings last month, when she was asked to speak to students at Smith College. "Sitting out on the stage looking out at those wonderful young women, all of whom have the world now in their pocket," she wondered what she could say of relevance. "It was a little depressing, I'll have to confess," she says. "I mean, how could I even talk to them?" 

Finally, though, she decided on a common-sense message that she thinks will always be relevant, no matter what changes are engulfing American womanhood. "There's some rules that don't change," she says. "You've got to have priorities in life.
That's hard when you've got so many choices -- to say to yourself, I can't do everything, I've got to have priorities that I really care about." 

