.START 

EAST GERMAN POLICE CLASHED with protesters seeking political change. 

Security forces in East Berlin stormed a candlelight march by more than 1,000 people calling for a restructuring of the country's Communist system.
The protest followed the arrests of hundreds of people in the capital as violence erupted at the close of weekend celebrations marking the Communist state's 40th anniversary.
Soviet leader Gorbachev had attended the ceremonies.
Demonstrations were reported in five other cities, and the protests were considered the largest since a workers' uprising was put down by the Soviets in 

Despite the growing unrest and the exodus of East Germans to the West, leader Honecker told Gorbachev he would stick to hard-line policies. 

HUNGARY'S COMMUNISTS ADOPTED a socialist model ahead of elections. 

In an attempt to survive multiparty elections with a shred of its once-absolute power, the Communist Party voted Saturday to disband and recreate itself as a party of social democrats called the Hungarian Socialist Party.
Parliamentary elections are to be held before June, and presidential balloting is set for this year.
The move, which came during a party congress in Budapest, made Hungary the first Soviet bloc nation to dissolve its ruling Communist Party and abandon Stalinism. 

A document unveiled by the new Western-style party rejects excessive centralization of power and supports a market economy and civil liberties. 

Bush never made a clear-cut decision on whether to use military force to support last week's coup attempt in Panama or to remove Noriega.
Senior administration officials insisted that the president acted prudently and that the decision-making process was hampered somewhat by the confusion in Panama. 

Latvia's nationalist movement approved a plan for eventual independence from the Soviet Union.
It was considered the biggest challenge to Moscow from the restive Baltic republics.
In Azerbaijan, railroad crews defied a ban on transport strikes and again stemmed the flow of supplies to Armenia amid a dispute over Nagorno-Karabakh. 

The Senate voted to amend the Catastrophic Care Act of 1988, killing its income surtax and abandoning expanded coverage for doctors' bills and care in skilled nursing facilities, as well as new coverage for prescription drugs.
The 99-0 vote came Friday.
The House voted last week to repeal the program. 

Pope John Paul II challenged South Korea's President Roh to move his country toward full democracy.
The pontiff then prayed for the reunification of the divided Korean peninsula during an outdoor Mass in Seoul attended by about 700,000 people.
The Roman Catholic pope, on a tour of Asia, also expressed a desire to visit China. 

Palestinian leaders urged the U.S. to pressure Israel to begin peace talks, saying Israel's rejection Friday of a proposed meeting with Arabs in Egypt would lead to more violence in the uprising in the occupied lands.
Israeli officials also indicated that intervention by Washington was needed to break a deadlock over Cairo's plan. 

A Lebanese Moslem lawmaker said that talks in Saudi Arabia aimed at ending Lebanon's 14-year-old civil war were deadlocked.
The Sunni legislator, who represents an alliance of Syrian and Iranian-backed Lebanese factions, also warned that a "more vicious war" could erupt unless the country's Christians surrendered some political power. 

Argentina's President Menem announced pardons for 39 military officers accused of crimes during the "dirty war," the military regime's crackdown in the late 1970s on political dissent in which about 9,000 people disappeared.
The move, announced Friday and criticized by human-rights activists, ends trials for the officers. 

NASA technicians packed two atomic generators aboard the space shuttle Atlantis as the space agency prepared for a Thursday launch that anti-nuclear activists vow to block legally or physically.
The generators were installed in the Galileo space probe stored in the shuttle's cargo bay. 

A bomb exploded aboard a bus in Bogota, killing at least seven passengers and injuring eight others.
The blast came as Colombia's President Barco installed new justice, communications and interior ministers.
Cocaine traffickers were suspected. 

The Oakland Athletics won baseball's American League pennant, defeating the Toronto Blue Jays, four games to one. 

Died: Bette Davis, 81, actress and two-time Academy Award winner, Friday night, in Paris, of breast cancer. 

