.START 

Some 2,500 base metals traders and executives assembled in London last week to celebrate another buoyant year.
But at the annual dinner of the London Metal Exchange they received an ominous warning. 

"Gentlemen, you have all become extremely exuberant {following} three years of plenty," said Ian Rugeroni, president of Alcan Enterprises USA and Canada in a speech.
But "one lesson we should have learned is the cyclical nature of the metals industry." 

"Mr.
Rugeroni made a lot of us very cautious," said Hans Murmann, managing director of Metallgesellschaft Ltd., a London metals trading unit of the West German company.
Prices could weaken next year, he says, though of course individual metals will behave differently. 

A sharp rise in European interest rates last week over and above increases throughout this year could crimp metals demand, dealers say.
The dollar has weakened since central banks have intervened in the currency markets, but it is still relatively strong.
Since the vast majority of raw materials are priced in dollars, the appreciation of the currency during the past year has raised the cost of commodity imports for European and Japanese companies. 

The combination of higher costs for the raw materials and the strain of high real interest rates leave consumers with little choice but to keep raw material inventories as low as possible, dealers say. 

So far this year West German, French and Italian demand has been more buoyant than the U.S., Mr. Murmann of Metallgesellschaft says.
Metals consumption of Japanese and Far Eastern users has also been strong, he says. 

But orders from European metals users could fall next year, dealers say.
And if U.S. and European businesses buy less Far Eastern finished products, Oriental purchases of base metals and other raw materials will also eventually wane. 

"Moreover, metal prices are running into resistance because supplies are overhanging the market," says Anne Whitby, managing director of Chart Analysis Ltd., a firm that specializes in technical analysis. 

Despite a rally since the summer, base metals prices have fallen below their peaks of 1988.
The exception is lead, which rose to a new high only weeks ago.
Yet average quotes are still well above levels seen in the mid-1980s.
As a result, profit of the base metals mining industry has soared. 

Pretax profits of the five main base metals industries -- aluminum, copper, lead, zinc and nickel -- surged to a "fantastic" $28 billion last year, Mr. Rugeroni said.
This compares with $6 billion in 1987 and a "staggering" pretax loss of $16 billion from 1981 to 1986.
Because profits continued to be buoyant this year, miners and refiners are scheduled to raise production capacity of the five metals by as much as 24% between 1988 and 1993, Mr. Rugeroni said. 

Potential supplies of copper and nickel will increase the most markedly, he said, followed by aluminum and lead. 

To absorb all this metal, consumption growth must double for at least five years, Mr. Rugeroni said.
But demand is unlikely to grow at this rate.
Besides the threat of a slowdown in the international economy, high prices are encouraging substitution. 

Some analysts contend that Mr. Rugeroni is too pessimistic. "In general, base metals prices will sag next year, but they are still likely to be relatively high compared with past years," says Reg Eccles, managing director and a mining specialist at Ord Minnett London stockbrokers.
Profits of base metals companies are likely to be lower next year, he says, but companies will still be doing well. 

The markets are unlikely to be overwhelmed by an increase in supplies, says Neil Buxton, a metals analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in London.
Projects will be coming on stream, he says, but there will also be mine closures. 

Moreover some inventories -- copper, for example -- are low, says Edwin Arnold, London-based metals analyst of Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner & Smith.
Any losses of production or sudden surges in demand could surprise the market and push copper prices "sharply higher" he says. 

Nevertheless, optimistic mining companies may fail to achieve the profits that they expect on new developments, Mr. Rugeroni contends.
He estimates that since 1986, the weighted cost of production for the five base metals rose by 23% to 50 cents a pound this year.
It will be difficult to lower overhead costs if prices turn down, he says. 

Looking ahead to commodity markets this week: 

Copper 

Traders will be watching today's London Metal Exchange's report on copper stocks in its warehouses with more than the usual interest. 

Unexpected and major withdrawals or deposits of the metal often set the tone for the day's trading in both London and New York and frequently the influence of the changes can extend into the week.
The inventories are a handy, but not truly conclusive, indicator of readily available supplies.
Their week-to-week fluctuations reflect the ebb-and-flow of market conditions. 

Late last week, traders and people in the copper business grew increasingly concerned about the prolonged loss of production caused by shutdowns of the Bougainville and Highland Valley mine.
Japan, which normally depends heavily on both Bougainville and Highland Valley for supplies, may have to find copper elsewhere and compete with other buyers. 

This uncertainty was injected Friday into projections of London Metal Exchange stocks.
Generally, the estimates are in agreement, even if they turn out to be wrong.
But on Friday, "They were all over the place," said one analyst. 

Early in the day, there were expectations that inventories would rise 15,000 tons.
Later, these estimates were lowered.
Some were looking for inventories to be unchanged from the previous week to 5,000 tons higher.
Others estimated a drop of 5,000 tons. 

However, another analyst cautioned against projecting LME figures into a global supply/demand scenario.
World-wide demand for copper is strong, he says, and supplies are tight in the Far East and in the U.S. However, there is greater availability of the metal in Europe, which may be reflected in the London market but not elsewhere, he said. 

Energy 

This week will confirm whether an uptrend resumes in oil markets after last week's correction.
Many analysts are confident high oil demand will firm prices again once the correction runs its course.
But a big factor, they agree, will be the pace of OPEC's production. 

Late last month, OPEC increased its production ceiling to 20.5 million barrels a day for the fourth quarter.
That's up from 19.5 million barrels in the third quarter and 18.5 million in the first half.
The increase was intended to take into account higher demand for OPEC oil and the fact actual output has been running above the ceiling. 

For the last two months, according to industry estimates, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries has been producing 22.3 million barrels a day.
As a result, output of many of the exporters -- with the obvious exception of Saudi Arabia -- already is near capacity.
There is doubt they can produce much more.
Some can.
But no one knows how much total output will rise, if any. 

Some industry projections suggest some additional OPEC production can be absorbed in the fourth quarter.
OPEC's secretary-general Subroto sees demand for OPEC oil at "something like 22.5 million barrels a day." Energy Security Analysis maintains the "call" on OPEC oil will be slightly higher than that, or around 22.6 million barrels a day. "We enter the fourth quarter well balanced," the Washington-based consulting firm reports. 

Grains And Soybeans 

This week the Midwest harvest might kick into high gear.
If dry weather allows farmers to work in the fields, the prices of corn and soybean futures contracts will come under downward pressure.
On Friday, the price of corn futures prices dropped in the wake of forecasts for dry weather this week.
Futures prices usually drop during the harvest in part because grain handlers sell futures contracts at the Chicago Board of Trade in order to hedge their purchases of new corn from farmers.
This year, prices are also falling because good harvesting weather is prompting trade analysts to boost their estimates of the crop size.
Dean Witter Reynolds, for example, is pegging the soybean harvest at 1.90 billion bushels and the corn crop at 7.373 billion bushels.
Sparks Commodities Inc., a Memphis, Tenn.-based forecasting concern, expects a 1.92 billion bushel soybean crop and a 7.39 billion bushel corn crop.
After the close of trading on Thursday, the Agriculture Department is slated to release a harvest estimate based on Oct. 1 conditions.
Most analysts expect the government to slightly raise its estimate from a one-month-old forecast for a 1.89 billion bushel soybean crop and a 7.32 billion bushel corn harvest.
This week, analysts will also watch for signs that the Soviet Union is continuing its traditional fall buying binge of U.S. crops.
Last week, the Agriculture Department confirmed that the Soviets had bought about 2.6 million metric tons of U.S. corn.
The Soviets are widely rumored to be interested in buying several more millions of metric tons of corn, and to be mulling purchases of U.S. wheat. 

