.START 

The Senate's embrace of a leaner, cheaper plan to insure the elderly from catastrophic illness is a step that could help change the politics and economics of the health-care issue. 

In a 99-0 vote, the Senate amended the Catastrophic Care Act of 1988 by killing its unpopular income surtax and abandoning three expensive benefits: expanded coverage for doctors' bills and care in skilled nursing facilities, as well as new coverage for prescription drugs.
The proposal would continue to provide full coverage for hospitalization after the first day, as well as some smaller benefits. 

The plan still faces significant hurdles.
The House voted overwhelmingly last week to repeal the Catastrophic Care plan, except for three noncontroversial provisions to help poor people.
But Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.), who sponsored the Senate plan, expressed some confidence that his plan will survive a House-Senate conference. "I think that they realize that they have got to act," he said shortly after Friday's vote.
He said his plan had strong support from senior citizens' groups and from the House GOP leadership.
The issue may not be resolved for several weeks, Sen. McCain said. 

The vote was a significant victory for Sen. McCain, who represents a state with a large elderly population.
He first proposed his plan in early June and then, using a series of parliamentary maneuvers, the former Navy pilot and prisoner of war in Vietnam, fought persistently to force the Senate to consider his proposal.
The Senate adopted his plan after an 11-hour debate, during which it rejected outright repeal and about a half-dozen less sweeping plans to trim the current law. 

Sen. McCain and his staff believe that health care will be an important issue for Republicans, one that can damage them if they appear to be taking away benefits and help them enormously if they provide leadership in addressing growing public concern about the cost, quality and accessibility of health care.
Because Democrats frequently get credit for expanding health benefits, Sen. McCain feared a political backlash against Republicans if important benefits were repealed during the Bush administration. 

In addition, the cost of the McCain plan is moderate and predictable compared with the current law.
Just this year, Congressional Budget Office estimates of the five-year cost of the current law have risen to $48 billion from $30 billion.
By contrast, a McCain aide estimates that the Senate proposal will cost $8.7 billion over the next four years.
By lowering the ante for catastrophic-illness care, the Senate plan would make it easier to consider adding provisions for long-term nursing-home care in the future, a benefit that many elderly persons want. 

Even though most politicians agreed that the catastrophic coverage provided the elderly with important protection against financial ruin from acute illness, the intense opposition to the surtax generated a political panic.
The House, after failing to find a compromise, retreated from the law entirely.
The powerful Senate Finance Committee, which is filled with health-care experts, wasn't able to reach a consensus on how to save elements of the act. 

The Bush administration -- cautious, divided and preoccupied with cutting the capital-gains tax -- played no part in the debate, even though Mr. Bush frequently boasted about his support of the Reagan-era law during his campaign. "This never should have been our issue; it should have been George Bush's issue," said a McCain staffer after the vote. 

Sen. McCain, working with Sen. Orin Hatch (R., Utah), promoted his plan as offering a combination of compassionate care, a low cost and fairness that no other plan provided. 

The main benefit left in the bill -- full coverage of hospital stays after payment for the first day of care -- would be financed by a flat monthly fee paid by the 33 million elderly and disabled Medicare beneficiaries.
The fee, currently $4, is scheduled to rise to $4.90 next year and to $10.20 by 1993, producing a revenue surplus.
The existing coverage is financed by this monthly premium, plus an income surtax that spurred a hostile campaign against the law from politically potent groups of senior citizens. 

The McCain bill also includes several provisions from the existing law -- improvements to Medicaid for the poor, some home-care and hospice benefits, coverage of intravenous and immunosuppressive drugs, and mammography screening for elderly and disabled women. 

