.START 

Chrysler Corp., in a surprising shift, said it will put most of its 1990 media budget for Chrysler-brand automobiles into magazines rather than television. 

For the 1990 model year, Chrysler said 70% of its media budget for cars with the Chrysler nameplate will be spent on print, which includes a wide spectrum of magazines and some newspapers.
A model year runs from September to September.
Last year, Chrysler put about 60% of that budget into TV, and about 40% in magazines and newspapers. 

Major auto makers, both domestic and foreign, have usually supported their automobile lines with massive advertising budgets placed largely in television.
The shift by Chrysler represents the largest proportion of an ad budget dedicated to print by a car line of a major U.S. auto manufacturer in at least two decades, according to Jim Guthrie, executive vice president of marketing development for the Magazine Publishers of America, an industry group.
Auto makers are the largest category of advertisers in magazines, spending $800 million in 1988, an increase of 17% from 1987. 

The shift in spending is part of a stepped-up campaign by Chrysler to promote its high-end Chrysler brand, which includes the Imperial, New Yorker, Salon, LeBaron, and Town & Country lines.
Chrysler is making a major push to increase showroom visits while it reintroduces some new models; the company is once again manufacturing a full-size, four-door luxury Imperial sedan, not in production since 1975. 

"We have a whole host of new products to introduce and we can reach a better part of our buyers with magazines," said Clark Vitulli, general marketing manager for Chrysler. "Frankly, upscale luxury car buyers don't watch a lot of general-interest TV." 

Chrysler will be spending more dollars on media in the 1990 model year, though Mr. Vitulli wouldn't disclose the exact figure.
He did say it would be a double-digit percentage increase from last year.
In 1988, the Chrysler brand spent $99 million on TV and magazine advertising, according to Leading National Advertisers. 

The auto maker's move is a hearty endorsement of the effectiveness of advertising in magazines, which face competition from network TV and the growing cable TV industry.
It also represents a comeback of sorts for magazines; earlier this year, Nissan Motor Corp. USA stunned publishers when it canceled nearly all its print advertising for the rest of the 1989 model year.
The Nissan Motor Co. unit shifted its spending to TV to move an oversupply of unsold cars. 

Nissan executives will unveil their spending plans for the 1990 model year at a car dealers show later this month.
However, it's clear Nissan is using magazines heavily, as well as TV, to introduce its new Infiniti line of luxury cars. 

It isn't clear whether other auto makers will follow Chrysler's lead; auto makers largely maintained their spending patterns in 1989, despite Nissan's defection from magazines.
Other auto makers have showed a decided preference for TV.
For example, Mr. Vitulli said Chrysler Corp. 's lower-priced Plymouth auto line will spend 10% of it media budget on print and 90% on broadcast TV and cable. 

Magazine publishers have gone to great lengths in recent years to draw ad pages from the auto makers.
Promotional tie-ins such as Family Circle magazine's "Family Car of the Year," and Home Mechanix magazine's "Easy Maintenance Car of the Year," have been used to drive up the number of auto pages or to attract pages that weren't there before. 

Mr. Vitulli said Chrysler's spending will be spread over a broad range of magazines including The New Yorker, Lear's, Vanity Fair, Ms. and Business Week. "We are looking to target niches -- young women, older people and others," he said. "We'll use core publications for the entire brand, along with magazines meant for specific lines." 

