.START 

Central Banking System Inc. said it will ask shareholders to liquidate the company, after it sells off its two main units. 

Central Banking said it signed a definitive agreement to sell most of the company to Bank of the West, a San Francisco subsidiary of France's state-owned Banque Nationale de Paris, for $54 million.
Following the sale, a portion of the proceeds will be used to pay Central Banking's debt of about $25.6 million. 

The company said it also expects results for the third quarter will be roughly break-even.
Central Banking said "most or all" of the $13.5 million gain realized from the July sale of its insurance-premium-finance division and other assets was wiped out by estimated losses and charges in the quarter. 

If Central Banking's tangible net worth -- or assets minus liabilities exluding intangibles such as good will -- at closing is less than $35 million, the purchase price will be reduced.
The price will be cut one dollar for each dollar between $35 million and Central Banking's actual net worth, with a total reduction of $7.5 million.
If Central Banking's tangible net worth falls below $27.5 million, Bank of the West can terminate the agreement. 

At Aug. 31, the bank holding company's net worth was estimated at $36.7 million. 

Shareholders are expected to receive liquidation payments of between $5.50 and $4.00 a share for each of the 4.3 million shares outstanding.
Shareholder payments will depend on the company's net worth after paying off debt, transaction costs, taxes and other obligations. 

The sale to Bank of the West is subject to certain conditions including approval of regulatory authorities and shareholders, as well as an audit of Central Banking's results for the quarter ended Sept. 30.
Shareholders are expected to vote on the transaction near the end of the year.
The companies expect the transaction to be completed in the first quarter of 1990. 

If the acquistion isn't completed, Central Banking has granted Bank of the West an option to acquire up to 24.9% of its stock, exercisable under certain conditions. 

Central Banking has been operating under agreements with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and other regulatory agencies since mid-1988.
The agreements required, among other things, that the bank boost capital to $85 million, or 7.5% of assets, whichever is greater. 

The company was unable to make $4.4 million in payments on its senior notes due in May 1989, and noteholders have given the Central Banking a notice of default. 

The company has been plagued with losses.
For the 1989 first half, Central Banking posted a net loss of $12.9 million.
For 1988, it posted a loss of $39.9 million. 

Bank of the West, which has assets of $1.8 billion and 45 branches in California, said that Central Banking's branches are a "logical addition" to its Northern California branch network.
Central Bank, with assets of about $1 billion, has 46 branches, mostly in Northern California. 

Earlier this year, Central Banking and Security Pacific Corp., Los Angeles, terminated an agreement under which Central Banking was to be acquired for $62.7 million in stock. 

