.START 

You won't see a tie with Smokey Bear on it.
Smokey socks?
Perish the thought. 

Elsie Cunningham sees to that.
She is Smokey's manager, the U.S. Forest Service official in charge of protecting the government's trademark on Smokey.
Only she can prevent Smokey Bear from being reduced to a gag gift. 

As far as most citizens can see, the federal government employs one president, 535 congressmen, 275,000 mail carriers and that's about it.
But there are millions of anonymous civil servants.
And a few have jobs that are downright bizarre. 

So we set out to find the 10 most unusual jobs in all the bureaucracy, judging candidates by the thoroughly arbitrary standard of what raised eyebrows the highest in our office. 

Secrecy was one obstacle.
We were prevented by protective Pentagon public-relations men from talking to a Col. M.S. Gilchrist, the Army's director of civilian marksmanship.
The Army did allow that Congress gives him $5 million a year to train civilians "so they can function in the national interest in case of war," apparently on the assumption that the next war will involve rifles rather than missiles. 

The travel budget kept us from visiting Deidre Dockweiler, a federal fish watcher.
For two or three months at a time, the marine biologist lives aboard foreign fish-processing vessels off Alaska to monitor compliance with U.S. rules on what fish foreigners can take from U.S. waters.
Sole is okay, salmon isn't. 

And, alas, the official Supreme Court seamstress died recently and hasn't been replaced.
Not to worry.
A seamstress in private practice is hemming the justices' robes in the interim. 

Fortunately, Ms. Cunningham was forthcoming about her $42,000-a-year job as the chief promoter and protector of Smokey Bear. "I would like to convince people that it's really neat to work for a bear and for fire prevention," she says.
Note that we didn't say Smokey the Bear.
As Ms. Cunningham is quick to point out: "Smokey has no middle name." Yes, Smokey is serious business.
Ms. Cunningham learned that last year when she provoked a controversy within the Forest Service by swapping the wooden Smokey Bear ruler that's given to schoolchildren for a plastic model.
In an agency that exists to promote the use of trees, plastic simply wouldn't do. 

We also took our search beyond the Beltway -- to 80 feet below street level in New York's Wall Street district, where a half dozen specialists move millions of dollars for foreigners.
These are the "gold stackers." 

America keeps its gold at Fort Knox, but foreign governments keep much of their hoard in the basement of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Steel and concrete vaults hold 800,000 gold bars -- worth $120 billion -- in chicken-wire cages, each containing a single country's gold.
When one nation sells some gold to another, the gold stackers load bars onto a cart, verify the serial numbers stamped onto each one and wheel the gold to another cage. 

Gene Haislip deals in another form of gold -- cocaine.
While platoons of narcotics agents are deployed to stop cocaine from entering the U.S., Mr. Haislip grants licenses from the Drug Enforcement Administration to import it legally. 

Currently, he permits just one outfit, Steppan Co., to import coca leaves.
The Maywood, N.J., company extracts cocaine and sells it to drug companies for legitimate medical use, primarily as a local anesthetic in eye or nose surgery.
Mr. Haislip allows Steppan to import enough coca leaf to meet the legal U.S. demand of about 400 kilograms a year. "I have the weirdest job in DEA," he says. 

Which is not to be confused with the weirdest job at the FDA: condom tester. 

In a Food and Drug Administration lab in Rockville, Md., one fellow pulls a condom over metal nozzles, presses a button and watches a machine slowly blow it up like a balloon.
Condoms commonly hold eight to 10 gallons of air before bursting, far more capacity than necessary in normal use. "It may be a predictor of overall product quality," explains Don Marlow, FDA director of mechanics and material science. 

Another researcher slices condoms into strips like rubber bands to test how far the latex can be pulled. "They must stretch 650%," Mr. Marlow says. "Most go 1,000%." 

Meanwile, at the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, we find Lorraine McGill gently dipping her fingers into a small cardboard box filled with disintegrating shreds of pale green paper, as if she were an archaeologist handling ancient papyrus.
The box arrived from a little old lady in Philadelphia who had stored the money in a hole in the ground. "Please repair damaged money," the woman pleaded in a scrawled note. 

Actually, Ms. McGill doesn't repair money.
She reconstructs it to the point that bills can be counted and replaced.
In this particular batch of currency, she searches for fragments from the top left corner of bills; the distinctive scroll work allows her to tell a fifty from a five.
With Scotch tape, she pries apart two scraps married by moisture.
So far in this batch, she has counted $1,200, a small step toward the $28 million or so that the department redeems every year. 

Which brings us to Alice Price, curator of one of the world's most unusual art collections: the 7,000 paintings, drawings and sculptures belonging to the U.S. Air Force.
For 14 years, she has been dispatching professional illustrators, volunteers all, around the world to paint or draw anything remotely related to the Air Force. 

Mrs. Price's collection ranges from a realistic painting of a T-38 trainer flying upside down, drawn by an artist who went along for the ride, to a quilt sewn in honor of an Armed Forces Day parade down Fifth Avenue. "I never know what I'm going to get," she says. 

Meanwhile, at the White House, gifts keep coming in for the Bushes.
And John Hilboldt must place a value on every present the president and his wife receive -- be it the $12,000 Waterford crystal bowl filled with shamrocks that the Irish prime minister sent on St. Patrick's Day or a hand-knit sweater. 

There's no guessing involved -- not with an official White House list of appraisers who fix value based on the Washington replacement cost.
Sometimes that's a cinch, such as when the Soviet foreign minister gave Mr. Bush three bottles of vodka, three bottles of wine and four tins of caviar.
A check with local retailers established the official value at $340. 

But sometimes even Mr. Hilboldt is stumped.
When the Canadian minister of industry gave President Reagan framed caricatures of the eight participants in the 1987 Toronto Economic Summit, the value was recorded as "indeterminable." 

The Ten Most Unusual Federal Jobs 

-- Smokey Bear's manager 

-- The Army civilian marksmanship chief 

-- The fish watcher 

-- The Supreme Court seamstress 

-- The gold stacker 

-- The (legal) cocaine importer 

-- The condom tester 

-- The Air Force art curator 

-- The White House gift appraiser 

