.START 

British Steel PLC, Europe's largest publicly owned steel maker, is confident it can withstand a potential downturn in European steel prices despite outside forecasts that its operating profit will fall in the current financial year. 

The company holds this view despite declining prices in several steel product areas and despite Britain's high interest rates.
And even some analysts are beginning to think recently privatized British Steel may be able to break free of, or at least minimize, the industry's cyclical ups and downs. 

"We are confident but not complacent," Robert Scholey, chairman, said during an interview at an industry conference.
While many analysts see European steel demand retreating from recent peaks, Mr. Scholey describes the outlook for his company as "pretty steady." 

Some steel analysts concur that the group is in a strong position to cope with weaker demand.
Despite warning of a slip in operating profit, analysts feel the company is well placed compared with its competitors. 

"They can break out of the boom-and-bust cycle," said Harry Philips, engineering analyst at Laing & Cruickshank Ltd. in London. 

The company's restructuring in the past decade should ensure it a soft landing in any European steel market slump, analysts say.
During a period of heavy losses in the early 1980s, British Steel cut its work force by two-thirds and transformed its cost base by bringing capacity in line with output.
From a laggard, it had become one of the world's most efficient steelmakers by the time the British government sold its shares in the company to the public last November. 

In the financial year ended last March 31, British Steel pretax profit soared 42% to #589 million ($944.8 million) from #411 million a year earlier.
For the current financial year, analysts' pretax profit forecasts range from #622 million to #660 million, mainly reflecting a smaller one-time loss, which last year stood at #140 million.
But analysts' forecasts for operating profit in the current fiscal year average about #560 million, down sharply from #656 million a year earlier. 

There are strong signs that the previously buoyant British construction and end-user markets have peaked.
Analysts note that if British demand does slacken, the company might be forced to cut the prices of its export products, something it has so far avoided doing. 

Also, British Steel's formerly highly profitable Stainless Steel division is rumored to have offered lower prices recently, a trend Mr. Scholey declined to comment on.
The stainless unit was closed for seven days in early September after a three-week maintenance shutdown in August, and further shutdowns are rumored to be planned. 

Much of the company's gains in recent years rest on the productivity improvements made over the past decade.
But to beat the cyclical decline, analysts say British Steel will need to retain its firm grip on the U.K. market while expanding the range and quality of its products. 

Andrew Hollins, analyst at Kleinwort Benson Securities in London, says that the company will find it more difficult to score productivity gains if sales are falling. "Productivity gains are easy to make when volume is rising," he says. 

Mr. Scholey refused to agree that operating profit was bound for a cyclical downturn in the next two years. "That assumes too much," he said. "Consumption rates have cooled slightly, but it has been nothing dramatic." 

But with sales on a potential downward trend, the company is focusing on increasingly popular value-added products.
British Steel has a strong marketing campaign, promoting particular brand products such as "Colorcoat," which is steel painted according to end-user requirements. 

"It's a key policy of ours to go for value-added products," Mr. Scholey said. 

He says the group is also improving production techniques.
More than 80% of the group's steel products are made using the more-efficient continuous casting method, and Mr. Scholey hopes it will rise to 100% in areas where suitable.
British Steel is also now using secondary steelmaking techniques that remove impurities and increase sale prices on all products that require this treatment. 

With 1992 looming, analysts reckon British Steel is well placed to expand its European influence either through joint ventures or acquisitions.
The company already has a fair-sized European distribution network, especially in France and Spain.
British Steel shareholders recently approved a resolution enabling the group to use #300 million of new shares to finance acquisitions. 

"It's only a matter of time before they make a move," said Mr. Philips of Laing & Cruickshank. 

Mr. Scholey said the company plans a "gentle movement forward" in developing its European distributions service. "We don't want to marry in haste and repent in leisure," he said. 

