.START 

The scene is a factory manager's nightmare, and for Scott Whitlock, manager of Honda Motor Co. 's huge assembly operation here, it couldn't be happening at a worse time. 

Stopped dead on the factory floor is $40 million of brand-new equipment designed to produce dashboards for the 1990 Honda Accord.
The delay is threatening to foul up the first production day for the completely redesigned Accord -- a car so crucial to Honda that the plant installed the new machinery without shutting down for even a single day.
Mr. Whitlock, an exuberant ex-lawyer whose brisk manner belies a string of 18-hour workdays, watches while workers in white uniforms identical to his fuss over what to do. 

Fortunately, someone hits the right button.
The machine spits out the part.
Mr. Whitlock, relieved, lopes off to another department while praising the work team's leader. "He came here from the railroad," Mr. Whitlock says. "Now he's an expert on this technology." 

Scenes as stressful as this one, which took place in mid-September, are fairly common inside Honda these days.
Managers are working around the clock.
Workers with little prior automotive experience are grappling with new machines.
Crucial product launches are going off on schedules that most auto makers would dismiss as insanely optimistic. 

Honda, which won fame in the 1980s as the little car company that humbled industry giants, is in a big hurry to top that success in the 1990s.
Its goal: overtaking America's No. 3 auto maker, Chrysler Corp., both in world-wide vehicle sales and in share of the U.S. passenger-car market. 

This would be a stunning coup for a company that got into the car business just 27 years ago.
But in its attempt to carry off the feat, Honda is straining its people, its finances and the vaunted free-spiritedness of its corporate culture.
Even top executives complain that rapid growth has brought on an attack of bureaucratic bloat. 

Meanwhile, the company's long-term debt jumped 47% last fiscal year, to $2.28 billion.
Earnings for this year's fiscal first-quarter ended June 30 plunged 42%, to $106 million.
Results for the just-ended second quarter haven't been reported, but company executives concede they weren't much better.
The chief culprit: the enormous cost of Honda's aggressive expansion.
The company is opening a second U.S. assembly plant next month in East Liberty, Ohio, and greatly increasing engine and transmission production in this country.
It is also adding a third assembly line to its huge factory in Suzuka, Japan. 

Contributing to the cost crunch has been Honda's first-time use this year of financial "incentives" to sell cars in the U.S. -- a standard industry practice that the company had long disdained.
The new Accord, which has evolved from a compact into a midsize family sedan, won't require such inducements, company officials insist.
But the restyled car -- just now on sale, for prices starting at $12,145 -- is already providing Honda with a pointed lesson in the dangers of high expectations. 

Critics who once couldn't praise Honda enough now complain that the Accord's styling is dull, and lament the lack of anti-lock brakes as optional equipment. "Honda's cars aren't getting worse, they just stand out less," says Hiroshi Nakajima, an auto analyst with Yamaichi Research Institute in Tokyo. "Before, people went to Honda for something different.
Now you can go to Nissan or Mitsubishi." 

Such observations must be kept in perspective.
Analysts and competitors agree that if any company can increase sales significantly in a stagnant U.S. market, it's probably Honda.
What's more, a team of Chrysler planners recently warned their bosses that Honda's moves present a "scary scenario which . . . tells us that we at Chrysler have no time to waste." 

Next Tuesday, the entrenched U.S. automotive aristocracy plans to offer another sign of the respect it has for Honda.
At a gala dinner in Detroit, Soichiro Honda, the company's 82-year-old founder, is to be enshrined in the industry's Automotive Hall of Fame, right next to Henry Ford and General Motors Corp. 's swashbuckling pioneer, Billy Durant.
Mr. Honda will be the first Japanese to receive the honor. 

Mr. Honda's 1962 decision to move his motorcycle company into the car business was a big roll of the dice -- as is the company's current effort.
For all its success, Honda remains a medium-size car company with a limited product line.
Its $26 billion in annual revenue makes it less than two-thirds the size of Chrysler, and its total output of 1.9 million cars in its last fiscal year makes it only No. 11 in annual automotive production world-wide.
The company doesn't sell pickup trucks, four-wheel-drive sport vehicles or minivans -- and thus is shut out of the fastest-growing segments of the U.S. market. 

Honda simply lacks the manufacturing capacity to produce such vehicles.
But it's adding fast.
Besides the big expansion projects in the U.S. and Japan, Honda is starting to build its first European plant in partnership with Britain's Rover Group.
Honda's latest fiscal-year capital spending of $2.1 billion outstripped Chrysler's latest full-year capital outlays by 24%.
And Honda is spending more on new facilities as a percentage of revenue than either GM or Ford Motor Co. 

A big focus of this spending is central Ohio, where Honda is pouring money into an effort to make its U.S. operations nearly self-reliant.
The site of the engine and parts plant in Anna, Ohio, was a cornfield five years ago.
Now Honda is spending more than $600 million to turn the original $70 million factory into one that can do the work of seven Japanese plants. 

Besides adding manufacturing muscle, Honda is beefing up its U.S. product design and factory engineering operations.
A team designing a new Accord station wagon works a short distance from workshops adjacent to the Marysville plant, where welding tools and stamping dies for that vehicle are being prepared.
Previously, such design work would have been done in Japan. 

The object of all this, Honda officials say, is to increase their U.S. car sales by 10%, to a million a year, and their world-wide sales by 30%, to 2.5 million a yearall by the mid-1990s.
If Honda hits those numbers, it could well match or beat Chrysler's relatively flat global vehicle sales, which will be about 2.5 million this year.
In the meantime, Honda's share of the U.S. car market stands at 7.6%, up from 7% a year ago, while Chrysler's has fallen to 10.3% from 11.4% a year ago. 

"Just trend out the two companies," says Leonard Sherman, a vice president and auto consultant with Booz, Allen & Hamilton. "I don't know when the lines cross, but it's not too far in future." 

Chrysler officials say they're not taking Honda's threat lying down. "We're scrapping for every point of share we can get, regardless" of who the competition is, a company spokesman says. 

Chrysler is also scrambling to cut costs and modernize its products.
In July, the company said it would slash 2,300 whitecollar jobs and hack $1 billion out of annual costs by the end of next year.
Ironically, Chrysler is borrowing some of Honda's techniques -- such as consensus decision making -- as it overhauls operations. 

At Honda, the brick-and-mortar blitz hasn't been painless.
To meet the demand for U.S.-produced transmissions for the compact Civic, for example, Honda had to start casting parts at its lawn-mower plant in North Carolina.
And recently at the Anna plant, the company temporarily dropped its rigorous just-in-time delivery system, in which materials arrive exactly when they are needed, and stacked dozens of pallets full of engine blocks all around the factory floor.
Anna needed insurance in case its new, highly automated engine-casting and machining lines don't come up to speed on schedule. 

Ed Buker, who manages the new assembly plant in East Liberty, borrowed workers from Marysville to help make the November deadline for launching Civic production.
But when the Marysville plant ran into snags cranking up Accord production last month, he had to ship some of the workers back. "We don't have a surplus of resources," he says. 

That applies to financial resources as well.
Honda officials expect earnings to start rebounding in the company's fiscal second half, which begins Jan. 1.
But unless Honda meets its sales targets, it will be saddled with the sort of excess manufacturing capacity that is badly depressing the earnings of Detroit's Big Three. 

Amid all this, the problem that most worries top executives in Tokyo is how to get big without getting slow. 

Honda started the decade by shattering the stereotype of the tinny little Japanese car with its first Accord sedan, an economy car that offered U.S. consumers quiet performance and such thoughtful features as cup holders and coin boxes.
In 1982, it became the first Japanese company to build cars in the U.S.
In 1986, it beat the Japanese giants again, this time by launching a separate luxury division, Acura.
Toyota Motor Corp. and Nissan Motor Co. are just entering that market. 

Honda's savvy and agility made it the envy of its rivals, and one of the most heavily studied companies anywhere.
Honda relished it all, declaring in one advertisement, "It looks like we're being followed." 

But now, the pursuers are catching up, and Honda doesn't seem quite so untouchable.
Nissan, for example, blind-sided Honda in Japan this year with a wave of distinctively designed new models.
Honda's share of the Japanese car market so far this year, at 10.7%, is virtually the same as it was last year, while Nissan's has risen 1.3 percentage points, to 25.6%. 

One reason is Honda's stumble in the market for sporty coupes.
Because of its conservative styling, Prelude would have had trouble anyway against such newer, more eye-catching rivals as Nissan's sleek 240-SX, dealers and analysts say.
But Honda added to the problem by loading many Preludes with pricey options that customers didn't want -- such as four-wheel steering -- and then bringing out an Accord coupe that offers many of the same features as a Prelude for thousands of dollars less. 

The result: Prelude sales in Japan so far this year are down 21%, and Honda needed dealer rebates of $500 a car just to keep Prelude sales flat in the U.S. "There's no doubt the Prelude has been kind of outshone lately," concedes Thomas Elliott, Honda's top U.S. marketing official. "Obviously, it's time to reconsider the direction of that car." (As a first step, the company is expected to give the existing Prelude a fresher look by early next year.) 

The embarrassment of getting caught flat-footed in the market is prompting a round of self-criticism within Honda. 

"During the past two to three years, the speed {of decision making} dropped because of size," says Shoichiro Irimajiri, a senior managing director at Honda. "We have to change direction." Besides scrapping the dress code at headquarters in Tokyo, Honda is giving more responsibility to its operating divisions.
It's also trying to raise morale among younger workers, with such steps as flexible work hours at Tokyo headquarters. 

Flexibility may be creeping into other areas as well.
The planned joint-venture factory with Rover is Honda's first-ever manufacturing "alliance." Every other major auto maker has at least one such partnership, so Honda -- whose motto has long stressed holding "our own torch" -- is a latecomer to the notion.
But the company saw no other way to bolster its weak position in Europe. "There was a lot of political resistance to Honda proceeding alone," says Mr. Irimajiri. 

Honda officials acknowledge the challenges they face, but they also point to the hurdles they've already overcome.
Shige Yoshida, executive vice president for Honda's North American operations, was on the Honda team sent to launch motorcycle production at Marysville in 1979.
In December, two months after the first red dirt bike buzzed off the line, headquarters asked the operation to consider whether cars could be built in Ohio, Mr. Yoshida recalls.
A month later, his superiors handed down the order: Do it by 1982. 

"We've had tremendous growth," Mr. Yoshida says now, watching Accords and Civics roll down Marysville's twin auto assembly lines. "It's hard to imagine." 

How Honda Grew 

A look at some milestones in the company's history 

1948 -- Soichiro Honda founds Honda Motor Co. 

1962 -- Company introduces its first car in Japan 

1970 -- Introduces first car in U.S. 

1979 -- Begins motorcycle production at Marysville, Ohio 

Nov. 1982 -- Starts auto production at Marysville 

March 1986 -- Launches Acura luxury division 

Sept. 1986 -- Begins automobile engine production in Ohio 

March 1988 -- Starts construction of second Ohio car plant 

April 1988 -- Builds one millionth car in U.S. 

July 1989 -- Announces British factory venture with Rover Group 

Nov. 1989 -- Plans to begin production at second U.S. auto plant 

