.START 

President Bush never made a clear-cut decision on whether to use military force to support last week's coup attempt in Panama or to remove Gen. Manuel Noriega, despite ample opportunities to do so during a series of high-level White House meetings. 

Senior administration officials, in appearances over the weekend, insisted that President Bush acted prudently and that the decision-making process was hampered somewhat by the confusion in Panama while the events were unfolding.
But some Democrats and Republicans assert that the administration was ill-prepared for the coup attempt by some Panamanian military officers -- a move Mr. Bush had been encouraging with tough rhetoric for months. 

A review of last week's events shows that instructions were tentative concerning whether the U.S. would forcefully take Gen. Noriega, who is under indictment on drug charges in Florida.
And administration officials waited more than a day to confirm to the coup plotters that officials in Washington had agreed to their request to have U.S. forces block two routes expected to be used by pro-Noriega Panamanian troops to reach the capital. 

The administration also acknowledged that U.S. officials in Panama had a face-to-face meeting with Maj. Moises Giroldi, the leader of the coup, a day and a half before the uprising was launched.
The meeting was reported in Friday's Wall Street Journal.
Previously, the White House insisted U.S. officials hadn't talked directly to Maj. Giroldi. 

"That may be the biggest shortcoming of all of this: They had really not thought about this and planned it out," Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.), chairman of the Senate Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Western Hemisphere affairs, said on CBS's "Face the Nation." Sen. Dodd generally supports the administration's diplomatic efforts to isolate Gen. Noriega. 

Administration officials said the commander of U.S. forces in Panama was authorized to work up a contingency plan to remove Gen. Noriega covertly.
But in confirming the authorization, which was reported in yesterday's Washington Post, senior officials indicated that the contingency plan was cluttered with conditions. 

Secretary of State James Baker said on NBC's "Meet the Press" the message sent to the U.S. command was: "If there were an opportunity to do this without risking bloodshed and significant loss of American life, and to do so without open military involvement, then the commander on the ground was free to go ahead." 

The administration said word of the coup planned for last Monday reached U.S. officials in Panama the previous evening, when Maj. Giroldi and his wife met with American officials.
Word was communicated to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney about midnight Sunday and he, in turn, spoke with other senior U.S. officials within the next few hours.
The coup planners wanted refuge for their families in Panama and wanted to know whether U.S. troops would block certain key intersections once the coup was under way.
Administration officials insist that Maj. Giroldi's wife didn't contact U.S. officials in Panama two weeks earlier, as reported in this newspaper, although they didn't rule out that some contacts may have occurred on some level, and officials acknowledge they still are learning new details of events in Panama.
U.S. officials in Panama confirmed that the contacts were made more than two weeks before the coup attempt, and since the coup they confirmed to Washington that the contacts were made. 

President Bush was informed of the coup plan at 8 a.m. last Monday morning, and he held an unusually large meeting at the White House that included his senior advisers as well as Assistant Secretary of State Bernard Aronson and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Michael Kozak, who has negotiated personally with Gen. Noriega earlier this year. 

Midway through that meeting, word arrived that the coup had been put off until Tuesday.
The delay produced skepticism that "it was just another of the periodic coup reports that we get," said one senior administration official involved.
Still, the officials decided they probably would block two intersections in Panama as requested.
U.S. officials said they didn't block a third route because they weren't asked to do so and because it ran through the middle of Panama City and was outside the zone in which the U.S. could conduct routine "exercises" under its treaty rights. 

When the coup took place Tuesday, the president and his top aides held three additional meetings at the White House.
At about 12:30 p.m. EDT, as the coup was unfolding, three rebel officers arrived at U.S. military headquarters in Panama again wanting reassurances that American troops would block the key intersections.
They also wanted to ensure that there wouldn't be confrontations between American troops and the rebel troops.
They were told for the first time that the White House had formally agreed to allow U.S. troops to block the routes and that American troops had been deployed for that purpose. 

But senior administration officials insist that the rebel officers didn't ask that an American helicopter remove Gen. Noriega from the compound where he was being held.
They say that U.S. military officials in Panama cabled the White House saying the rebel officers said "they had no intention to turn over their people to the U.S. . . . and they said stay out of it." The State Department said Friday that it received a report that the rebels wanted to hand over Gen. Noriega to the U.S., but that the message was "garbled" and incorrect and differed from the information received at the White House.
U.S. officials in Panama, however, have confirmed that the rebels requested that the U.S. promise not to extradite Gen. Noriega, and one official in Panama stressed that this was part of a request that the U.S. take custody of the general. 

In any event, pro-Noriega forces moved into place to rescue the general using routes that avoided the intersections blocked by U.S. troops, and the coup soon collapsed and Maj. Giroldi was killed. 

In the aftermath of the failed coup, the U.S. continues to insist it hasn't ruled out using force to oust Gen. Noriega.
But Mr. Baker said, "We must have better conditions and a better atmosphere" before the president will commit U.S. lives. 

