.START 

Bullish dollar sentiment appears to be strong enough to survive any gradual reduction in U.S. interest rates. 

If the Federal Reserve does ease the cost of credit -- even after last week's sharp rate increases in Western Europe -- currency analysts say inflation-adjusted U.S. rates still will be high enough to fuel purchases of dollar-denominated investments. 

And while some traders admit being baffled by the dollar's resilience, they say the currency continues to draw strength from the nation's economic and political stability. 

"The dollar doesn't want to go down," says Rick Porter, manager of corporate trading at Westpac Banking Corp. 

Mr. Porter and others believe the dollar will climb above 1.90 marks this week, a crucial resistance level thought to be the ceiling on a range that the Group of Seven major industrial nations has pledged to keep the dollar within.
That level hasn't been topped decisively since the G-7 agreed in late September that the dollar had been too strong during the summer. 

The G-7 nations -- the U.S., Japan, West Germany, Britain, France, Canada and Italy -- and other countries have been aggressive dollar-sellers in recent weeks. 

Late Friday in New York the dollar was quoted at 1.8867 West German marks and 142.35 yen, compared with 1.8847 marks and 142.40 yen late Thursday.
The dollar was also substantially above 1.8620 marks and 138.65 yen, intraday lows in the last two weeks. 

In Tokyo Monday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.60 yen, down from Friday's Tokyo close of 142.45 yen. 

Rate cuts by the Fed long have been viewed by analysts as the most forceful weapon the G-7 has for holding the dollar down.
On Friday, though, the dollar gained against most currencies despite rampant speculation a Fed easing was at hand as a result of weaker-than-expected September employment data. 

The September jobless rate rose to 5.3% from 5.2%, while non-farm payrolls rose 209,000.
Participants, who had expected a steady jobless rate and a non-farm payrolls rise of about 280,000, were also surprised by a 103,000 decline in manufacturing jobs. 

Despite the weak data and expectations for more soft numbers in coming weeks, traders say the dollar is underpinned by the belief that a Fed rate cut wouldn't be big enough to do much damage. 

"Our guess is the Fed is about to ease {the federal funds rate} about 25 basis points," says Russell Sheldon, senior economist at Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh.
A basis point is 1/100 of a percentage point. 

The federal funds rate, the charge on loans traded among commercial banks overnight, has recently traded in a perceived equilibrium range of 9% to 9 1/8%. 

Some analysts say the rate would have to be cut at least 50 basis points or the 7% discount rate would have to be lowered to trigger a dollar decline.
But many economists doubt a drastic easing will occur soon. 

The Fed "probably won't say that a recession is under way" just because the September employment report is weak, Mr. Sheldon says. 

While the jobs data may confirm expectations that retail sales and industrial production were also weak in September, the inflation-wary Fed will probably let the fed funds rate drift down to 8 1/2% by year end rather than loosening credit sharply, says Mr. Sheldon. 

Adds Mr. Porter of Westpac: "A gradual easing of the federal funds rate should not bring the dollar down.
There's still a fundamentally strong outlook to the U.S." He sees the dollar fluctuating this week in ranges of 1.87 to 1.92 marks and 140.50 to 144.00 yen. 

Primary influences that have worked in the dollar's favor all year are moderate growth in the U.S. economy and the nation's relative political stability amid turmoil in the Far East and Eastern Europe, currency analysts say. 

The dollar's persistent strength has many central bankers and currency traders wondering what it would take to cause a lengthy retreat, especially because the Bank of Japan is not expected to raise rates soon. 

For the central banks, "the only weapon left" is more massive intervention, says Earl Johnson, a foreign exchange adviser at Harris Trust & Savings Bank in Chicago. 

The concerted intervention in the past two weeks is estimated to have cost nearly $10 billion.
Although these sales have pushed the dollar only modestly lower, central banks are expected to continue intervening to keep their credibility and stem the dollar's upward momentum. 

Mr. Johnson says currency traders may try to push the dollar toward 1.95 marks soon, but buying will be cautious because the dollar was slammed lower by profit-taking the last time it flirted with major resistance at 2.0 marks.
The dollar's 1989 intraday peaks of 2.0475 marks and 151.85 yen were hit June 15. 

Analysts say dealings may be thin and volatile Monday because a number of U.S. banks and other traders will be out for the Columbus Day and Yom Kippur holidays. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York Friday, gold for current delivery settled at $363.70 an ounce, up 30 cents.
Estimated volume was a light 2.1 million ounces. 

Monday was a public holiday in Hong Kong and gold wasn't traded. 

