.START 

Canada's largest food processor, Canada Packers Inc., said it will seek takeover offers for the company, which has a stock-market value of about 731 million Canadian dollars (US$620.9 million). 

The company said it decided to seek a buyer after the McLean family of Toronto, which holds about 30% of its shares, said it was willing to sell its stake "if an attractive offer is made for all of the (company's) shares." 

Canada Packers said it hired RBC Dominion Securities Inc. to identify potential bidders, and adopted a shareholder rights plan that effectively gives the company until Dec. 15 to make a decision on any bids received. 

In heavy trading on the Toronto Stock Exchange yesterday, Canada Packers gained C$6.50 to close at C$20.25 (US$17.20). 

William McLean, whose father founded Canada Packers and was president until 1954, explained the decision to sell. "Basically it's that there is no longer a member of the family directly engaged in the management of the company.
We just feel that holding that investment in such a concentrated form is no longer appropriate," he said. 

Roger Porretti, president of Canada Packers, said he knew of no potential bidders or interested parties and declined to place a value on the company. 

One analyst said potential bidders could include closely held McCain Foods Ltd. of New Brunswick and Peter Pocklington, owner of the Edmonton Oilers hockey franchise and several meat-processing concerns.
McCain declined comment and Mr. Pocklington couldn't be reached. 

Ian Osler, an analyst with Prudential Bache Securities Canada Ltd., said he thinks it is unlikely one bidder will emerge for the entire company. 

Canada Packers' operations include meat processing and packaging, fish processing, dairy, animal feeds and food chemicals.
For the year ended March 25, the company had net income of C$25.2 million on sales of C$3.22 billion. 

Mr. Osler said the company is difficult to value, but he said yesterday's run-up in share price "is getting close to a full value." 

