.START 

Corn futures prices jumped the daily permissible limit in early trading on rumors of major Soviet grain purchases, then gave up part of their gains by the close of the session as traders expressed doubts about the extent and timing of the Soviet's grain purchasing plans. 

Soybean futures prices also rose sharply in early trading on Soviet purchase rumors. 

The question of whether the Russians are coming into the U.S. grain markets as buyers this fall has been hanging over the grain and soybean futures markets for months.
Comments from Soviet officials in recent weeks that their country had completed grain purchases for the current year -- calendar or fiscal year, no one knew which -- only added to the uncertainty about their purchase plans. 

The Soviet Union is thought to be the U.S. farmer's biggest customer.
For the year ended September, the Soviets spent about $3 billion to buy 21.7 million metric tons of U.S. crops. 

Comments from Cooper Evans, the White House's agricultural adviser, set the stage for the early rally yesterday when he told reporters on Friday that a major sale of agricultural products to the Soviet Union would be announced shortly.
Futures traders appeared to interpret Mr. Evans' remarks as meaning that the Soviets were about to make huge purchases of U.S. corn, with one market rumor yesterday putting the purchase at a whopping two million metric tons. 

Corn futures retreated somewhat from their 10-cent daily limit in response to reports emanating from commodity trading firms that the Soviet sale was more likely to concern products such as broiler hens, corn gluten, and pork bellies, among others, rather than grains and soybeans, analysts said. 

Despite the apparent setback to traders' hopes for an imminent grain and soybean sale to the Soviets, one Agriculture Department official said he was confident that the Soviets would return as major buyers of U.S. grains and soybeans before the end of the year. 

December delivery corn futures on the Chicago Board of Trade rose eight cents a bushel to close at $2.415.
Soybean futures for November delivery rose 9 cents a bushel to close at $5.77 a bushel. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

COPPER: Futures prices rose on an unexpected drop in visible copper supplies.
The December contract advanced 3.85 cents a pound to $1.2675.
Inventories of copper in warehouses of the London Metal Exchange last week fell 6,425 tons to 104,275 tons.
The general expectation had been for a rise of 5,000 to 7,000 tons.
According to Fred Demler, metals economist for Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., New York, this reverses a trend that began in the middle of July and has seen the LME's stocks rise 43,000 tons.
In general, the background picture has become more supportive for copper prices, he said.
Demand globally accelerated during May, June and July by 10% over the year-ago period, he noted.
At the same time, production gains slowed as the year progressed: Production rose about 6% over a year before from January through May, but output was practically unchanged from last year during the three months ended in July. "When you consider the host of production problems the industry has had during that period and still has, it's logical to believe that refined copper production will drop below a year ago," Mr. Demler said.
On the other hand, he observed, stocks of refined copper in the hands of producers, consumers, exchange warehouses and merchants for the period ended in July are up about 175,000 tons from the record low of last November, to 670,000 tons.
According to another analyst, workers at the bankrupt Cananea mine in Mexico may accept a pay increase of 15%, far below the 60% they'd been asking, and could return to work next week if all workers are assured they will retain their jobs. 

COCOA: Futures prices declined following a drop in Ivory Coast producer prices and the possibility that a major cocoa deal may have broken down, leaving a large supply to be marketed.
The Ivory Coast late last week halved the price the government pays to farmers to 200 francs a kilogram for cocoa beans from the main crop, which is harvested beginning this month through March.
A kilogram is equal to 2.2 pounds.
The Ivory Coast has been running a large deficit, largely because of the price it has been paying farmers for cocoa, an analyst said, and it may have taken the action in response to suggestions by major international lending agencies.
Also, there was talk that the deal, reported in August, in which the Ivory Coast had sold 500,000 tons to two major international trade firms, "had become unglued," the analyst said.
If true, he said, that amount of cocoa is now unsold on a market already burdened by big surpluses. 

SUGAR: Prices declined in quiet trading.
The March contract was off 0.24 cent at 13.92 cents.
The world market for physical sugar was quiet and there was a lack of any other fundamental developments, analysts said.
One analyst observed that prices early in the day tended to be stronger on buying by some traders who might have been testing to see if they could trigger a technical advance.
However, he noted, the gains couldn't be sustained.
Another analyst said traders ignored reports that cane cutters in a major Brazilian sugar-growing area had indicated they would strike for higher pay. "They make these threats quite often around this time of the year," she said. 

