.START 

Long-term Treasury bonds drifted higher in quiet trading yesterday, buoyed in part by a firm dollar. 

But short-term Treasury notes were unchanged as the market continues to digest $17.5 billion of Treasury notes that were auctioned last week. 

The two-year and four-year notes sold by the government to dealers last week "are still hanging around in the marketplace," said Joel Kazis, manager of trading at Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. "That's hurting the short end," he said. 

The bond market was also skittish about reports that Resolution Trust Corp. hopes to issue as much as $100 billion of short-term debt over the next several years but starting some time in the current quarter.
Resolution Trust is the federal agency created by Congress to resolve the savings and loan crisis. 

One report, issued by R.W. Wrightson & Associates Inc., an economic consulting firm based in New York, said Resolution Trust wants the cash for use as working capital.
According to the consulting firm, the notes would be in addition to the $30 billion in so-called bailout bonds to be issued over the next year or two by Resolution Funding Corp., a division of Resolution Trust that is responsible for financing the massive thrift rescue. 

Louis Crandall, chief economist at Wrightson, contended that proceeds from the working-capital notes issuance would be used to finance the inventory of assets that Resolution Trust is seeking to liquidate.
Currently, Resolution Trust "is financing those assets by issuing {certificates of deposit} through the hundreds of thrifts it holds in conservatorship," he wrote in the report. "A working-capital note program would allow the RTC to close sick thrifts by providing an alternative to the CD financing on which the government currently relies." 

On Wall Street, several bond traders said they were talking with officials at Resolution Trust about the program, although some question whether such a plan would sit well with Congress. 

The fact that Resolution Trust would raise working capital isn't new, but it wasn't clear exactly how the money would be raised. 

Steve Katsanos, director of communications at Resolution Trust in Washington, said the feasibility of Resolution Trust raising a large sum of cash through the public debt market "is getting considerable debate internally." Mr. Katsanos couldn't confirm the size of any potential debt offering, but he said Resolution Trust "will be coming to a point in the not-too-distant future where we will have to obtain capital.
We are trying to look ahead and see what our options are." 

The benchmark 30-year bond rose 1/4 point, or about $2.50 for each $1,000 face amount, while its yield slid to 8.21% from 8.23% Friday.
Corporate bonds were unchanged, and municipal issues were as much as 3/8 point higher. 

But analysts said activity was extremely light yesterday, ahead of today's meeting of the Federal Open Market Policy Committee and Friday's employment report. 

Economists widely expect the committee, the Fed's policy-making arm, to leave credit policy unchanged at the meeting.
But the employment report has been the subject of much concern. 

Some analysts, for example, believe that nonfarm payrolls in the September employment report will be up 350,000, or 240,000 when adjusting for the impact of workers returning to their jobs after strike activity.
That large a jump could rekindle fears that the economy is starting to take off again. 

In the asset-backed securities market, two recent industry trends were highlighted in new offerings. 

Sears, Roebuck & Co. offered retail investors $250 million of securities backed by credit-card loans.
The securities, which usually are sold to institutional buyers, will yield about 8.8%. 

The move by Sears to target retail buyers in the $40 billion asset-backed sector follows a similar effort by Citicorp, which sold credit-card securities earlier this year.
Sears's offering yesterday was the second by the company for retail buyers. 

Meanwhile, Nomura Securities International Inc. underwrote a $201 million offering of Federal National Mortgage Association real estate mortgage investment conduit securities that will be sold primarily to Japanese investors. 

For years, many Japanese buyers have shied away from the mortgage market because of its complexities and sometime erratic performance.
But the Nomura underwriting is another sign that Japanese institutions are getting more comfortable with mortgage issues. 

Treasury Securities 

Treasury securities ended unchanged to modestly higher in quiet trading, gaining support from the dollar.
The dollar improved in foreign currency markets despite continued central-bank intervention. 

Bond prices were also helped by news that the Purchasing Managers' Index edged higher to 46% in September from 45.2% in August.
Although the index rose for the first time in five months, the gain was less than had been expected and provided additional evidence that the manufacturing sector of the economy continues to deteriorate. 

The benchmark 30-year bond was quoted late at a price of 98 30/32 compared with 98 22/32 Friday.
The latest 10-year notes were quoted late at a price of 98 3/32 to yield 8.27% compared with a price of 97 31/32 to yield 8.28%.
The latest two-year notes were unchanged at a price of 99 26/32 to yield 8.45%. 

Interest rates moved higher yesterday at the government's weekly Treasury bill auction.
The average discount rate on new three-month Treasury bills was 7.83%, and it was 7.92% for six-month bills.
Those rates were higher than those from last week's auction, which were 7.72% and 7.79%, respectively. 

Here are details of yesterday's auction: 

Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value.
Thus, higher bidding narrows the investor's return while lower bidding widens it.
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year, while the coupon equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year. 

Both issues are dated Oct. 5.
The 13-week bills mature Jan. 4, 1990, and the 26-week bills mature April 5, 1990. 

Corporate Issues 

Corporate bonds ended unchanged in quiet trading. 

Among new issues, Student Loan Marketing Association tapped the debt market for the second consecutive session, offering investors a $100 million issue of one-year notes. 

In other new issue activity, Chesapeake & Potomac Co. of Virginia, a subsidiary of Bell Atlantic Corp., offered $100 million of debentures priced at par to yield 8.375%, according to underwriter Merrill Lynch. 

A $200 million senior debenture offering by Coastal Corp. rounded out the activity in the new-issue market yesterday.
The 15-year debentures were priced at 99.846 to yield 10.27%. 

In another development, William Malec, Tennessee Valley Authority chief financial officer, said the agency could sell more than $2 billion of debt if it goes ahead with plans to tap the federal agency market. 

Foreign Bonds 

European investors are bracing for what is widely expected to be an imminent increase in West German interest rates. 

Bond dealers were nearly unanimous in expecting that some kind of increase in West Germany's Lombard and discount rates will be announced Thursday after the Bundesbank's biweekly policy meeting. 

Traders in London and Frankfurt said speculation doesn't focus any longer on when and if there will be a rate rise, but rather, on the size of the increase. "Opinion is about split between 1/2 point and a full point" increase in West Germany's Lombard and discount rates, said one trader. 

West Germany's 6 3/4% issue due June 1999 ended at 97.99, down 0.16 point to yield 7.01%, while the 6 3/4% notes due 1994 fell 0.147 point to 97.9 to yield 7.29%. 

In other markets: 

-- The Japanese government bond market ended lower with yen. 

-- British government bonds ended slightly firmer in quiet trading. 

Municipals 

Municipal bonds were mostly 1/8 to 3/8 point firmer in late dealings, with recent new issue demand and steady Treasurys lending a firm bias. 

The pricing pace, relatively quiet yesterday, is expected to step up today. 

Pennsylvania dominates the competitive calendar in the upcoming session, accepting bids for about $550 million tax-anticipation notes. 

New York state also taps the public market today, taking bids for $90.5 million of certificates of participation, due 1990 to 1996. 

Mortgage-Backed Securities 

In the mortgage pass-through market, active issues ended 3/32 higher.
Government National Mortgage Association 9% securities for October delivery finished at 96 3/4, up 3/32. 

