.START 

A House subcommittee, removing a major stumbling block to passage of a clean air bill, voted to tighten auto tailpipe-emission standards more than President Bush proposed. 

The accord, a blow to the auto industry, essentially would apply nationwide the tougher standards that California already has decided to adopt.
It represented a compromise between two powerful adversaries on clean air legislation: Rep. John Dingell (D., Mich.), chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, and Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.), chairman of that panel's subcommittee on health and the environment.
Although other provisions of the clean-air bill still are likely to spark significant battles, the agreement on the contentious issue of tailpipe emissions enhances the chances for early passage of a clean-air measure. 

President Bush's clean-air proposal would tighten tailpipe-emission standards, though not as much as the lawmakers' plan, which was unanimously approved by the subcommittee.
Administration officials contend that the additional reduction in pollution wouldn't be worth the extra cost, which the Environmental Protection Agency says would total at least $100 a vehicle, and possibly as much as $600 a vehicle.
Still, officials privately welcomed yesterday's agreement as improving the chances for a clean air bill. 

The compromise marked the third major blow to the auto makers since the subcommittee took up the clean air bill last month.
Previously, the panel rejected an administration proposal to let auto makers meet a prescribed average emissions standard for all the vehicles they produce, rather than having to meet emissions limits for each vehicle.
The panel also voted to require on-board cannisters to catch vapors released during refueling. 

Detroit's auto makers were quick to condemn the House panel's action. "It will bring virtually no significant benefits over what the (president's proposal) provides," said General Motors Corp., "but will mean huge costs to the consumer and high risks for the industry." Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. issued similar statements. 

Whatever tailpipe-emissions standard finally emerges from Congress likely will be at least as strong as the Dingell-Waxman accord.
Subcommittee members agreed to fight efforts to change their compromise plan as the bill moves through the legislative process.
Moreover, a pending Senate proposal contains even stricter requirements. 

The amendment calls for phasing in tough new standards for car and light-truck emissions of nitrogen oxide, hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and particulate matter, between car model years 1994 and 1996.
California already has decided to phase in the same standards beginning in 1993.
The plan also would phase in a requirement that auto pollution controls for hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide be designed to last 10 years or 100,000 miles.
The EPA estimates that these changes would add slightly less than $100 to the cost of a car. 

The administration proposed less stringent standards for nitrogen oxide and offered none for particulates.
Moreover, its clean-air bill would require that emission-control equipment be designed to last only 50,000 miles. 

The subcommittee compromise also would require the Environmental Protection Agency to study whether even tighter standards are needed, feasible and cost-effective.
The panel's plan would authorize the agency, depending on its findings, to impose more stringent standards, which are spelled out in the amendment, beginning with car model years 2003 to 2006. 

These tougher standards would add a further $500 to the cost of a car, the EPA estimates.
Auto makers have argued that the second-stage standards being contemplated aren't technologically feasible. 

The amendment also would require the EPA to begin within 18 months a study of motor-vehicle emissions of toxic pollutants such as benzene and formaldehyde.
The EPA would have 4 1/2 years to issue regulations requiring the greatest feasible reduction of such hazardous air pollutants. 

Environmentalists hailed the compromise as a help in spurring enactment of a bill, but they objected to the slower phase-in of the tougher standards and the discretion it would give the EPA over whether to impose even tighter standards later. 

Mr. Waxman agreed to the compromise after he lost in an earlier attempt to impose even stricter tailpipe standards.
Mr. Dingell said yesterday that he had come to realize that many of his colleagues thought that the president's proposal, which he sponsored, didn't go far enough. 

