.START 

Zenith Electronics Corp., returning to its roots in consumer electronics, agreed to sell its fast-growing computer unit to Cie. des Machines Bull of France for as much as $635 million. 

The definitive agreement, which will be submitted to Zenith shareholders for a December vote, includes both the Zenith Data Systems personal computer unit, and Heath, a maker of electronic kits.
The companies said the final price is expected to be lower as Zenith tries to sell off its bloated computer inventories before the expected closing later this year. 

Zenith stock soared $3.25 to $17.75 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday. 

The move is an admission by Zenith, which has been plagued by losses for years, that it doesn't have the money to compete effectively in both personal computers and televisions. "We are a highly leveraged company in two very tough businesses . . ." Zenith's chairman and president, Jerry K. Pearlman, said at a New York news conference. "We really felt we couldn't do either one of them appropriate justice." 

While it would quickly improve Zenith's balance sheet by erasing much of its debt, the transaction would leave the Glenview, Ill., company with a core television business that hasn't made much money for years. 

The Zenith purchase would more than double the size of Bull's unprofitable personal computer business, making the state-owned computer company a bigger force in the world market.
The addition of Zenith's computer sales, totaling $1.4 billion last year, would also make Bull the largest European-based computer company, surpassing West Germany's Siemens AG and Italy's Ing.
C. Olivetti & Co. 

Zenith Data Systems is the biggest seller of battery operated laptops in the U.S., ahead of such giants as Toshiba Corp. and NEC Corp. of Japan. "They have tremendous technology strength in developing small PC systems, and we have strength in networking these things together," said Roland D. Pampel, chief executive of Bull HN Information Systems, which is majority-owned by Bull. 

Although the sale of the computer unit comes as a surprise to some analysts, they believe Zenith had to do something to reverse its sliding fortunes.
In recent weeks Zenith has twice had to cut its earnings estimates, has seen its debt downgraded and its stock trade at 52-week lows. 

Pressured by disgruntled shareholders, Zenith has been exploring options for its consumer electronics business for more than a year, but has had trouble getting the price it wanted for a unit that had 1988 sales of $1.13 billion. 

"Their financial resources were spread far too thin," said Mark Hassenberg, an analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. Mr. Hassenberg said the move was "positive" for shareholders. 

The short-term benefits for Zenith are clear.
In addition to an after-tax gain of $22 million, the transaction would give Zenith a chunk of money with which to clean up its deteriorating balance sheet.
Mr. Hassenberg estimates Zenith had more than $200 million in short-term debt and $315 million in long-term debt at the end of September. 

The company said it will use some of the proceeds to repay short-term obligations and retire a portion of its long-term debt.
It said the rest would be available for investments in "new consumer electronics and component technologies, particularly high-definition television and advanced high-resolution color displays." 

But success in consumer electronics is by no means assured.
For years, the company has faced the problems of competition from lower-cost Far Eastern firms and demands for cut-rate deals from discount electronics chains. 

Although the business has improved recently with modest increases in television prices, it remains intensely competitive, and Zenith is a small fry compared with well-heeled giants such as Japan's Sony Corp. or Thomson Consumer Electronics, which has the RCA and General Electric television brands. 

Mr. Pampel of Bull said in an interview that John Frank, Zenith Data's president, will remain head of that unit under Bull and that Bull doesn't plan major changes in Zenith Data's management. 

The planned purchase furthers Bull's strategy of trying to grow its way out of its extensive computer-marketing problems.
In recent years Bull, the flagship of French government hopes for a strong native computer industry, has been racing to expand world-wide to boost production volumes, prevent losses, and sharpen its technology. 

Kevin Goldman contributed to this article. 

