.START 

The advertising industry is under attack.
Congress and consumers are calling for crackdowns on tobacco ads.
They're demanding more restrictions on liquor and children's ads. 

As might be expected, advertisers at a conference here are wringing their hands, moaning and groaning about their unhappy lot.
Americans see advertisers "as the heirs of snake-oil salesmen," said Joseph J. Doherty, an Owens-Corning Fiberglas vice president. "If only we were half so Machiavellian and manipulative as we are often believed to be.
It would make our work much more effective." 

But Mr. Doherty, outgoing chairman of the Association of National Advertisers, told participants at this year's annual meeting to lay off the complaints for a while.
Instead of lashing out at would-be regulators, he suggested, advertisers should come up with alternate proposals. "We react, we protest, as we fight back against other people's initiatives to ban advertising, or muzzle it, or tax it," he said. "Again and again, we seem to confuse talking about an issue with doing something about it." 

Mr. Doherty has a few specific proposals of his own.
Consider consumer groups' charges that beer advertising encourages people under 21 to drink. "I would suggest that the heart of the matter isn't drinking," he said, "it's the potent combination of young people, beer and automobiles." So the ad industry, he proposes, should band together to lobby for stiffer penalties for drunk driving. 

Mr. Doherty also chastised advertisers for fighting proposed cigarette ad restrictions by draping themselves in the flag and lecturing about their First Amendment freedoms of speech.
Instead, he suggested, advertisers should enlist potential allies, like smaller magazines that depend on tobacco advertising to survive. 

In response to complaints about abusive, insubstantial political advertising, he advocated doing as the British do: requiring all political commercials to run at least three minutes, rather than the usual 30 seconds of sunsets, farms and gurgling babies.
The longer political ads should ensure "reasoned arguments and detailed positions on issues -- rather than pithy epigrams, winsome slogans and pseudo-Kennedyism," he said. 

It isn't clear whether Mr. Doherty's proposals would be effective, and the industry isn't likely to adopt any of them, at least not right now.
His suggestions signaled that advertisers, after fighting regulators every step of the way, might consider making some compromises.
Indeed, in an era when regulators and critics are gaining, some advertisers are realizing that making small concessions may be the only way to marshal their time and money for more important fights. 

"If we don't agree {with regulation efforts}, we tend to try to stop it.
Maybe there's a way to reconcile the problem on both sides of the fence," said Philip Guarascio, executive director of advertising and strategic merchandising for General Motors Corp. 

While advertisers agree they need to seize the initiative rather than just react to regulatory crackdowns, they have yet to take their own advice. "The ad community has never communicated the value it brings to the party," said Joanne Black, senior vice president of communications for MasterCard International. "Americans think of {advertising} as a tainted business.
I think we're in more danger than anybody realizes." 

Coors's Halloween Pitch 

Get ready for "The Phantom of the Fridge." 

Tonight, Adolph Coors Co. breaks a whodunnit-style ad campaign for its Coors Light brand aimed at snagging some Halloween party dollars.
The campaign, created by Foote, Cone & Belding, Chicago, features three separate television spots that advance the plot of a mystery ("Who stole the Coors Light?") by offering clues in each ad. 

Viewers follow the antics of a dim-witted detective, played by actor Leslie Nielsen, star of the movie "The Naked Gun," and his dippy secretary, Suzy, as they attempt to unmask the culprit.
The campaign spotlights a sweepstakes program in which winners will split $100,000 in prizes. 

"We invented Halloween and we intend to keep it," says Bob Simon, senior vice president at Foote Cone.
Coors, in conjunction with its ad agency, credits itself with positioning Halloween as a beer-guzzling holiday.
For the past two years, Coors Light has run a Halloween campaign featuring the wacky actress Elvira. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

EARNINGS: WCRS Group PLC reported that net income for the 14 months ended June 30 was #13.7 million ($22.2 million), or 30 pence a share.
In the 12 months ended April 30, 1988, profit was #11 million, or 23 pence a share.
Revenue for the latest period was #569 million, compared with #408 million in the earlier period.
WCRS announced a year ago it planned to change its fiscal year to June 30 to coincide with that of the Carat Holding S.A. network, of which WCRS is a 50% stockholder and is negotiating to become majority owner. 

DOG FOOD PROMISE: Ralston-Purina Co. 's ad for HiPro dog food, which ran yesterday in the New York Times, promises to clean up New York City because "HiPro's high digestibility means smaller, firmer stools." The ad features a picture of a businessman looking in disgust at the bottom of his left shoe. "We're proud that we can make even the smallest contribution to people looking at the sights instead of the sidewalks," the ad says. 

