.START 

The economy continued to exhibit signs of decline in September, for the fifth consecutive month, according to a survey of the nation's purchasing managers. 

The National Association of Purchasing Management said its overall monthly index edged higher in September, to 46% from 45.2% in August.
Nonetheless, the association said the index continued to show a general decline in manufacturing; a reading below 50% indicates a decline in the economy, while one above 50% indicates an expansion.
Despite the uptick, the index -- excluding August -- is at its lowest level since December 1982. 

The survey, which measures such areas as production, new orders, inventories and prices, indicates that the economy as a whole is "still declining, but not at the same pace," said Robert J. Bretz, chairman of the group's survey committee. 

Mr. Bretz said it is "too early to tell whether the decline is leveling off." But he said he thinks the economy "will continue to follow the trend downward" until the Federal Reserve Board eases up on the money supply or reduces interest rates. 

The report is based on data provided by more than 250 purchasing executives.
Each of the survey's indicators gauges the difference between the number of companies reporting improvement in a particular area and the number reporting a worsening. 

One bright spot in the survey was the new export order index, which increased sharply in September to 60.5% from 56% in August.
The index was the highest it has been since April's 62% reading.
New export orders were "the one single event that seemed to have eased the decline in September," Mr. Bretz said.
About 70% of the companies surveyed are in the export business. 

But Mr. Bretz cautioned that many of the export orders were for capital expenditures, "one of the last areas to feel the brunt of decline." Mr. Bretz also noted that a stronger U.S. dollar would affect new export orders, possibly reducing them and making U.S. goods less competitive abroad. 

Prices continued to decline for the fourth consecutive month, and the price index remained unchanged at 43.1%, the lowest level since April 1986.
Higher prices were reported for nine commodities, while prices for 25 items declined. 

Another indication of continued decline in the economy was the purchasing executives' vendor deliveries index, the only indicator to decline at a greater rate than in August.
The index fell to 43.8% in September, the fifth consecutive month of decline, from 44.9% in August.
Mr. Bretz said this was significant because it is "a very early leading indicator," and suggests there's "more decline to come." Only 4% reported slower deliveries in September, compared to 5% in August. 

The survey found that production continued to decline in September, but at a slower pace.
The production index rose to 48.5% from 46.5%, still below the benchmark 50% level. 

New orders declined for the fourth month in a row, but not as steeply as in the previous two months.
The September new orders index rose slightly, to 45.4% from 45.1% in August.
The report noted that the new orders index is the lowest since November 1982, what the report called the "trough of the previous recession" and the start of the current economic recovery. 

Inventories continued to decline, but at a slower pace than the previous month.
The inventories' index rose to 45.1% from 43.3%.
The report said purchasers are "intent" on keeping inventories in line with production demands.
Employment also continued to decline, again at a slower pace in September than August.
The employment index rose to 45.9% from 44.7%. 

Lead times for capital expenditures lengthened slightly in September, with the number of members reporting lead times of six months or more at 54%, up from 52%.
Lead times for production materials were nearly unchanged in September, with those reporting lead times of 30 days or less at 54%, down from 55%. 

The report noted that the purchasing managers' index averaged 49.5% for the first three quarters of the year.
It said that based on experience, if that average continues in the fourth quarter it would be consistent with real growth in the gross national product of about 1.7% for the full year. 

