.START 

Brace yourself.
Third-quarter earnings are about to start flowing and they won't be pretty. 

International Business Machines Corp. 's announcement last week that it will fall far short of analysts' expectations for third-quarter profit was only the tip of the disappointment iceberg.
Yesterday, Kellogg Co. and Rochester Telephone Corp. proclaimed similarly gloomy news about their forthcoming earnings reports, and their stocks, like IBM's last week, responded by tanking. 

Meanwhile, analysts in dozens of industries are scurrying to lower their third-quarter and fourth-quarter earnings estimates for companies that haven't been so forthcoming, in an effort to prepare clients for bad news. 

"What people are finally recognizing is that the thrill is gone out of corporate earnings," says Abby Joseph Cohen, a portfolio strategist at Drexel Burnham Lambert. "Sure, 1989 earnings will be a record, but the problem is that the rate of gain is decelerating." A year ago, overall corporate earnings were growing at about 25% in the fourth quarter; this year the gain is more likely to be about 10%, she says. 

A myriad of problems underlie the dimmer outlook: The economy is slowing, labor costs are rising, heavily leveraged corporations are paying huge amounts of interest and the dollar's recent strength is crimping overseas sales and profits.
Taken together, those factors are hurting nearly every industry to some degree. 

And analysts are catching on.
A recent study compiled by Zacks Investment Service shows that of 100 industrial groups the company tracks, analysts in only five -- shoes, securities brokerages, medical care facilities, tobacco and toys -- are raising earnings expectations.
Analysts who follow the remaining 95 are shifting their expectations lower. 

Benjamin Zacks, a Zacks Investment principal, says that in the last 30 days some 70% of all earnings-forecast revisions were downward, a peak for the year.
Currently, he said, analysts are expecting the 500 stocks in Standard & Poor's index to post a 4.8% drop in profits from their 1988 third-quarter results, caused largely by some big banks adding several billion dollars to reserves against shaky Third World loans.
And for the fourth quarter, they're expecting an 8.9% increase this year. 

But given the rate of changes he's seen in recent weeks, Mr. Zacks doubts earnings will be that good. "I think we're going to see more negative earnings surprises in coming weeks," he said. "The question is, how severe will they be?" 

Worse yet, he says, survey data show that projections for growth in 1990 are even more dismal.
The average estimate for earnings growth in 1990 over 1989 among 44 portfolio strategists is only 2.5%.
Among industry analysts, the projection is for 8% year-over-year growth in 1990. "Both figures are the lowest I've seen in seven years," he says. 

Charles Clough, chief portfolio strategist at Merrill Lynch & Co., suggests that investors watching the overall economy may not be seeing the extent of problems in many industries. "When you look at individual industries, things look weaker than the overall economy looks," he says. 

The evidence of slowdown is everywhere, he says.
New orders for everything from construction to computers to heavy trucks are weaker.
Rail and truck tonnage has stopped growing.
Retailers' inventories are growing.
And prices for basic commodities such as paper and chemicals are falling. "These things have been building all year, and now it amounts to just general crumminess." 

So why aren't stock prices reflecting that crumminess?
Many analysts were amazed that the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 9.12 points on the day IBM disclosed its earnings-forecast gap.
And while the average is down 38 points, or 1.39%, from its Sept. 1 record of 2752.09, the retreat was orderly and on small volume, clear signals that investors weren't panicking. 

One reason investors remain calm, says Mr. Zacks, is that the ratio of expected per-share earnings for the S&P 500 to their share prices is at a relatively conservative 12.4 for all of 1989.
Further, the U.S. stock market continues to look relatively more attractive than foreign stock markets.
But Mr. Zacks, like many portfolio strategists, is counseling caution. 

"Based on our analysis, investors should be focusing on interest-sensitive areas such as regional banks, security brokers and financial services and utilities," he says.
He adds that smaller growth stocks could also do well.
Analysts are estimating that earnings for small capitalization stocks will grow about two to three percentage points more than earnings of the big, well-known stocks in the S&P 500. 

Drexel's Ms. Cohen has similar recommendations. "It's time to go back to the steady-Eddies, the consumer nondurables and financial-services growth names," she says. "You want to own companies that can do reasonably well regardless of the economic environment." 

Mr. Clough, too, is concerned about the short-term outlook.
But he adds a qualification: As the economy slows, interest rates will fall, perhaps sharply.
That could reignite the economy and the stock market. "We're a little concerned about the near-term, but the farther you look out, the more optimistic you can be." 

Industry groups with largest estimated profit increases and decreases for the third quarter, in millions of dollars 

