.START 

When Hurricane Hugo swept across the beautiful South Carolina coast it left 65% of the buildings on beachfront property either destroyed or seriously damaged.
Before rebuilding on the beaches begins in earnest, perhaps it's time to ask if the federal government should continue to pass out subsidies for people to live along the hurricane-prone Gulf and Atlantic Coasts. 

For decades, the federal government has implicitly encouraged people to settle in such hazardous areas as the Barrier Islands -- those beautiful but fragile ribbons of sand that contain such cities as Hilton Head, S.C., and Galveston, Texas.
In effect, the government has created "disaster-subsidy" zones which function as a kind of reverse enterprise zone: They lead to the destruction of resources instead of their creation. 

Federal subsidies to these vulnerable coastal areas were reined in somewhat in 1982 by a law limiting some of them to already-developed areas.
But Washington still pays 75% of the cost of repairing causeways, sewer lines and roads after a natural disaster.
On Dauphin Island, Alabama, the bridge to the mainland was destroyed by Hurricane Camille in 1969.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers replaced it at a cost of $25,000 per resident.
Similarly, Hurricane Hugo has knocked out bridges connecting various barrier islands to the mainland.
Such subsidies often redistribute income upward to those who can afford beach property and seaside views. 

Since 1970, the federal government has also offered subsidized flood insurance for many residents in flood-prone areas.
It now has $176 billion worth of outstanding insurance policies, including $5 billion in South Carolina alone. 

Before federal flood insurance, coastal buildings were largely of two types: solid, steel-rod enforced structures that could withstand all but the worst hurricanes and flimsy beach houses built by people who expected they might be blown away.
The existence of flood insurance has encouraged the building of homes that fall between those extremes and thus often suffer the costliest damage. 

It is, of course, difficult to discuss "disaster-subsidy" zones when thousands of people are struggling to rebuild their lives and homes.
But if such issues are ignored in the aftermath of a disaster, no lessons are learned and we are doomed to repeat the same tragedy. 

One way to cut back on disaster-subsidy zones would be to sunset the federal dollars flowing into them.
In developed coastal zones a gradual reduction of public support would reinforce the need to develop the fledgling private-insurance market and would make building decisions more rational. 

Federal officials are also proposing to offer communities lower premiums if they take certain precautions against damage.
Currently, almost half of federal flood-insurance claims are for repeat losses suffered by only 3% of policyholders. 

If such reforms are not introduced, the alternative is not the status quo but a gradual ban on any coastal development.
Last year, South Carolina's Legislature passed a law severely restricting new construction or repairs to damaged buildings on its coast.
Owners are understandably fighting the law as an unconstitutional taking of their property's value.
The solution is not to ban building along the coast, but rather to force people to bear the full costs -- both financial and environmental -- of whatever activities they choose to undertake. 

