.START 

Bank of Boston Corp. disclosed that its internal controls and real estate operations are under review by federal regulators and said its head of real estate operations resigned. 

In what it said was a separate decision, the bank also said it will add $370 million to its loan loss reserve.
The increased reserve will lead to a net loss for the third quarter of about $125 million.
It had net income of $79.2 million, or $1.14 a share, in the year-earlier quarter.
The bank said the expansion of the loss reserve reflects the continued deterioration of New England's real estate market, economic weakness and one large, highly leveraged, nonperforming loan. 

The regional bank, New England's largest, with $37 billion in assets, declined to specify the problems highlighted by regulators.
It said Edwin B. Morris III, executive vice president and head of the real estate group, had offered to resign and his offer was accepted. 

Ira Stepanian, chairman and chief executive officer, said that he hadn't requested Mr. Morris's resignation. "Ed has felt a great deal of pressure.
Given the real estate situation and the problems we've experienced, he probably felt it (resigning) was the honorable thing to do." Mr. Morris couldn't be reached for comment. 

The bank said that it expects to enter agreements with the office of the comptroller of the currency and the Federal Reserve under which its directors will be responsible for reviewing a number of management functions specified by the federal regulators.
In addition to real estate and internal controls, they will study risk review, strategic planning and reserves, the bank said. 

Bank of Boston, a Brahmin institution founded in 1784, has long prided itself for conservatism and rectitude, but has periodically gotten into hot water with regulators.
In 1985, it pleaded guilty to charges of violating reporting requirements of the bank secrecy law that was designed to prevent money-laundering.
Last year, it suspended three officials because of sloppy practices in its corporate trust department and the comptroller of the currency questioned it about allowing the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to overdraw an account by $200 million. 

A spokesman for the bank said the recent regulatory review was a routine matter. "The office of the comptroller has intensified its examination of all major banks," he said.
He said 63 formal agreements like the one Bank of Boston expects to sign with the comptroller were reached last year by the office of the comptroller.
No financial penalties are involved in such agreements, he said.
The formal agreement specifies steps the bank is to take to improve operations. 

Mr. Stepanian said that the agreement the bank is currently negotiating won't restrict bank operations severely. "It's not an agreement that is going to be difficult to live with.
It's one I think we'll be able to achieve without great difficulty." 

The bank made its announcement after the market closed.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Bank of Boston shares closed down 50 cents, at $26.625. 

The bank said that the addition to loan-loss reserves will bring its total reserves to $945 million, or about 3.5% of total loans and leases.
That is up from reserves of $645 million, or 2.4% of total loans and leases, at the end of the second quarter. 

A bank spokeswoman said the new reserve percentage is average for multinational banks and above the average for regionals.
Bank of Boston was among the first international lenders to confront the problem of loans to less developed countries, taking a $500 million reserve covering 100% of its debt that wasn't trade related in 1987. 

The bank said its ratio of reserves to nonperforming loans is about 60%, after taking the additional reserve, up from 53% at the end of the previous quarter. 

Mr. Stepanian said, "We believe a provision of this magnitude is consistent with our traditionally conservative approach to the establishment of reserves." 

The bank's ratio of reserves to nonperforming loans remains lower than the average for multinational banks and well below that for regional banks.
However, a spokeswoman said that Bank of Boston often classifies loans as nonperforming because of deteriorating conditions, even if they aren't 90 days past due, the point at which they are required to be classified as nonperforming. 

James McDermott, a bank analyst with Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, said that Bank of Boston "has a reputation for conservatism related to recognizing asset problems.
Given that, it's not surprising to see them act this way." He added that with big multinational banks recently announcing large reserves against international loans, the bank may expect "the market will tolerate an asset clean-up by banks generally." Mr. Stepanian said that "this reserve position is certainly adequate, and I hope, more than adequate." He said that the bank expects to take a $45 million reserve in the fourth quarter, up from the $36 million it takes in average quarters. 

