.START 

Cray Research Inc., citing continuing slow demand for its expensive supercomputers, announced the first layoff in its 17-year history. 

The company said it would reduce the work force at its main Wisconsin plants by about 400 people, which is about 7% of overall employment but 18% of its manufacturing personnel. 

"This is going to be a tough year and we are taking the necessary steps to control costs," said Cray President Marcello Gumucio. "We continue to see that government contracts are taking longer" than anticipated, requiring orders to be bumped from one quarter to the next, he said in an interview.
The government traditionally accounts for about half of Cray's business. 

For example, while Cray products are likely to be major components of any Star Wars system, Mr. Gumucio said the proposed multibillion-dollar project "will take a lot longer than people anticipate." 

Mr. Gumucio also said that the company will decide by year-end whether to build a small, cheap supercomputer model to compete with machines made by Convex Computer Corp., among others. 

Cray said it expects to incur about $3 million in charges because of the layoffs.
The company said it would ask for volunteers before imposing involuntary cuts on the production force.
Employees affected by the cutbacks will remain on the payroll through the end of the year, collect profit-sharing payments, and be eligible for up to $4,000 in educational support, Cray said. 

The layoffs come as Cray phases out production of its labor-intensive X-MP line-hand-wired machines -- in favor of a model that, because of factory automation, higher-density chips and other advances, can be made in one-third the time.
Moreover, where a central processing unit in the old model had 30,000 parts, those in the new Y-MP line have 310. 

Until now, demand has "more than made up for efficiencies realized in the manufacturing process," the company said.
But supercomputers are big-ticket items -- they can cost as much as $25 million each -- so they are particularly vulnerable to economic downturns.
Cray increasingly has exposed itself to that risk as it seeks to make inroads into the commercial markets. 

In July, the company sharply reduced its revenue and earnings projections for the year.
Yesterday Mr. Gumucio reaffirmed that outlook, but said demand for cheaper used machines has been heavier than anticipated. 

"The order book just isn't as robust as they hoped it would be," said Gary Smaby of Smaby Group Inc., a Minneapolis industry research concern. 

The unprecedented work-force reduction comes as Cray awaits an Internal Revenue Service ruling on its proposed spinoff of part of its operations into a rival company headed by founder Seymour Cray, a famed supercomputer designer.
Cray said yesterday it will close the laboratory Mr. Cray used in the company's early days. 

