.START 

GORBACHEV CALLED for a 15-month ban on strikes in the Soviet Union. 

Speaking at the end of a two-hour legislative debate on a package of emergency economic measures, the Kremlin leader urged the Supreme Soviet to impose the prohibition, saying labor unrest was wrecking the economy and threatening his restructuring program.
A vote on the ban is expected today.
The emergency proposals, aimed at bolstering the faltering economy and ensuring proper energy supplies for winter, also provide for nearly total military control of rail traffic in the volatile Transcaucasus. 

Gorbachev has expressed increasing impatience in recent months about labor stoppages, which have become a way of expressing ethnic discontent. 

Hundreds of East Germans poured into Bonn's embassies in Prague and Warsaw, hoping to join about 7,000 others who fled to the West.
East Berlin demanded that the new arrivals be expelled.
Amid the dispute, West Germany indicated that the Soviet Union had helped arrange the weekend refugee exodus. 

HUD chief Kemp plans to announce a plan to reshape agency programs that have been hit by scandal and mismanagement.
The package is expected to include the appointment of a chief financial officer, elimination of some FHA programs, and fines for consultants and lobbyists who fail to register with the agency. 

The Supreme Court opened its 1989-90 term, agreeing to hear an appeal by Florida officials over whether a state may permanently prohibit grand-jury witnesses from disclosing the nature of their testimony.
A lower court found that the state's secrecy law violates the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech. 

The Texas Supreme Court ruled that the state's system of financing the education of public-school children is unconstitutional.
The nine-member panel cited "glaring disparities" between rich and poor districts, which receive funding through property taxes and state aid. 

Bush met at the White House with Egyptian President Mubarak, who said a "golden opportunity" exists for a breakthrough in the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The hourlong meeting came amid U.S. efforts to persuade Israel to open direct negotiations with Palestinians in the occupied lands based on Mubarak's 10-point Mideast peace plan. 

Officials in Jerusalem expect as many as 100,000 Soviet Jews to enter Israel in the next three to five years following a tightening of U.S. visa requirements.
Israel's government has asked the U.S. to guarantee $400 million for housing.
But the White House said it would reject any request to resettle immigrants in the occupied lands. 

Lebanese lawmakers debated proposals by Arab mediators to give the Moslem majority more power in the country's Christian-dominated government.
The Arab League officials intervened in talks in Saudi Arabia in an attempt to dissuade the legislators from complicating efforts aimed at settling Lebanon's 14-year-old civil war. 

Runcie and Pope John Paul II pledged to work toward the reunification of the Anglican and the Roman Catholic churches, but noted that the Anglican ordination of women remained an obstacle to healing the 450-year-old schism.
The joint declaration was issued as the archbishop of Canterbury ended a four-day visit to the Vatican. 

Britain's Labor Party abandoned its longstanding commitment to unilateral nuclear disarmament, considered a major policy reversal.
The opposition party's revised defense strategy was approved at an annual conference in Brighton, England. 

The National Cancer Institute reported that a post-surgery therapy using a combination of two well-known drugs, including a veterinary medicine, significantly increases the survival rate of patients with advanced colon cancer.
It is the second-leading cancer killer. 

Quayle said the White House is considering asking Congress to allow the Philippines to use U.S. aid to bolster its internal security.
The vice president recently returned from a two-week tour of Asia, during which two U.S. workers were killed near Manila. 

South African blacks demanded clemency for two condemned African National Congress guerrillas in what was viewed as the largest protest march ever held in one of the country's nominally independent tribal homelands.
About 25,000 demonstrators marched in Transkei.
The ANC members are on death row for a 1986 bombing. 

Rain, floods and a tornado struck the South, disrupting rebuilding efforts in South Carolina following Hurricane Hugo nearly two weeks ago.
At least two people were killed and three missing in the latest storm, authorities said.
Scores of people were evacuated in Georgia and the Carolinas. 

