.START 

The dollar nosed higher, defying several rounds of central bank intervention. 

Foreign exchange traders said activity was fairly thin, with most participants tightly focused on the likelihood of an interest rate increase in Germany later this week. 

Traders generally expect the Bundesbank to lift its key rates half a percentage point at Thursday's central bank council meeting.
But participants are divided on the impact of such a move on the dollar. 

"The market's been expecting this for a week and half," said Paul Stancs, assistant chief dealer at Oesterreichische Laenderbank in New York. "So I wouldn't expect any massive sell-off" in the dollar. 

A half percentage point rise may not be enough to provide durable support for the major central banks' recent assault on the dollar, many traders said.
And if the Bundesbank fails to increase its key discount and Lombard rates, the central banks will find it next to impossible to restrain the dollar through intervention, many traders said. 

Late in the New York trading day, the dollar was quoted at 1.8793 marks, up from 1.8713 marks late Friday in New York.
The U.S. currency was changing hands at 139.68 yen, up from 139.00 yen in New York late Friday.
Sterling was trading at $1.6135, down from $1.6200 late Friday. 

In Tokyo Tuesday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 139.72 yen, up from Monday's Tokyo close of 139.30 yen. 

On Monday, the dollar locked into a slow climb during Asian trading, when the absence of coordinated central bank intervention prompted some participants to cover short-dollar positions.
The Bank of Japan was reported to have intervened at least twice later in the day in Tokyo. 

The dollar continued to draw strength from short-covering in the morning in Europe and rose until at least 10 European and North American central banks, including the Bundesbank and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, jumped in early in New York trading to stem the dollar's climb. 

But the intervention's effect apparently was short-lived, traders said.
Central bank dollar sales seemed small, just enough to buy a place on dealers' trading screens, they said.
The dollar edged higher in the afternoon in New York, prompting another Fed intervention that knocked the currency off its peaks of 1.8822 marks and 139.90 yen. 

Dealers said that the effect of the central banks' joint action last week is wearing off now that participants have become accustomed to the banks' tactics: high-profile, concerted interventions and surprise visits to each other's markets. 

The central banks "have been greeting everybody in the morning," said Douglas Madison, corporate foreign exchange dealer at Bank of America in Los Angeles. "But they're going to have to turn up the heat a little bit.
Otherwise the market will be prepared to have a go at them." 

The Bundesbank's decision Thursday will be an important factor, dealers said.
Without an interest rate increase in West Germany -- a move that probably will be mimicked in most other West European countries -- U.S. interest rates will still have an attractive premium over those of most other major nations, drawing money to the dollar, traders said. 

In the past two weeks, many European short-term rates have risen at least a half point in anticipation of the Bundesbank's move.
With the dollar nonetheless attracting support, many traders said it's not certain an official European rate increase will turn opinion against the U.S. currency. 

Mr. Madison predicts the expected half-point increase will restrain the dollar. "Everybody's already dismissing (the rate rise) as insufficient, but it's certainly necessary," he said.
He added that the rise in official rates would put a solid floor under short-term rates near existing levels, allowing for additional gains in interest rates that would reduce the flow of funds to the U.S. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $367.60 an ounce, up 40 cents.
Estimated volume was a moderate three million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Tuesday, gold was quoted at $366.25 an ounce. 

CO P NPL+ WMB .START 

Phillips Petroleum Co. said it entered into a joint venture agreement with Northwest Pipeline Corp. to explore for methane gas on 111,000 acres in the San Juan Basin area of New Mexico and Colorado. 

Phillips, a Bartlesville, Okla., energy concern, said the agreement replaces a previous pact under which Northwest was operator of the venture.
Under the new arrangement, Phillips will hold an 82% working interest in the acreage, as well as act as operator, and Northwest will hold the remaining 18% interest.
Current production is 54 million cubic feet a day.
Northwest Pipeline is a unit of Williams Cos., a Tulsa, Okla., natural gas transportation and telecommunications concern. 

