.START 

USX Corp. put on the block oil and gas reserves -- valued at more than $1 billion -- of its recently acquired but lackluster Texas Oil & Gas Corp. unit. 

The steel and energy giant said it will funnel proceeds to reduce its $5.8 billion debt load and to buy back stock -- both actions designed to enhance the balance sheet and shareholder value. 

But the sale also raises the question of whether a cash flush USX will seek another acquisition.
The company had long hinted that it might seek a "third leg" to balance the cyclical steel and energy business. 

USX's new chairman, Charles A. Corry, who took over this year, could speed that process. 

"There'a clearly a lot of incentive with a new chairman there to take a look at some other areas and reconsider the current line of business," said Christopher Plummer, an analyst with WEFA Group. 

Along with this current cutback in oil and gas reserves, he said USX will likely reduce its steel holdings during the next few years. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, USX rose $1.75 to $34.875. 

Even though the move includes sizable reserves -- about 1.2 trillion cubic feet of natural gas and about 28 million barrels of oil as of Dec. 31, 1988 -- it represents only one-fourth of USX's gas reserves and 3.5% of its oil reserves, when taking into account USX's larger Marathon Oil unit.
The company also will sell Texas Oil & Gas's estimated 2.2 million undeveloped and developed acres of land. 

USX will retain Texas Oil's vast transmission business, as well as the unit's gas gathering and contract drilling business. 

Still, the sale indicates the company's disappointment in the profitability of Texas Oil.
USX acquired the business, long known as a star in the energy industry, in early 1986 in a stock exchange valued at about $3 billion as part of its strategy to diversify from the mature steel business.
The acquisition struck a raw nerve on Wall Street because it involved issuing 133 million shares of USX, doubling the number of shares outstanding.
Investors were likewise skittish about the future of natural gas prices. 

Their concerns were warranted.
Natural gas prices have declined since then, as has the profitability of Texas Oil. 

"The timing wasn't great.
They bought it just before the collapse in oil and gas prices," said Lysle Brinker, a vice president of John S. Herold Inc., a Greenwich, Conn., oil and gas consulting and appraisal firm. 

Indeed, in 1986, Texas Oil had an operating loss of $21 million.
The following year, the unit earned $2 million, but dropped back into the red in 1988, with an operating loss of $31 million.
Sales likewise have dropped to $937 million in 1988 from $1 billion in 1986. 

Still, Mr. Brinker said Texas Oil's oil reserves, valued at about $6.50 a barrel, could fetch about $182 million.
The natural gas reserves, valued at 72 cents per million cubic feet, could reap $850 million.
The reserves are mainly in Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana, Colorado and Kansas.
CS First Boston Corp. has been retained to handle the sale of the assets. 

Moreover, USX should have a ready market, given the dearth of sizable amounts of reserves.
Major U.S. oil and gas producers, watching their own stockpiles dwindle, are scrambling to buy the reserves, especially in the U.S. Acquiring reserves, as opposed to developing them, enables companies to bypass expensive exploration and development costs, which in the U.S. has been averaging $6.36 a barrel for the last five years. 

And by retaining the transmission and gas gathering assets, USX can still profit from an upturn in the natural gas market, expected sometime in the early 1990s.
Indeed, USX has been predicting that gas prices would rebound as consumers use twice as much gas as is currently being discovered. 

The operating profit from those retained assets totaled about $85 million last year, compared with about $150 million in 1985, Mr. Brinker said. "In a stronger gas market in two or three years, they might be able to earn twice as much on those assets," he said. 

