.START 

Proponents of a capital-gains tax cut, sensing that their chances of winning in the Senate Finance Committee are waning, indicated they will take their fight to the Senate floor. 

Sen. David Boren of Oklahoma, the chief Democratic advocate of the gains-tax reduction on the finance panel, said he won't offer a capital-gains amendment in the committee.
Although his decision severely undercuts the prospects of the measure's passing in the tax-writing committee, Mr. Boren said he expects to offer such an amendment on the floor, where it appears to have the support of a majority of senators. 

"This showdown's headed for the floor," Sen. Boren said in an interview.
Sen. Boren faced the prospect of being the only Democrat to side with Republicans on the committee in favor of a measure to cut capital-gains taxes. 

But some proponents of a capital-gains tax cut are suggesting privately that Democratic leaders who now oppose reduction might eventually support some version of it.
Asked if he would support such a cut, Finance Committee Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas) said: "We'll look and see what's proposed." 

As early as today, the panel is likely to entertain capital gains-tax cut proposals from other members, including one from the senior Republican, Sen. Robert Packwood of Oregon.
His plan would gradually increase the amount of capital gains that can be excluded from income each year.
It isn't clear, however, how many Republicans will stand with him. 

Some special problems might await the capital-gains fight on the Senate floor.
If a cut isn't approved by the committee, Senate rules might require that proponents get 60 votes, rather than the usual 51-vote majority, to add it to the bill.
That hurdle, if applied, might be too high for Sen. Boren to surmount. 

But Sen. Boren said he hopes the special obstacle won't be put in his path.
He suggested that a "gentlemen's agreement" could be reached with Senate Democratic leaders to waive the 60-vote requirement. "I would be surprised if someone tried to block us by requiring 60 votes," Sen. Boren added. 

He said he now has "several options" about how to reduce the capital-gains tax.
He said he would like the reduction to be permanent, with long holding periods required in order to encourage long-term investment.
One element would probably borrow from a proposal by Sen. Dale Bumpers (D., Ark.) to target special assistance to small businesses, he said. 

The senator is working with about 15 Democratic colleagues who have expressed interest in a lower capital-gains tax cut of one kind or another. 

Yesterday, the Finance Committee met privately to review options presented by Sen. Bentsen for raising taxes and cutting spending in line with deficit-reduction goals.
The senators suggested small amendments to the package, and many of them will be incorporated into an updated proposal today. 

Votes on the package and on capital-gains taxes could come as early as today, Sen. Bensten said.
He declined to predict the outcome of the capital-gains vote. 

One new tax proposal would benefit retired people.
Sen. Bentsen proposed to increase the income threshold beyond which senior citizens have their Social Security benefits reduced.
The threshold this year is $8,880.
Sen. Bentsen would increase that level to about $14,500 in 1991, compared with the current law's level of $9,840 for that year. 

