.START 

For the first time in a decade, Democratic and Republican lawmakers are looking seriously for mutually agreeable ways to curtail special-interest money in politics and government. 

Behind-the-scenes bipartisan talks are under way concerning, among other things, limiting campaign spending, greatly reducing re-election donations from political-action committees, expanding the financial role of political parties, eliminating the personal fees lawmakers accept from lobbyists and subjecting Congress to stricter conflict-of-interest rules. 

And while these sensitive talks could easily collapse or produce nothing of great significance, the very fact that they are going on is creating an air of optimism in some quarters. 

"You really have an opportunity for the kind of fundamental breakthroughs that you rarely see in Washington," exults Fred Wertheimer, president of the self-styled citizen's lobby Common Cause. "We are really at a moment of history, in terms of breaking through what has been a paralyzing gridlock for years." 

Already the leadership-sanctioned talks have produced some modest progress.
Bipartisan bills are being written that would, among other things, abolish the personal PACs maintained by some senior lawmakers, repeal a "grandfather clause" that allows senior House members to convert leftover campaign funds to personal use after they retire, close a loophole allowing PACs to funnel unlimited amounts of money to candidates by "bundling" together checks from individual donors, and require clearer identification of PACs that sponsor independent political advertising. 

The tough campaign-finance issues -- whether to drastically restrict PACs, loosen constraints on spending by political parties, impose spending limits on congressional campaigns, or even subsidize House and Senate races from the Treasury -- remain unresolved.
But one aide involved in the talks says "minor change seems to me to be more difficult to discuss than major change." 

Rep. Al Swift (D., Wash.), co-chairman of a bipartisan task force on election laws, says he has sent his staff "out into the no-man's land" to discuss "two or three concepts, as vague as you can imagine" with aides to his GOP counterpart, Rep. Guy Vander Jagt (R., Mich.).
Rep. Swift says he isn't optimistic about crafting any broad compromise, and he told a group of state election-law enforcers last week that he couldn't even discuss specific proposals without fueling partisan "paranoia" on both sides.
He said rank-and-file members fear any change will give an advantage to their opponents, and many are asking their leaders, "Why are we doing this?" 

Meanwhile, a separate bipartisan task force on ethics hums along, keeping under wraps a broad array of far-reaching ethics reforms it will soon propose publicly.
Headed by Reps.
Vic Fazio (D., Calif.) and Lynn Martin (R., Ill.), the panel is drafting proposals to expand the House Ethics Committee, limit expense-paid travel, require stricter financial disclosure for lawmakers and aides, and tighten restrictions on outside earnings.
In addition, a House Judiciary subcommittee last May approved a bill to restrict lobbying by former lawmakers. 

The ethics task force is also wrestling with a possible ban on honorariums.
Present law allows lawmakers to accept up to $2,000 per appearance for a speech or brief appearance, up to a total of 30% of regular salary for House members, 40% for senators.
Lawmakers are reluctant to vote publicly for a pay raise but many don't want to give up honorariums without one. "This is the biggest area of controversy," says a Democratic House staffer working on the ethics package. 

Nevertheless, campaign-finance and ethics talks both are on a fast track; House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) wants to bring bills to the floor this year, an aide says, despite a crush of other business. 

Pressure to act boldly is coming from several directions.
The ethics furor that caused the resignations of House Speaker James Wright and Rep. Tony Coelho (D., Calif.) has faded, but other scandals continue to bubble.
The House Ethics Committee is investigating sexual indiscretions, alleged or admitted, by Reps.
Barney Frank (D., Mass.), Donald Lukens (R., Ohio), Gus Savage (D., Ill.) and Jim Bates (D., Calif.).
Also, Rep. Robert Garcia (D., N.Y.) is on trial accused of bribery and extortion. 

The Senate Ethics Committee is investigating $100,000 that Sen. Dave Durenberger (R., Minn.) received in a book-publishing venture similar to the one that helped bring down Mr. Wright.
And Sens.
John Glenn (D., Ohio), Dennis DeConcini (D., Ariz.), John McCain (R., Ariz.), Alan Cranston (D., Calif.) and Donald Riegle (D., Mich.) have been embarrassed by a total of $1 million in various forms of political contributions raised for them by Phoenix, Ariz., businessman Charles Keating, the subject of racketeering suits over the collapse of a savings-and-loan association he owned. 

President Bush has also prodded Congress with broad ethics and campaign-finance packages.
He has proposed outright elimination of business and labor PACs, and a cap of 15% of salary on outside earnings, for example.
He has also urged Congress to give up their honorarium fees.
There isn't any rush to enact his bills; his campaign-finance package was only introduced in the Senate last week.
But Democrats are reluctant to concede the moral high ground to a Republican president, and that impels them to act. 

So far there hasn't been any public outcry for change.
Lawmakers say their constituents hardly ever mention honorariums or PACs.
But some poll-takers say that just below the surface, public discontent is quite strong.
A recent Newsweek poll showed 77% of those questioned said they would be less likely to vote for a candidate who "accepted money from special-interest groups pressuring him to vote in a certain way." That could be a sobering figure in a Congress where House members got 45% of their election money from PACs in the last election, and senators got 26%. 

"You can be guaranteed you will see a lot more commercials aimed at that" heavy dependence on special interests, says GOP poll-taker Linda DiVall. "It can now be construed as a legitimate campaign issue." And Democratic pollster Geoffrey Garrin says, "There's going to be an inevitable bidding war between the two parties on ethics issues. . . . This is an issue where neither party feels they can afford to be behind the curve." 

All this means odds are improving that Congress will enact the first major changes to the election laws since 1979, and the first ethics overhaul since the Ethics in Government Act of 1978. "The chances are marginally better now than they were before the August recess," said one aide to the House leadership. "Going in, everybody was saying you can't reach any agreement." Now, he said, there's cautious hope of finding common ground. 

Inc. 

