.START 

Lockheed Corp. said it will take $165 million in charges against third-quarter operating profit, resulting in a net loss for the period of about $35 million. 

The aerospace concern said the bulk of the write-offs reflect increased costs connected with its subcontracting work on the Air Force C-17 transport, built by McDonnell Douglas Corp., and its modification on the Navy EP-3E reconnaissance plane.
Also included in the write-offs are adjustments on smaller fixed-price development contracts and certain other programs that Lockheed didn't identify. 

And in an action that is bound to be mirrored increasingly by military products makers, the company said it doesn't intend to pursue any future fixed-price development contracts. 

In the year-earlier quarter, Lockheed posted net income of $300 million, or $5.06 a share, on sales of $2.41 billion.
In that period, the company earned $123 million, or $2.07 a share, from continuing operations. 

News of the latest write-offs came after the close of New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, in which Lockheed shares rose 62.5 cents to finish at $49.75.
Lockheed said it expects to report its third-quarter results late next week.
For the first six months of 1989, Lockheed had net of $139 million, or $2.25 a share, on sales of $4.45 billion. 

Lockheed hasn't registered a quarterly net loss since the final three months of 1981 when it disclosed plans to discontinue its L-1011 commercial jetliner program. 

Lockheed blamed the cost overruns associated with the C-17 -- for which it makes the wings -- and with the EP-3E on "hundreds of design changes" ordered by the customer.
On both contracts, Lockheed hasn't been responsible for the design work.
The company said it will "continue to pursue its claims for equitable pricing adjustments under these contracts," but it's unclear how the situation might ultimately be resolved. 

Some industry analysts were taken aback by Lockheed's announcement. 

"It's certainly a surprise," said Paul Nisbet of Prudential-Bache Securities in New York, who noted that the write-offs amount to about $1 a share.
Lockheed previously adjusted its results for cost overruns on the C-17 as part of $20 million in reserves it charged against 1988 fourth-quarter results, but "they obviously underestimated at that point what it would take to complete the program," Mr. Nisbet added. 

PaineWebber Inc. 's Joseph Campbell said he was shocked at the projects being hit. "These are not on the list of programs people were most concerned"about, he said.
The latest charges don't relate to Lockheed's development work on the P-7A, a Navy anti-submarine warfare plane.
Lockheed said that program, which is in the early stages of development, is currently being reported on a break-even basis. 

But Phil Friedman, of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., said he had expected the C-17 and EP-3E to be in trouble.
He pointed out that Lockheed's 10-Q filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission hinted at the write-downs. "They're moving on to a much cleaner 1990," he said. 

The trend to cost overruns on fixed-price development contracts -- pacts that make it all but impossible to be reimbursed for each and every expense, even when it's the customer that changes the details of its order -- has become a defense industry epidemic.
Last quarter, Lockheed was set back $27 million in pretax charges, mostly write-downs on contracts to modify three Air Force cargo planes.
McDonnell Douglas, Northrop Corp. and General Dynamics Corp. took similar hits. 

The C-17 has been a particular problem.
McDonnell Douglas told a group of analysts touring its Douglas Aircraft Co. unit last week that its first flight is now scheduled for December 1990, six months late. 

The company added that it's now at the contract ceiling price, above which it begins to absorb all excess costs -- unless, of course, it can pass them on to its subcontractors. "They have a vested interest to push this on to Lockheed," Drexel's Mr. Friedman said. 

