.START 

Several small technology concerns' shares took a tumble after the companies disclosed poor earnings prospects. 

But overall, the over-the-counter market rose, propelled in part by cellular telephone issues.
The Nasdaq Composite Index rose 2.27 to 475.19, its second consecutive record close. 

It was a propitious beginning for a month that strikes fear into the hearts of many investors. "Everybody's worried about trading in October," said Robert Antolini, head of OTC trading at Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette. "Professional traders are playing it close to the vest; no one's carrying big, big positions." 

Small technology stocks' performance yesterday seemed to provide good reason for caution. 

"The market has taken a lot of shocks from technology companies, and even sophisticated investors are not inclined to assume the risks of smaller companies," said Steven Ossad, technology analyst for Montgomery Securities, San Francisco.
The battering continues a pattern evident among larger technology companies in recent months. "I think what we're up against is a spillover of disasters from the larger corporations," Mr. Ossad said. 

Optek Technology lost 1 1/4 to 4 3/4, making it Nasdaq's second-largest percentage loser.
The company said it will about break even in its fourth quarter, ending Oct. 27.
Last year, Optek reported net income of 17 cents a share for the quarter.
The company said unexpected order delays and reduced bookings cut into the quarter's results. 

Shares of Xyvision, a maker of computer publishing systems, fell 3/8 to 3 3/8 on volume that was about four times its normal pace.
The Wakefield, Mass., concern predicted a "substantial" fiscal second-quarter restructuring charge and said it will post a "significant" loss for the quarter ended Saturday. 

FileNet, a maker of computerized image storage systems based in Costa Mesa, Calif., plunged 2 1/4 to 10 3/4, after the company said third-quarter earnings will be about one cent a share; analysts had been expecting 19 cents to 26 cents a share.
In the 1988 third quarter, the company had a loss of 22 cents a share. 

KLA Instruments dropped 2 to 10 1/4 after it said earnings for its first quarter, ended Saturday, will be down 15% from a year earlier because of lower-than-expected orders for its printed circuit board inspection systems. 

Helix Technology dropped 1 7/8 to 16 3/8 after it said it expects to report third-quarter revenue and profit "significantly" lower than previously indicated. 

It was a better day for cellular telephone stocks, which drove the Nasdaq Utility Index up 1.32%, or 10.04 points, to 764.21 -- a record for that index. "That's really what rallied our market," said Mr. Antolini of Donaldson Lufkin. "If it wasn't for the cellular stocks, we wouldn't be busy at all." 

Traders said activity in cellular issues was tied to speculation that a higher bid would soon emerge for LIN Broadcasting.
Such a bid could cause an upward valuation of other cellular stocks.
LIN rose 3/4 to 111 5/8. 

LIN has agreed to a stock-swap merger with BellSouth, which first involves LIN selling off its television operations and paying shareholders a $20-a-share dividend. 

The BellSouth merger was seen as an attempt to thwart McCaw Cellular Communications' $110-a-share tender offer for LIN. McCaw rose 1 1/2 to 39 1/2. 

Two other cellular issues posted strong gains: Cellular Communications rose 1 1/2 to 42 1/4, and Vanguard Cellular System jumped 2 1/4 to 38 3/4. 

MCI Communications slipped 1/8 to 44 7/8.
The company said it will cut basic service rates for calls made within California by an average 1.3%. 

Microsoft gained 1 1/8 to 69 5/8.
The company said it received a patent for its "mouse" technology.
Separately, Ingram Micro D placed a "record order" for the new Microsoft computer device. 

InterVoice climbed 3 to 31 after surging 2 Friday.
Last Thursday, the company priced a 1.3 million-share public offering at $26 a share.
Yesterday, underwriters said they exercised their overallotment option to issue an additional 195,000 shares.
InterVoice is expected to report strong second-quarter earnings, according to Dow Jones Professional Investor Report. 

Kaman Class A shares dropped 1 1/4 to 11 7/8.
On Friday, the company disclosed that it expects to report a loss of 50 cents to 60 cents a share for the third quarter.
It cited a write-down on inventories in its industrial distribution business and pressures in defense markets, among other factors. 

Craig Smith contributed to this article. 

