.START 

Department of Housing and Urban Development Secretary Jack Kemp plans to announce a broad-based plan to reshape agency programs that have been hit by scandal and mismanagement. 

Mr. Kemp scheduled a news conference for today to release details of his package.
HUD documents and agency officials said it would include the creation of a chief financial officer position for the department, the elimination of certain Federal Housing Administration programs, fines for consultants and lobbyists who fail to register with the agency, and the termination of the secretary's discretionary fund. 

He apparently rejected a call by two of his top appointees to change the name of the agency to the "Home Department." 

Since an inspector general's report was released in April, HUD has been hit with a series of reports about lack of oversight, weak internal controls, serious inefficiencies, bribery and embezzlement, as well as influence peddling by politically well-connected consultants during Samuel Pierce's eight years as HUD secretary in the Reagan administration. 

This last issue was a central point in the April report and in continuing hearings by the House Government Operations subcommittee on employment and housing, which is investigating the agency. 

Mr. Kemp will propose that consultants and lobbyists disclose the source of any fee paid to them for HUD-related work, said Robert Nipp, a department spokesman.
Failure to do so would result in a $10,000 fine for each violation, he added.
Consultants, generally with extensive ties to the Republican Party, received large fees for assisting developers with HUD contracts.
Some top HUD officials during the Reagan administration also received HUD work after leaving office. 

The role of consultants again was the topic of a hearing of a House subcommittee investigating federal housing scandals.
A top political consultant, who previously acknowledged to the panel engaging in "influence peddling," yesterday said his company "played by the rules" to get funding for a controversial project. 

Paul Manafort, a partner in the lobbying and consulting firm Black, Manafort, Stone & Kelly, told the employment and housing subcommittee that the firm "worked within the existing system at HUD" on behalf of the Seabrook apartment project in Upper Deerfield, N.J. 

During an often contentious hearing, subcommittee Chairman Rep. Tom Lantos (D., Calif.), said that Mr. Manafort's firm secured the moderate-rehabilitation program contract through "a sweetheart deal with Deborah Dean," who was executive assistant to Secretary Pierce. 

Ms. Dean's lawyer, Joseph diGenova, said, "There are no witnesses and no testimony, indeed no evidence that Ms. Dean or anyone else promised funding for the program would be provided." 

Mr. Manafort was asked about his relationship with Scott Reed, executive assistant to Mr. Kemp.
Mr. Reed ran the Iowa campaign of Mr. Kemp when he sought the Republican presidential nomination last year.
Mr. Kemp was one of Black Manafort's clients, as was President Bush and former President Reagan.
HUD's Mr. Nipp said there is "no type of special relationship" between the department and the consulting firm. 

Some consultants and members of Congress were able to get funding for projects through the secretary's discretionary fund, which Mr. Kemp wants to eliminate.
These projects weren't required to undergo the same level of scrutiny as those funded through the competitive process. 

Mr. Kemp is expected to announce the termination of programs that allow dealers of mobile homes and home-improvement services to approve FHA loans to homeowners.
HUD officials believe allowing the sellers to authorize government-backed loans to buyers of their products was an invitation to fraud and mismanagement. 

Another change would encourage nonprofit organizations and state and local governments to replace the role of investors in FHA programs for insuring single-home mortgages.
A Sept. 1 memo from C. Austin Fitts, FHA commissioner, and J. Kenneth Blackwell, deputy undersecretary for intergovernmental relations, urged Mr. Kemp to "actively create a distribution network of nonprofit and local groups to take FHA insurance to the inner cities and other areas you will designate as 'housing zones' to be 'greenlined. '" 

The position of chief financial officer for the department would be created as a watchdog over the financial affairs of the agency.
This officer would ensure the fiscal integrity of its programs by operating sound reporting and control systems.
A General Accounting Office report last week recommended that position and the corresponding one of comptroller within the FHA. 

Mr. Kemp has previously announced his intention to make some changes in HUD programs.
For example, last month he said companies in the scandal-ridden co-insurance program would have to meet stronger capital requirements to protect against high default rates. 

Many of the changes the secretary will propose can be done administratively, through the regular rule-making process that allows a certain period for public comment.
Other revisions in the way HUD does business already have been proposed by members of Congress who are considering various pieces of HUD-related legislation. 

