.START 

Stock prices kicked off the fourth quarter with a sharp rally late in the session.
Currency traders bid the dollar higher despite a continuation of last week's central bank intervention, and bond prices rose modestly. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 20.90 to 2713.72, its first close above 2700 since Sept. 12.
However, volume was light and the gains came on computer-assisted stock index arbitrage, traders said. 

Central banks continued to pressure the dollar with coordinated selling around the world.
But traders said the weeklong effort is weakening and that other measures will be needed if the central banks want to keep the U.S. currency down.
The dollar's gains gave long-term Treasury bonds a nudge upward. 

Despite the relatively light stock-market volume, traders were encouraged that prices rose.
There was widespread suspicion that with third-quarter "window dressing" behind them, money managers would reduce their stock holdings because of continuing uncertainty about the economy. "Window dressing" refers to money managers' adjusting of portfolios before showing them to clients at the end of each quarter. 

Yesterday's report by U.S. purchasing managers showed a slight increase in manufacturing activity in September.
But that did little to clarify the economy's direction, so stock and bond investors now are looking toward Friday's report on September employment.
Currency traders said the central banks' continued intervention probably is a sign that governments of the industrialized nations will go further in their efforts to undercut the dollar.
The most likely next move is for the West German Bundesbank to raise interest rates this week. 

"I think everybody is expecting the Germans to raise rates this week," said Keith Cheveralls, vice president and manager of foreign exchange trading at Nippon Credit Bank.
Higher interest rates abroad make the dollar less attractive to foreign investors. 

With little in the way of economic data to guide them, bond traders followed the dollar's lead.
There remains some hope that the Fed will cut U.S. interest rates as part of the international effort to drive the dollar lower; but most traders think it's unlikely the Fed will move without concrete evidence that the U.S. economy is slowing. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices rallied in thin trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 127.4 million shares.
Advancing issues on the Big Board were ahead of losers, 861-598. 

The dollar gained.
In late New York trading, the currency was quoted at 1.8793 marks and 139.68 yen, compared with 1.8713 marks and 139.00 yen late Friday. 

Bond prices rose modestly.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond gained about a quarter of a point, or $2.50 for each $1,000 face amount.
The yield on the issue slid to 8.21%. 

