.START 

The Supreme Court, in a case with significant First Amendment ramifications, agreed to decide whether a state may permanently bar grand jury witnesses from disclosing the nature of their testimony. 

The high court will hear an appeal by Florida officials from a federal appeals court ruling that the state's grand jury secrecy law violates the First Amendment guarantee of free speech. 

The case may have a significant impact on the laws of many states.
In 17 states, witnesses are prohibited from publicly revealing the subject or details of their testimony. 

Moreover, if the Supreme Court concludes that such a prohibition doesn't violate the First Amendment, legislatures in some of the other 33 states may consider passing broader grand jury secrecy laws. 

The case may have little impact on the federal courts, however.
Procedural rules for the federal courts generally require grand jury secrecy, but the rules haven't been interpreted to bar witnesses from making public statements. 

Despite the potential significance for state courts, the high court's consideration of the issue may be narrow in scope.
Florida's law was interpreted by a federal appeals court in Atlanta to permanently bar disclosure, even after a grand jury has completed its investigation.
In its February 1989 ruling, the appeals court said this permanent secrecy requirement violated the rights of a newspaper reporter who testified before a local grand jury about county corruption.
But the appeals court stressed that its ruling didn't apply to laws in which secrecy was required of witnesses only while the grand jury was still investigating. (Butterworth vs.
Smith) 

The justices agreed to decide whether state and local governments must disregard political affiliation in hiring, promoting and transferring public employees.
The justices will examine the political patronage system in Illinois in an appeal by several people who said their job status suffered because they weren't loyal supporters of the Republican Party. 

A federal appeals court in Chicago ruled that the constitutional rights of public employees are violated by a patronage system only if denial of a promotion or transfer has the same effect as if the worker were fired. (Rutan vs.
Republican Party of Illinois) 

The high court agreed to decide whether police violate the rights of a criminal suspect by placing undercover officers in the same cell to question him.
The justices will hear an appeal by Illinois officials from a state court ruling that police acted unconstitutionally by failing to warn a suspect of his so-called Miranda rights to refuse to answer questions and to consult a lawyer.
The state court ruled that a suspect who is already in jail for one crime can't be questioned about another without being advised of those rights. (Illinois vs.
Perkins) 

In other action yesterday, the high court: 

-- Agreed to consider the constitutionality of police roadblocks to check for drunken drivers.
The justices will examine this widely used practice in an appeal by Michigan officials.
A Michigan court struck down use of sobriety checkpoints, but most other state courts have upheld them. (Michigan Department of State Police vs.
Sitz) 

-- Agreed to decide whether lawyers may object to paying mandatory state bar association dues if they contend that the dues are being used to pay for ideological causes, such as a nuclear freeze and handgun ban.
The appeal was filed by a group of California lawyers. (Keller vs.
State Bar of California) 

-- Let stand a libel award of $28,600 in compensatory damages and $250,000 in punitive damages against a unit of Ingersoll Newspapers Inc., publisher of the Pawtucket Evening Times in Rhode Island.
The award was upheld by the state court although there was no specific false statement in the paper's articles. (New England Newspapers Inc. vs.
Healey) 

-- Let stand the convictions of eight organized-crime leaders who were charged with conspiring to violate federal racketeering laws, and other charges against seven of the eight.
The conspiracy was based on charges that the eight men ran a so-called commission to oversee the five New York Mafia families. (Indelicato vs.
U.S.; Salerno vs.
U.S.; Persico vs.
U.S.; Scopo vs.
U.S.) 

-- Agreed to decide who is entitled to the royalties from the Alfred Hitchcock movie, "Rear Window," a 1954 thriller that starred Jimmy Stewart.
The court will hear an appeal by Mr. Stewart and Mr. Hitchcock's heirs in a copyright dispute. (Stewart vs.
Abend) 

