.START 

The Earth may be just another planet, but television programmers are about to make it a star. 

Once the subject of an occasional public-television documentary, the issue of saving the Earth's environment is about to blanket network and cable channels, in everything from news-division specials to sitcom episodes.
We won't just see Madonna singing to save the rain forest: An episode of "Murphy Brown" set to air next month finds the caustic TV anchor (Candice Bergen) accepting a bet that she can make her life style more environmentally responsible. "I wanted to get across the message that we don't have a choice anymore, but to also make it funny by showing how inconvenient it is for Murphy," says Diane English, the show's creator. 

Expect to see a lot of heart-to-heart talks about recycling among prime-time families this season, but that's only the beginning.
Among the environmental projects recently shown or in the works: 

-- Turner Broadcasting System Inc. 's Superstation TBS is working on an animated cartoon series for children to be called "Captain Planet." 

-- CBS last month began airing 60-second "Earth Quest" spots, which replaced its occasional "Presidential Portraits;" CBS News also plans five one-hour specials on the environment in April. 

-- Six new episodes of ABC's series "Head of the Class" have been written with an environmental message, says coproducer Jonathan Roberts. 

-- Puppeteer Jim Henson is developing a kids' show about nature to be called "W.I.L.D." 

-- Olivia Newton-John, about to be named the first United Nations goodwill ambassador for the environment, plans an environmental holiday special called "A Very Green Christmas." 

-- Barbra Streisand, Kevin Costner and other stars will be hosts for a two-hour special called "A Practical Guide to How You Can Save the Planet," to run on Earth Day, April 22. -- And look out for a raucous music video to the tune of "Yakkety Yak" that promotes recycling.
Bette Midler, Paul Simon and other artists have agreed to join top producers and directors working at no charge. 

Why now, and why so much? 

It isn't just the result of Hollywood producers with beach houses finding they can't jump into the ocean for a back yard swim because of raw sewage.
The environmental crisis is truly heating up.
Time magazine named "endangered Earth" its man of the year in January -- after Chernobyl but before the Exxon Valdez oil spill.
People are increasingly aware there's a hole in the ozone, too much garbage and that the planet's climate is heating up. 

"The experts tell us we have about a 10-year window of opportunity to reverse some things, or we'll ruin the environment," says Bonnie Reiss, who gave up an entertainment-law practice in Hollywood to form Earth Communications Office, which tries to get environmental messages into TV shows, movies and pop music. 

Another Hollywood group joining the crusade is Environmental Media Association, launched in April.
EMA's president, Andy Spahn, is blitzing the business, holding sessions with television writers.
Next month, the top programming executives of all three networks -- all EMA board members -- will address the Writers Guild of America in Los Angeles about the environment. 

"It seems to me we have a great opportunity to do something about the most pressing issue of the '90s," says Kim LeMasters, top entertainment programmer at CBS, who suggested the "Earth Quest" minutes. 

There are plentiful examples of TV's power of suggestion. "There was one episode of 'Happy Days' where the Fonz happened to take out a library card, and the next day, teen-agers swamped libraries around the country," says Mr. Spahn of EMA. "If sitcoms keep showing families recycling their trash, it could have a huge impact." 

Some in the media have been beating the environmental drums for a while.
The Discovery Channel, which is owned by four large cable operators, dissects environmental issues regularly.
Few have been as relentless as Ted Turner (who even banned Styrofoam in the Turner Broadcasting cafeteria because it isn't biodegradable).
In 1981, Mr. Turner hired activist Barbara Pyle to make environmental documentaries for TBS, and in 1985 he co-founded the Better World Society, which has acquired or produced some 40 documentaries, largely on the environment. 

TBS is going a step further with "Earthbeat," a weekly program that will begin Oct. 15 and that will show how individuals, countries and corporations can help save the planet. "Television is the most powerful tool in the world, and it wasn't being used to aid the most serious issue of our time," says Jeanette "J.J." Ebaugh, the show's creator. "Earthbeat's" activism will be reflected in its use of telephone lines to record viewers' opinions on issues and perhaps invite them to add their names to "electronic petitions" to be sent to politicians or corporations. 

"Earthbeat" also is unusual in that it will be produced by a for-profit subsidiary of a non-profit parent group, Planet Live Inc., which will use its share of profits for educational purposes.
The idea is that "Earthbeat" will make money from subscription sales for a monthly publication called "Action Guide," the 900-number toll calls and commercials, and will evolve into a company producing mini-series, documentaries and concerts tied to ecology. 

Despite her lack of broadcasting experience, Ms. Ebaugh -- Mr. Turner's frequent companion and former pilot -- has managed to attract some award-winning journalists and producers, such as Jim Hayden, who left his own production company in Minneapolis to be executive producer of "Earthbeat." "I've got staff people here with Emmies who took a pay cut to come," Mr. Hayden says, "because they believe we'll be doing something important." 

