.START 

already more than four million strong -- are proliferating, and now their principal lobby wants a bigger voice. 

The National Association of Women Business Owners, invigorated by last year's success in passing a landmark federal law, is launching a campaign to double its membership and hence bolster its influence. 

But the effort may falter because it pits two forces within the women's entrepreneurial movement against each other: novice business owners and their veteran counterparts. 

Already, tensions have erupted as some leaders urge that the group cater more to the veterans.
Indeed, some association officials seek to reach the 6,000-membership goal within a year by targeting women running businesses at least three years.
To appeal to these seasoned owners, it intends to focus on issues critical to them, such as education and international trade. 

And to attract them, the group is marketing itself this fall through a series of magazine ads, mailings to targeted magazine subscribers and a new radio program.
The 13-week series, "Women Talk Business," began airing last month on the national Business Radio Network.
Each hour-long show on Sundays at noon Eastern time carries an interview with a business newsmaker, a profile of a woman entrepreneur, business news and a call-in period for listeners' questions. (Prospective members can phone an 800 number to receive materials on the association.) 

In recent years, the association has made its mark by helping develop policies on women's business issues.
Washington observers say the established, male-dominated small-business groups have largely ignored this need. 

Working with only a $500,000 annual budget, the association has picked its shots selectively.
Three years ago, it played an influential leadership role at the White House Conference of Small Business by maneuvering to get many of its members elected as state delegates.
More recently, it helped ensure passage of the federal Women's Business Ownership Act of 1988.
Among other aspects, the law reduced barriers to commercial credit that have traditionally confronted women and established a panel to develop goals for aiding women entrepreneurs. 

"I look to them as one of the major voices on issues important to women in business," says Rep. John J. LaFalce (D., N.Y.), chairman of the House Small Business Committee and the legislation's sponsor.
He says he "worked closely" with the group to forge the legislation. 

However, the association struggles internally to overcome strains between its inexperienced and more seasoned members that stem in part from its origins.
The association started 15 years ago in Washington, D.C., as a networking organization for novice women entrepreneurs who counseled each other on such basics as obtaining commercial credit. 

Since then, the association (whose members pay an average $160 in annual dues) has expanded nationally into an advocacy group with 40 chapters.
It even runs trade missions abroad that appeal to its more experienced members. 

Stephanie V. Slavin, who joined the group's Miami chapter in May and then started her own Sarasota, Fla., chapter, is just such a member.
A developer of heliports for eight years, Ms. Slavin says her association contacts have given her leads to pursue "millions of dollars" in development contracts in Colorado and Europe. 

She says she might have heard about possible contracts before joining the group but wouldn't have known just how to go about trying to land them. "The key at Nawbo is the quality of the women.
They see opportunity where others see obstacles," she says. 

But owners of newer businesses, who have considerable influence in the organization, complicate the association's efforts to appeal to such seasoned recruits.
These novices want how-to seminars and mentors, rather than international trading partners.
As many go out of business, they're also one reason the group suffers from a high 30% annual turnover in its membership, say association officials. (In contrast, the turnover rate of the 500,000-member National Federation of Independent Business is 20%.) 

Earlier this year, the association's national board considered limiting its membership to women in business at least a year.
Chicagoan Judi Schindler, sponsor of the plan, says it was defeated by chapters dominated by newer business owners. "They were afraid they'd lose 50% of their members," she says. "Some people feel we have a mandate to help new businesses." 

As a result, the association runs the risk of alienating the very recruits it's trying to draw.
Though the organization promises networking opportunities as a prime feature, Ms. Schindler worries that savvy veterans will find themselves spending their time as mentors to start-ups and smaller firms rather than networking with peers. 

That's what happened to Palmer A. "Pam" Reynolds, who owns Phoenix Textile Corp., a St. Louis distributor of towels and linens.
Her local chapter wooed her with invitations to run seminars, then nominated her for entrepreneurial awards and named her to a largely ceremonial post after she joined. 

But Ms. Reynolds says she "can't relate" her business problems to those of members running smaller businesses.
Her company has annual sales of $30 million, while fewer than one in five members run companies with sales exceeding $1 million a year.
And she says the organization must "become more sophisticated" to suit her needs. 

Her solution?
Within her chapter, she's organizing a roundtable of veterans like herself. 

Source: National Association of Women Business Owners survey, 1987-88 

