.START 

Nintendo Co., the Japanese concern that brought Americans such video games as Super Mario Brothers, is joining forces with Fidelity Investments to develop and market a home-trading system for financial services. 

The system would enable the use of Nintendo machines to trade stocks, update portfolios or check on the latest market information. 

Fidelity, the Boston mutual-funds and discount brokerage house, will develop the software cartridges.
Nintendo, based in Kyoto, Japan, will develop and manufacture a modem and special controller to be used with the standard Nintendo player. 

The securities program would form part of a broader Nintendo effort to launch a communications network for interactive entertainment and information products, beginning some time next year, according to Fidelity.
The network, which could offer such services as home shopping, likely would be similar to one already operating in Japan.
The Japanese network includes a financial information and trading service marketed in conjunction with Nomura Securities Co. 

Nintendo's Nintendo of America Inc. unit, based in Redmond, Wash., has been discussing plans for a U.S. network with American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and other telecommunications companies, according to Jerry Ruttenbur, vice president of network products for Nintendo of America.
Mr. Ruttenbur said an agreement on the network hasn't been struck yet. 

Details of the accord between Nintendo and Fidelity also remain to be worked out.
Mr. Ruttenbur said Fidelity would be given a period of exclusivity for investment software, but the length of that period hasn't yet been set. 

Fidelity, which manages more than $100 billion for its mutual fund and brokerage customers, stands to benefit from Nintendo's own market penetration.
Nintendo estimates that some 20 million U.S. households will own Nintendo video machines by year end.
And anyone who uses the Nintendo home-trading system would have to do so through a Fidelity account. 

Mr. Ruttenbur said Nintendo hopes to price the add-on modem and controller at less than $200.
Nintendo's basic machine currently costs less than $100, he said. 

Jack Chafin, senior vice president, said the software cartridge will include special security features in addition to several levels of security already available in Fidelity's online service for personal-computer users. 

