.START 

Here's a pop quiz.
Under the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction law, the federal budget deficit since 1987 has: 

(a) decreased 

(b) increased 

Hint: Remember, this is Washington. 

That's right.
Under Gramm-Rudman-Hollings, the problem has been getting worse instead of better.
In fiscal 1987, the deficit totaled $149.7 billion; in fiscal 1989, it grew to an estimated $161.4 billion. 

Gramm-Rudman-Hollings is a flop.
Originally designed to cut the federal deficit to zero in 1991, the law has had great success in cutting deficit projections.
But it has failed in the last two years to do anything at all for the actual deficit. 

"I want a divorce from Gramm-Rudman-Hollings," thunders Sen. Ernest Hollings, the bill's Democratic sponsor.
When the law passed in 1985, the stentorian South Carolinian hailed it as ending "the fraud that we have all perpetrated on the American people." These days, though, he labels the latest budget produced to comply with the law "pure sham." Although the fiscal 1990 deficit was supposed to be down to $36 billion, Congress is now busily completing a plan calling for a deficit of $99.7 billion -- while its own Congressional Budget Office projects that the real number will be $117.8 billion. 

The bill's original approach was simple, and seemingly severe.
It set out to eliminate the deficit by imposing limits that shrank every year.
It required the government to determine every Oct. 15 whether it would meet that year's deficit target.
If not, the law would impose automatic, across-the-board spending cuts. 

But complying with the law has turned into little more than a fiscal shell game. "Everybody has learned how to rig it," says Senate Budget Committee Chairman James Sasser of Tennessee.
Both Congress and the administration have become masters at coming up with enough accounting gimmicks and other fiscal legerdemain to claim to achieve the required reductions.
By the time the lie becomes evident, the threat of cuts is a fading memory. 

Just last week, the administration shifted a Pentagon payday to Sept. 29, which is in fiscal 1989, from Oct. 1, the first day of fiscal 1990.
In addition, the government advanced some farm price-support payments to the old fiscal year from the new one.
The moves made it $4 billion easier to reach the fiscal 1990 target -- but, of course, raised fiscal 1989's deficit by precisely the same amount. 

Further, the dreaded across-the-board cuts are turning out to be not so dreaded after all.
Congress is all but certain to miss this year's deadline; its effort to put into place the deficit-reduction plan worked out with the Bush administration has become painfully entangled in issues ranging from capital-gains taxes to child care.
Yet most people now expect cuts to be quickly rescinded once Congress and the administration reach agreement on the various issues. 

Not only has Gramm-Rudman failed to solve the deficit problem, it has created a number of other ones.
The drive to meet its targets has become paramount and often dictates policy, rewarding gimmickry and out-and-out fiscal deceit.
Its year-to-year focus has also created a short-term, help-me-make-it-through-the-fiscal-nigh t mindset among congressional and administration budget writers.
The result is a string of one-time spending reductions, but little permanent policy savings. 

"It's a well-intentioned experiment that failed," says Alice Rivlin, a former Congressional Budget Office director who is now a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. "It is time to recognize the mistake before more damage is done." 

Many lawmakers agree, and some are drawing up plans to work over the law when the debt ceiling is raised later this month.
The law has already been weakened once, stretching the balanced-budget goal out to 1993 from 1991.
Now, under the guise of "truth in budgeting," some want to stretch out its targets even further.
A co-author, Texas Republican Sen. Phil Gramm, suggests extending the law through the end of the century.
And House Ways and Means Committee staffers are toying with the idea of coupling an automatic tax increase to the automatic spending cuts. 

Backers of the law point to some benefits from it.
Since it went into effect, the rate of growth of federal spending has slowed.
And deficits did decline the first few years under the law, although they have increased again the past two years.
When the bill was enacted, the federal budget deficit appeared headed for the $300 billion mark and beyond, and the law served to focus attention on the problem. 

But even some of the law's protectors offer little more than faint praise. "As near as I can see, it is the only element of discipline left in the system," says Minnesota Rep. Bill Frenzel, the senior GOP member of the House Budget Committee. "It may not be a very good one, but I certainly would be reluctant to make changes in it." 

The need to meet the law's projected deficit targets is one of the driving forces in Congress behind the current push to lower the rate at which capital gains are taxed.
According to Congress's Joint Committee on Taxation, cutting the rate would in the short run encourage so many people to sell off appreciated holdings that government revenues would rise $2.9 billion in the first year and a total of $9.4 billion over three years. 

After that, though, the committee projects the capital-gains change would cost the government more in the next two years -- $10.9 billion -- than it had raised in the previous three.
And those losses would come just as Gramm-Rudman requires the deficit to be brought to zero. 

Gramm-Rudman also puts a premium on finding big, one-time savings gimmicks.
Congress and the administration have agreed to take the U.S. Postal Service operating losses out of the budget, "saving" $1.7 billion from next year's projected deficit. (Aides joke that once the Postal Service generates a surplus again, they'll put it back in the budget.) 

Nor has the law done much to deter lawmakers from spending; instead, it has simply led many to change tactics.
The law's focus is on outlays -- that is, the money the government actually spends.
So lawmakers, eager to please the folks back home, are authorizing more and more projects that will be costly down the road.
The effect is like making a down payment on a balloon mortgage that will require huge, escalating payments in the future. 

Democrats complain that this problem is exacerbated by President Bush's penchant for announcing popular new programs -- a mission to Mars, a war on drugs, efforts to curb acid rain -- without saying how to pay for them.
That places lawmakers in the awkward position of not wanting to kill the projects but lacking the immediate resources to pay for them. 

Other policy is written with an eye on immediate budgetary impact instead of other, potentially more serious consequences.
The Senate, for instance, voted last month to raise the ceiling on Federal Housing Administration-insured mortgages for single-family homes.
The hoped-for result is to raise $106 million next year by stimulating 43,500 new loans; the money would help finance the space-station program.
Administration officials warn, though, that an unintended consequence could be to raise greatly the risk exposure of the insurance fund, whose losses already stand at $6.9 billion. 

"I wonder if we are making worse law in meeting targets," says New Mexico Sen. Pete Domenici, the senior Republican on the Budget Committee and a defender of Gramm-Rudman. "It is a glaring example of policy driven by budget targets." 

Another example is the budget treatment of the $166 billion savings-and-loan bailout.
The bulk of the on-budget treatment comes in the last fiscal year, when adding to the deficit didn't trigger any cuts.
In future years, the scheme will actually reduce the deficit because funds will flow from a government-sponsored borrowing enterprise into the Treasury, distorting the budget's representation of government borrowing and spending. 

That maneuver illustrates another Gramm-Rudman loophole exploited by lawmakers and administration officials alike.
All that matters in the law are projections of the deficit in the coming fiscal year.
Once the White House Office of Management and Budget certifies, when the spending year is just 15 days old, that the deficit 350 days hence will meet the law's target, the threat of automatic spending cuts vanishes.
Congress and the administration then are free to spend more. 

OMB Director Richard Darman calls this "a giant loophole . . . the biggest single problem that's got to be corrected." But that hasn't stopped the administration from taking advantage of it from time to time. 

The frustration over Gramm-Rudman is likely to bubble to the surface late this month during the debt-ceiling debate.
Staffs for both House and Senate Democrats and Republicans are quietly drafting possible legislation, some of which would go so far as to repeal the law.
But that isn't likely to happen, if only because keeping some semblance of the law provides political cover for lawmakers. 

More likely to be considered are efforts to change the way government trust funds, including Social Security, are accounted for in the budget process.
Currently, Social Security surpluses are counted to reduce the deficit and are invested in Treasury notes, thus helping to finance the deficit.
Sen. Gramm proposes separating Social Security from the federal budget in 1993 and creating a panel to manage its investments. 

Since such a move would create a budget deficit of $105 billion instead of the zero his namesake law now calls for, Mr. Gramm would extend Gramm-Rudman through fiscal 1999.
He hopes his plan will act as a check on Congress's spending through the end of the century.
But other lawmakers, noting how ineffective the law has been in curbing the deficit and how many other problems it has created, don't think his scheme will accomplish much. 

Gramm-Rudman deficit projections vs. reality, in billions of dollars 

*Congressional Budget Office estimate 

Sources: Gramm-Rudman law and Congressional Budget Office 

