.START 

Coca-Cola Co. said it expects to report a fourth-quarter after-tax gain of $530 million from the sale of its entertainment holdings.
The soft-drink giant also said its board approved a purchase of as many as 20 million, or about 6%, of its common shares outstanding. 

The moves followed a board meeting yesterday, in which directors approved the sale of Coca-Cola's 53.8 million shares of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. to Sony Corp. Last week, the Japanese company reached a definitive agreement to acquire the entertainment company for about $3.4 billion.
Coca-Cola's holdings represent a 49% stake in Columbia. 

The $530 million gain will amount to about $1.53 a share, the company said.
In 1988, Coca-Cola earned $1.04 billion, or $2.85 a share.
In New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday, Coca-Cola rose $1.50 a share, to close at $68.50. 

Coca-Cola has been steadily buying up big chunks of its stock for several years.
In recent months, the company said it substantially completed a 40 million-share repurchase program, launched in 1987.
Since 1984, Coca-Cola has purchased about 84 million of its common shares for about $3 billion, or an average cost of about $35.80 a share.
Based on current market prices, those shares have a value of about $5.6 billion, Coca-Cola said. 

During the past year, Coca-Cola's share price has risen substantially, to the high 60s from a low of about $41.
That has been partly because of a run up generated by disclosures that widely watched investor Warren Buffett had acquired more than 6% of Coca-Cola and may boost it to 15%. 

Nonetheless, Coca-Cola and some market analysts say it is a good time for the company to acquire more shares.
Even before the Columbia windfall, as of June 30, Coca-Cola had some $1.42 billion in cash and only $2.6 billion in total debt. "For a cash-rich company like Coca-Cola, the decision becomes: Do we buy shares now or later?" said George Thompson, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc.
The repurchase "reflects their confidence in the future profitability of the company," he said. 

"We continue to view a share-repurchase program as an attractive investment for excess cash," said a company spokesman.
Coca-Cola said the current buy-back authorization runs through 1991. 

Although Coca-Cola had been widely expected to plough most of the proceeds into its overseas business, its fastest growing soft-drink operation, analysts say they aren't worried about Coca-Cola's momentum abroad.
The windfall represents "a significant cushion to {buy back shares} without compromising the growth of the company overseas," said Martin Romm, an analyst with First Boston Corp. 

