.START 

A HOUSE PANEL VOTED to tighten tailpipe-emission standards more than Bush proposed, removing a major stumbling block to passage of a clean-air bill.
The vote, which essentially would apply nationwide tough standards adopted by California, enhances chances for early passage of a clean-air measure. 

The Senate Finance panel appears unlikely to pass a capital-gains tax cut, but Sen. Boren of Oklahoma expects to offer such an amendment on the floor, where it appears to have the support of a majority of senators. 

USX Corp. put on the block the oil and gas reserves of its Texas Oil & Gas unit, valued at more than $1 billion.
It said proceeds will go to trim debt and repurchase stock, but some analysts speculated a cash-flush USX might seek another acquisition. 

Zenith Electronics agreed to sell its fast-growing computer business to Cie des Machines Bull of France for up to $635 million.
The move is an admission by Zenith that it doesn't have the resources to compete in both computers and television sets. 

Bank of Boston said its internal controls and real estate operations are under review by U.S. regulators, and that the head of real estate operations resigned.
Separately, it said it would add $370 million to credit loss reserves, leading to a third-quarter net loss of about $125 million. 

Nomura Securities will name former Kidder Peabody president Max Chapman as co-chairman of its U.S. securities unit, a key step in Nomura's bid to be accepted as a full-fledged U.S. investment bank. 

Coca-Cola's board approved the sale of its 49% stake in Columbia Pictures to Sony and said it expects to report an after-tax gain of $530 million as a result of the move.
Directors also approved the buy-back of up to 20 million of Coke's common shares. 

Lockheed will take $165 million in charges against third quarter earnings, resulting in a net loss for the period of about $35 million.
The bulk of the write-offs reflect increased costs on Air Force and Navy projects. 

The Supreme Court decided that the states are free, at least for now, to prosecute corporate officials for workplace hazards that are also regulated by federal job safety laws. 

Cray Research will trim the work force at its main Wisconsin plants by about 400 people, the first layoff in the supercomputer maker's history. 

Auto insurance rates were ordered frozen in California for six months while hearings are held on a voter-approved plan to slash rates 20%. 

The economy continued to show signs of weakness in September for the fifth consecutive month, a survey of purchasing managers showed. 

New-construction spending rose 1.8% in August after slipping for two months, but spending for private residential projects eased slightly. 

West Germany's Allianz AG agreed to buy 50% of the insurance interest of France's Navigation Mixte for about $1 billion.
Pearl Group PLC, a big British insurer, said it would fight a takeover bid from Australian Mutual Provident Society. 

IBM has emerged as the front-runner in the bidding for Lockheed's Cadam computer-aided-design software business and may buy it for about $100 million, industry executives said. 

Canada Packers said it will seek takeover offers for the company, Canada's largest food processor. 

Markets -- 

Stocks: Volume 127,410,000 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 2713.72, up 20.90; transportation 1455.19, up 5.15; utilities 216.49, up 0.32. 

Bonds: Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3302.78, up 

Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 131.95, up 1.03; spot index 130.93, up 1.51. 

Dollar: 139.68 yen, up 0.68; 1.8793 marks, up 0.0080. 

