.START 

The Audit Bureau of Circulations said it will begin the verification of the placement and redemption of coupons in magazines, a practice that has long been conducted for the newspaper industry to eliminate fraud. 

Verification by ABC, the Schaumburg, Ill.-based nonprofit group that audits paid circulations of magazines and newspapers, is expected to encourage more publishers to offer coupon sections in their magazines.
ABC will announce the verification service today at a coupon industry conference in New York. 

Verification has become an important issue among mass-marketers, who industry experts estimate lose as much as $250 million annually through fraudulent redemption of their coupons.
ABC said it has created an industry task force to create a set of guidelines, which include verification on the security of printing, storing, handling and distribution of coupon sections. 

"Advertisers will feel a lot better knowing the ABC has given coupons in magazines a stamp of approval," said Valerie Muller, media director of Pedone & Partners. "This will let major packaged good companies know which publications are getting the best response from coupons.
The biggest problem with couponing has been verification." 

Nancy Smith, director of media services at Young & Rubicam, said the verification service would give magazines a competitive advantage as they attempt to pull dollars out of coupon business in Sunday newspapers. 

"If magazines are going to displace some of the coupon inserts in newspapers, the comfort factor of a verification will be a big help," said Ms. Smith. 

Magazine ad pages are usually used to build product brand awareness, but the use of coupons has grown as advertisers spend more on promotions that will encourage direct sales of goods. 

Last year, News Corp. 's TV Guide became the first consumer magazine to carry a regular coupon section, similar to those multiple-paged sections carried traditionally in Sunday newspapers.
TV Guide executives asked ABC to provide the service after its advertisers and coupon suppliers suggested the magazine get a third party verification of its coupon handling procedure. 

TV Guide will be the first magazine to be examined under the new procedure.
ABC auditors will verify records of receipts of coupon sections from coupon printers, insertion of coupon sections and binding of copies, distribution to wholesalers, and destruction of overrun coupons. 

Coupon verification is widely supported in the newspaper industry.
ABC has offered the Coupon Distribution Verification Service to newspapers since 1979.
Currently, 161 newspapers participate in the program, representing about 54% of the total newspaper circulation in North America.
The program also includes 38 advertisers and 18 advertising agencies. 

