.START 

With big-time investors dominating the bankruptcy proceedings, playing the phoenix game is getting riskier. 

Although it's a popular sport for small investors, buying shares of companies that go bust always has been a throw of the dice.
After bidding up a company's stock, speculators sometimes get wiped out as the company issues new shares to pay creditors.
Now, as more professional players fight over the spoils, there may be even less value left for reorganized companies' long-term shareholders, some bankruptcy players say. 

Last week, cash-squeezed Braniff threw in the towel after piling on debt to expand ambitiously and repeating some of the mistakes that led to its earlier spell in bankruptcy court, ending in 1984. 

Braniff stock, which traded this year as high as 7 1/2, touched a low of only 1/2 last week.
But it soon began rebounding as speculators moved in to play Braniff's second bankruptcy-law filing.
Yesterday, the stock closed at 2 1/2 bid, up 1/8. 

"You had the same kind of rebound after the original Braniff filing" in 1982, and those earlier risk-takers were "tremendously rewarded," says Julius Maldutis, a Salomon Brothers analyst. 

But he doesn't recommend Braniff stock now for conservative investors. "Travel agents, twice burned, may not book again" on Braniff, he says.
Moreover, to survive, Braniff needs a big cash infusion, but no one knows if it will get one.
Unlike Eastern Airlines, which also is in bankruptcy court, Braniff has few valuable assets to sell, Mr. Maldutis says. 

Meanwhile, in bankruptcy court Braniff might face demands from aggressive investors, making it hard for the carrier to get into really good shape. 

In theory, a Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law filing is designed to protect a company from creditors, so it can build a sturdy financial structure.
But increasingly, companies such as Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel, Revco D.S. and Todd Shipyards must deal with professional investors who typically buy their debt claims from original holders, then push for a bigger payback. 

As a result, some reorganized companies are expected to emerge from bankruptcy court with too little cash and too much debt, making them vulnerable to setbacks.
While such companies often rebound for a while, allowing traders to cash out -- Todd stock has lately been a winner -- long-term investors could get bagged in the end. 

Vulture investors sometimes forget "the body's got to be alive, before you start fighting over it," says Paul Debban of Seidler Amdec Securities in Los Angeles, who trades distressed companies' securities. 

Currently, vulture investors are buying Braniff's 15% bonds for about 25 cents on the dollar, says Jim Bennett of R.D. Smith & Co. in New York.
Drexel Burnham Lambert sold $100 million of the Braniff bonds privately last April at 100 cents on the dollar. "They might be interesting at these levels," Mr. Bennett says. 

The ideal bankruptcy strategy for any company: Wipe out as much debt as possible, raise new cash and issue a ton of stock to creditors, says bankruptcy specialist David Schulte of Chilmark Partners in Chicago.
Chrysler did that with help from Uncle Sam's loan guarantees, and everybody who owned the stock made money. 

But creditors hate to give up their claims.
While in bankruptcy court, Global Marine slashed debt by more than half and got a four-year break from cash interest payments.
But the oil-driller still is saddled with more than $400 million in debt, and might be too leveraged for its highly cyclical and depressed business, investors say.
Meanwhile, Global stock, after trading as low as 1/4 this year, was at 2 yesterday. 

Todd's recently-filed reorganization plan looks like a good deal, but would leave shareholders with a smaller, less promising company.
Todd plans to sell its Aro Corp. shipbuilding unit, then pay all its debts in full -- without diluting shareholders by issuing new stock. "That's pretty unique in bankruptcy," says investor Ron LaBow of Neuberger & Berman, a big Todd creditor.
However, he says Todd shareholders face "a different kind of dilution:" They'll forfeit future profit from the Aro subsidiary. 

The 4 1/2-year fight over steelmaker Wheeling shows the pressures that debtors can face in a reorganization.
Some Wheeling creditors want to be paid mostly in cash, perhaps forcing Wheeling to borrow money for operations.
But "we want to keep $50 million for working capital and as a cushion" against shocks, says Sean Mathis, Wheeling's financial adviser. 

Braniff isn't the first company to make two trips to bankruptcy court because of turbulent industry conditions.
In this decade, that fate has been shared by: silversmith Towle Manufacturing; TransAmerican Natural Gas, formerly GHR Energy; New American Shoe, formerly Amfesco Industries; apparel-maker and retailer HRT Industries, formerly Hartfield-Zodys, and discount-store chain Cook United, which finally liquidated. 

