.START 

Former astronaut William A. Anders's orbit keeps crossing that of General Dynamics Corp. 

As a young Air Force officer, he was assigned to oversee two General Dynamics test reactors as part of the government's now-defunct nuclear-powered aircraft project.
Later, he flew the company's F-16 as a fighter pilot.
In his current job, supervising the majority of Textron Inc. 's defense-products operations, he has supplied GD -- as it's known among Pentagon brass and Wall Street's suspender set -- with parts for planes and tanks. 

Last week, the 55-year-old was tapped as the next chairman and chief executive officer of General Dynamics, the nation's No. 2 military contractor. "I guess it was in the stars," Mr. Anders says. 

He will join the St. Louis company at the beginning of the new year as its vice chairman and is expected to ease into the top positions Jan. 1, 1991.
He succeeds Stanley C. Pace, 68, who was brought to General Dynamics nearly four years ago from TRW Inc. with the aim of cleaning up the company's image after the Pentagon procurement scandals of the mid-1980s and stabilizing its core businesses.
Most observers believe he has accomplished those things. 

Now it will be up to Mr. Anders to make the company really take off.
Faced with shrinking defense budgets and rapprochement with Moscow, it won't be easy. "To even hold your own in a declining industry is tough," says Jerry Cantwell, director of business planning at General Dynamics until 1984 and now an aerospace analyst at Wertheim Schroder & Co. 

But Mr. Pace insists he is leaving Mr. Anders with a chance to manage significant growth at General Dynamics, which counts in its annual revenue of nearly $10 billion an unusually broad range of prime contracts for weapons based at sea, on land and in the air.
Besides such staples as the F-16 Fighting Falcon, sales of which are expected to extend into the late 1990s, "an outstanding mix of new programs to build on for the future" will pass to his successor, Mr. Pace maintains. 

In fact, unlike other Pentagon contractors, General Dynamics has resisted the temptation to diversify outside the military sector.
It has instead pushed ahead with capital spending, reinvesting in its main product lines.
And its five-year compounded growth rate of 23% for research and development is among the highest in the industry. 

If everything works out, says Mr. Cantwell, General Dynamics "could emerge as the nation's premier fighter maker," still building F-16s and half the Navy's A-12 (along with McDonnell Douglas Corp.), and possibly a third of the Air Force's next-generation tactical fighter.
In that competition, it is working with Lockheed Corp., the team leader, and Boeing Co. 

Should funding get squeezed or technical problems arise, however, the landscape would look far more desolate.
For instance, even if the company wins the much-coveted tactical fighter contract, "it would be a hollow victory if they lose the battle in Congress for the bucks," Mr. Cantwell says. "And let's face it, the dollars are going to be harder and harder to come by." 

It is General Dynamics' hope that few managers are better prepared to grab what's out there than Mr. Anders. 

Mr. Pace says he first looked inside the company for a successor.
The retirement of Herbert Rogers, president and chief operating officer, was already scheduled, but there were several other promising candidates.
Among those who are thought to have led his list are Ralph E. Hawes, executive vice president for missiles and electronics, and Charles A. Anderson, general manager of General Dynamics' Fort Worth, Texas, military aircraft division. 

By selecting Mr. Anders, though, he went for a candidate with a broad background that on paper offers all the right stuff for the head of an international arms manufacturer. 

After serving on Apollo 8, the first manned trip to the moon, he was named executive secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. "I know how the back halls of the White House and Congress work," he says. 

In 1973, he became chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission and, later, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
But the role of regulator didn't suit him. 

"Being an umpire is not my bag," Mr. Anders says. "I'd rather be a player." He went to Norway in 1976 as U.S. ambassador -- a move that provided exposure to the global business scene, which is becoming increasingly important to General Dynamics as it joins with Japan to design the FSX fighter and looks to sell the M-1 tank and other goods abroad. 

From his five years at Textron and an earlier stint as a General Electric Co. manager, he also knows firsthand the scrutiny that defense contractors are under now.
Textron's Bell Helicopter unit was investigated last year by a federal grand jury and the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations for allegedly overcharging the Army.
Bell eventually settled with the Justice Department for $86 million.
In addition, Mr. Anders points out that he was accused by former Navy Secretary John Lehman of once being "an $800 screwdriver guy." 

In both cases, Mr. Anders contends, the government's outmoded and inefficient procurement and accounting system were to blame for the perception that a fraud had occurred. "I will assert that bascially most of that was smoke," Mr. Anders says. "There was no fire." 

Mr. Anders adds that 99% of the Pentagon's contractors are honest and offer the government "a good deal." And while he intends to make sure his work force doesn't join the other 1%, "even in the monasteries, some of the monks are probably misbehaving," he says. 

But Mr. Anders's experience as an astronaut could be the most useful to him and his new company.
Although he says he ended his career in space because "I didn't want to turn into a professional handshaker and autographer," the years of public exposure he received as part of the Apollo program have made him something of a natural salesman. 

He is, unlike many corporate chiefs, at ease with the media.
He speaks with exuberance, uttering words such as "gee whiz" and "whiz-bang." Still an active pilot, sailor and scuba diver, he portrays himself as a dashing adventurer. 

"I have an explorer's instinct," Mr. Anders says. "I'm always trying to see what's on the other side of the hill." 

