.START 

After 29 years and seven months in exile, Sam Nujoma, the gray-bearded president of the South West Africa People's Organization, hit the ground running when he returned home yesterday. 

He hastily kissed the tarmac at Windhoek airport and then gave his mother a quick hug.
He proceeded briskly through a reception line of party officials and old friends, and he barely had time to tell the news media "I am happy to be back home" before one of his bodyguards tugged his elbow and said "Comrade, let's move." 

Then he was gone, disappearing in an official motorcade that rolled past a mile-long line of supporters outside the airport. 

Not only does the 60-year-old Mr. Nujoma have a lot of catching up to do, he must also move quickly to keep a step ahead of those who have tried so long to keep him from coming back. 

Mr. Nujoma, who led Swapo's 23-year guerrilla war against South African control of Namibia, returned from his exile in Angola amid a number of anonymous death threats that have cast an ominous shadow over the United Nations-monitored Namibian-independence process, which is scheduled to culminate in elections in early November.
Two days earlier, Anton Lubowski, a high-ranking Swapo official who had also been threatened in the past, was assassinated outside his home. 

"If something happens to our president, we won't have an election," warns Hage Geingob, who is heading Swapo's election campaign. "This should have been the happiest day of the Namibian people.
Instead, there are mixed feelings of fear and joy." 

Those mixed emotions are being exacerbated by an election campaign that is proving to be as divisive as the long years of fighting.
About a dozen other political parties are campaigning to prevent Swapo, which favors a socialist and centralized government, from getting the two-thirds vote it needs to control the writing of independent Namibia's constitution.
Also, Swapo's image as a national liberation movement has been tainted by horrific tales of torture and imprisonment told by returning exiles who were accused by Swapo of being South African spies.
Anti-Swapo posters with drawings of torture scenes are appearing on telephone poles around the country.
In addition, leaflets distributed during the welcoming ceremonies hinted of a split between Swapo's exiled leadership and those leaders who remained in the country. 

Sitting in front of the red, green and blue Swapo flag in the backyard of his new home -- a spacious split-level house on a hill in the black township of Katutura outside Windhoek -- Mr. Nujoma said bitter memories of the past two decades of fighting "must be buried forever." 

While repeating the anti-South African invective that characterized his exile oratory, Mr. Nujoma also appealed for reconciliation inside Namibia. "If we continue digging up the old pages of our history, we won't achieve anything," he said. 

As he spoke, car horns blared in the streets of Katutura, which were jammed with Swapo supporters trying to catch a glimpse of their returning leader.
Many of them were born after Mr. Nujoma went into exile and know him only from pictures, like those printed on the party's ceremonial dresses and shirts on which the slogan "Long live Nujoma" encircles his smiling face. 

But that prospect is up to the South Africans, as Namibia's administrator-general, who is appointed by Pretoria, remains in control of the country's police until the day of independence. "The South Africans have to protect us," says Mr. Geingob with a wry smile. "We're fighting an election now, not a war." 

