.START 

On June 4, after the Chinese government began to massacre students in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, ABC dispatched a television crew to Henry Kissinger's weekend home in Kent, Conn., for a live interview with the former secretary of state, who ABC says enjoyed a "unique relationship" with the network. 

"We had first call on his services for breaking news events," explains Elise Adde, director of news information for ABC, which paid the 66-year-old Mr. Kissinger a fee (she won't say how much) for his services. 

"So what should America do, Dr. Kissinger?" anchorman Peter Jennings asked.
Should the U.S. impose military sanctions, cut off military aid? 

"I wouldn't do any sanctions," Mr. Kissinger replied, stressing the importance of the relationship between the U.S. and the Chinese regime. 

A month later, Mr. Kissinger, who writes a newspaper column for the Los Angeles Times Syndicate, devoted one of his pieces to praising Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping for his economic reforms. "No government in the world," he wrote, "would have tolerated having the main square of its capital occupied for eight weeks." 

Most TV viewers and readers of his column probably don't know that Mr. Kissinger has unique business ties to the Deng regime -- connections that had him on the verge of earning hundreds of thousands of dollars from a limited partnership set up to engage in joint business dealings with a ministry of the Chinese government.
The arrangement is legal and, in itself, proper.
Nonetheless, it has elicited criticism. 

ABC News was interested to learn from a reporter of Mr. Kissinger's extensive business ties to China. "If I knew then what I know now, I would not have wanted him on that broadcast, plain and simple," Mr. Jennings said yesterday afternoon. "And I think my management would have understood that perfectly." (On Wednesday, Mr. Kissinger was elected to the board of CBS Inc. and terminated his seven-year stint as a commentator for ABC.) 

Additionally, Kissinger Associates, a company founded in 1982, does lucrative consulting work for several businesses seeking counsel on how to conduct themselves overseas.
Mr. Kissinger says that 8% of the revenue of Kissinger Associates, and of a subsidiary called Kent Associates, comes from clients wanting help or advice in dealing with China. 

Mr. Kissinger won't divulge the revenue of the two companies, but it clearly is substantial.
Lawrence S. Eagleburger, currently deputy secretary of state, said in a public financial disclosure report that as an employee of Kissinger Associates last year he received $916,989 working for Mr. Kissinger's two companies, 28% of which was severance pay.
One client, American Express, has said it paid Mr. Kissinger and Kissinger Associates $445,000 last year, most of it for business advice. 

Mr. Kissinger, who opened U.S. diplomatic ties to China in 1971 at the behest of President Nixon, has kept his business activities secret, going so far as to require his clients to declare in writing that they won't make public his consulting arrangements. 

He is hardly the only former government official to engage in well-paying consulting work at the same time he expresses publicly his opinions on policy.
But Mr. Kissinger's stature and prominence make him uniquely influential.
And a number of China watchers in the U.S. think it's possible the views of Henry Kissinger the commentator are influenced by the deals of Henry Kissinger the businessman. "If you're going to do scholarly comment and if you're doing client work, you shouldn't do both at the same time," says Roger A. Brooks, the director of Asian studies for the conservative Heritage Foundation in Washington. 

Adds Harry Harding, a China expert at the Brookings Institution: "The question is whether his work introduces a bias into his analysis." 

It's a controversy that Mr. Kissinger says he finds "painful" and "outrageous." 

"What other former secretary of state has been submitted to this scrutiny?" he asks during an interview in which he has has agreed to answer certain questions about his China business connections. "Whatever we did, we did the hard way," he says, asserting that he has built most of his commercial ties from relationships that were established long after he left government in 1977. 

Mr. Kissinger's interests include a limited partnership called China Ventures.
It was established in Delaware to pool $75 million raised from U.S.investors for joint ventures with China International Trust & Investment Corp. (CITIC), the merchantbanking arm of the Chinese government.
The fund -- currently in abeyance because of the tumult in China -- would be directed, for a fee, by a general partner aided by a board of limited partners. (Mr.
Kissinger was designated chairman of the board and chief executive officer of the general partnership, with executive responsibility for managing its affairs.) It would invest in projects that "must enjoy the unquestioned support of the relevant PRC {People's Republic of China} authorities," according to an offering memorandum. 

Another of Mr. Kissinger's personal ties is the American-China Society, a private organization formed in 1987 by Mr. Kissinger after Han Xu, then China's ambassador to the U.S., suggested to a number of people that China needed a "lobby" to focus its support in the U.S. "I told him that was absurd, and we haven't done it," says Mr. Kissinger, who says the American-China Society was formed from a number of prominent people to "promote better relations between China and the U.S." It is run out of Kissinger Associates' Park Avenue office in New York and has held luncheons and dinners for a number of visiting Chinese officials. 

It's hard to tell at times where such cultural activities end and Mr. Kissinger's business interests begin.
Last July, for example, he led a delegation of U.S. businessmen to Beijing on behalf of the American-China Society.
Three of 13 executives on the trip were clients of Kissinger Associates.
In China, their host was Rong Yiren, the chairman of CITIC, the Chinese government agency then in the midst of negotiating the deal with China Ventures. 

"We had no financial benefit from those meetings," says Mr. Kissinger, who says they were held at China's request to learn more about the problems of U.S. businessmen in the People's Republic. 

Mr. Kissinger adds that his public comments about China represent his sense of what is best for the U.S. national interest.
And his conversations with Chinese officials, he says, are similarly motivated. "The idea that I would take a public position in order to curry favor with the Chinese government for clients is outrageous." 

Which is not to say that his efforts aren't helpful to commercial clients. "He is a hired door opener," asserts Rence Lee, a Washington consultant and China expert who performs risk-analysis for corporations that do business abroad.
But entree at the top, Mr. Lee says, often fails to help U.S. companies in China because many still are thwarted at lower levels of the Chinese bureaucracy. 

Mr. Kissinger's influence does appear to have helped out ITT Corp. According to James Gallagher, ITT's director of public relations, the company was unable to get permission for a board meeting in Beijing in June until it received an introduction through Kissinger Associates to Chen Ding, the New York representative of CITIC. CITIC thereupon agreed to play host to the ITT officials. 

"The introduction they made wound up being important and beneficial to the trip," says Mr. Gallagher. (ITT no longer does business with Kissinger Associates, for reasons it won't discuss.) 

"Door opening is not our principal activity," Mr. Kissinger says. "It is in fact something we very rarely do, unless it's this ITT thing, which I don't consider door opening.
They could have done it themselves; it would have just been more cumbersome." 

Mr. Kissinger's supporters say that, as a commentator, he approaches China much as he has approached other countries during his career as an analyst -- and as he did while Mr. Nixon's secretary of state. "His sense is that you have to be restrained in intervening with the internal affairs of another country, and you also have to be aware of long-term geopolitical interests that may be at risk," says Winston Lord, a former Kissinger protege who was ambassador to China from 1985 to 1989. 

As ambassador, Mr. Lord sat in on the meetings Mr. Kissinger and his entourage of visiting businessmen had with Chinese officials last year.
Mr. Lord says no specific business deals were discussed.
Mr. Lord adds that although he doesn't fully share Mr. Kissinger's sympathy for the Deng regime, he is convinced that Mr. Kissinger's views aren't influenced by money: "If he didn't have a cent of commercial interest in China, he would have taken the same position." 

Mr. Kissinger hasn't played down the potential commercial value of his years of dealings in China.
As he states in the offering memorandum for the China Ventures partnership, "The General Partner believes that the international business, financial and political knowledge and experience of the General Partner give the Partnership a unique advantage in exploring such investment opportunities and assessing their strategic, financial and technological viability." 

Bankrolled by a number of prominent U.S. businessmen, some of whom have also been advised by Mr. Kissinger vis-a-vis China, China Ventures was supposed to get under way on June 15 but did not.
And after weighing the unrest in China, the participants agreed in July to shelve the project. 

"I would say, to put it mildly, that the thing is on hold," says William E. Simon, the former secretary of the Treasury, currently a board member of China Ventures. "It {Tiananmen Square} changed the whole game." The board includes a number of prominent business executives who have had dealings in China, such as Maurice R. Greenberg, president of American International Corp.; Anthony J.F. O'Reilly, president of H.J. Heinz Co.: James D. Robinson III, chief executive officer of American Express; and Donald R. Keough, president of Coca-Cola Co. None would comment on Mr. Kissinger's China dealings. 

As for Mr. Kissinger, he says his China contacts will continue but will be more subdued.
He says he has informed the Chinese government that he won't accept its invitation to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the People's Republic next month.
He had been scheduled to give a speech to 100 Western businessmen in Beijing.
Instead, he says, he will go there in November for private meetings with officials. 

