.START 

France unveiled reductions in the expensive charges that companies here must pay to cover their employees' government-provided social benefits.
But the cuts, which take place next year, are even shallower than the limited cuts their architects had initially planned. 

The goal had been to cut the 10% unemployment rate by reducing the cost to companies of hiring people.
The government's so-called "social charges," for health care, retirement and other programs, cost companies more than 40% on top of each salary, greatly increasing the expense of each new hire.
On top of that, employees must pay 18% of their salaries in social charges. 

But while the Socialist-led government would like to cut those charges, it concluded this year that it simply can't afford a significant across-the-board cut.
The social charges represent 40% of French government revenue, by far its largest single revenue source, much larger than income and value-added taxes. 

"People realized that a significant reduction in hiring costs would cost the government 15 billion francs Õ$2.24 billionå to 20 billion francs," explains one official. "We would have had to finance it out of the budget, and there were just too many other things we needed to finance this year.
We hope to do it next year." 

The result is that the government is rejiggering some of the assessment methods for social charges and adopting some new tax credits, but avoiding a major shift in policy.
It will streamline an unwieldy system that assessed different industries at different rates for a family subsidy program.
That will save companies 3.7 billion francs.
In 1991, it intends to do something similar for its on-the-job accident fund. 

It will offer tax credits to companies that reduce their work weeks, meaning they hire more employees to maintain production levels. 

On the spending side, the government is boosting subsidies for programs to encourage part-time work and the hiring of long-term unemployed people. 

Officials reiterated plans to boost corporate tax credits for research, and to cut corporate income-tax rates on re-invested profit to 37% from 39%. (The tax rate on profit that isn't re-invested remains at 42%.) These measures are mainly intended to boost business investment, but to make them more palatable to its Socialist supporters the government is billing them as job-boosters too. 

