.START 

British Petroleum Co., in a sweeping shake-up of its world-wide exploration business, eliminated 1,700 jobs and agreed to sell $1.31 billion of oil and gas assets to Oryx Energy Co. of the U.S. 

The wholesale restructuring by Britain's biggest company reflects declining production at its major fields in the North Sea and Alaska's Prudhoe Bay.
BP, like other oil producers, also faces shrinking profit margins amid volatile oil prices, rising environmental costs and higher taxes. 

In this more hostile operating environment, "you need to be smaller -- to cut back and focus your efforts," said John Toalster, an oil-industry analyst at London brokers Hoare Govett. "It is a major cutback and a major withdrawal from certain areas." Other oil producers haven't pursued a similar strategy, however. 

The acquisition by Oryx -- the largest so far this year for oil properties -- is the biggest move in the company's short history and is its first move outside the U.S. Oryx, based in Dallas, was spun off from Sun Co. as a domestic exploration and production company last November and is the nation's largest independent oil company. 

The sale by BP and the staff cuts, reducing overhead by more than $150 million a year, will free up cash and lower BP's relatively high level of debt.
Company officials said the moves will help finance expansion into riskier, new exploration areas. "It is vital that we explore more aggressively but selectively for new reserves" in places that "until recently, were inaccessible to the oil majors," said John Browne, chief executive officer of BP Exploration, a subsidiary.
But industry analysts believe the streamlining will prepare BP, already the biggest oil producer in the U.S., for a major U.S. acquisition soon after Deputy Chairman Robert Horton assumes the top post next March.
Mr. Browne, chief architect of the restructuring, worked closely with Mr. Horton in turning around Standard Oil Co. of Cleveland.
In 1987, BP paid $7.9 billion for the 45% of Standard stock it didn't already own.
Oil analysts believe its next U.S. takeover possibilities include Los Angeles-based Unocal Corp., Phillips Petroleum Co. of Bartlesville, Okla., and New York-based Amerada Hess Corp. 

Under the agreement, Oryx would receive about 9% of BP's production fields and exploration acreage in the North Sea -- representing about two-thirds of the assets being sold.
The U.K. oil giant owns a small proportion of many of these fields but prefers to be a majority holder.
BP acquired some fields through its #2.5 billion (US$3.9 billion) purchase of small North Sea oil producer Britoil PLC last year.
It is offering to sell about 12% of former Britoil assets. 

Other properties include the company's entire oil-and-gas assets in Dubai, Gabon and Italy plus certain interests in Ecuador, Columbia and Indonesia.
BP said the sale would involve reserves of about 367 million barrels of oil, at an equivalent barrel price of $3.60. 

The oil giant has attracted a relatively good price for its assets, analysts said, because they offer Oryx a major entry into international exploration and production.
Oryx gets "a wide-ranging production base in one fell swoop," said Jeremy Hudson, an oil analyst at Shearson Lehman Securities in London. 

But the accord prompted Moody's Investors Service Inc. to place Oryx's debt rating under review for possible downgrade.
Oryx has indicated the asset purchase would be substantially financed by debt, the rating agency said.
About $1 billion of debt is affected by Moody's review.
Oryx anticipates assets sales and reduced capital spending to reduce its debt. 

Both the sale and the restructuring, which includes a reorganized management structure, "is a 'back-to-basics' strategy" for BP, Mr. Browne said at a news conference yesterday.
The company now will be able "to make sure we are spending enough money on 'frontier' exploration," increasing such expenditures by 50%.
He said BP now spends about $350 million of its $800 million annual exploration efforts world-wide in "frontier" areas such as Vietnam, Ethiopia and Korea. 

In the past, BP Exploration hasn't invested much in such areas, fearing it might spend a lot and discover little oil and gas.
But "it's what BP has to do {now} in order to assure reserve replacements in the 1990s" -- and reduce the company's reliance on Alaska and the North Sea area, said Carol Bell, an oil-industry analyst at London brokerage UBS Phillips & Drew. 

BP must take the risk of pursuing frontier areas "in order to correct what may be a fairly sharp decline curve in their major sources of production," concurred William Brown, an oil analyst at Kidder, Peabody & Co. in New York. 

Hoare Govett analyst Mr. Toalster views BP's chancy new exploration push and expected major U.S. takeover as part of Mr. Horton's aim to shift BP into second place from a precarious third among world oil producers. "The whole thing is moving BP onto a higher risk plane," he said. 

While the asset sale would lower BP's level of debt, "we have no present plans" for a U.S. acquisition, Mr. Browne said.
Following this disposal, BP will have shed about $6.2 billion of assets so far this year.
It currently has most of its coal assets and operations on the block for a sale that analysts say could fetch an additional $500 million.
BP's nutrition business, which includes Purina pet food, also could come up for grabs. 

The jobs BP is eliminating account for 17% of BP Exploration's 10,500 employees and include 280 of its 3,000 U.S. staffers.
At his news conference, Mr. Browne said the shake-up ranges from top management to support staff.
Shortly afterward, W. John Saint announced his retirement as BP Exploration's chief executive for Europe; his successor is David Harding, another BP Exploration executive. 

Caleb Solomon in Houston contributed to this article. 

