.START 

Some novels concentrate on the most private places in the heart.
Others sprawl like diaries, to take in as much as possible of the public world around them.
The British writer Margaret Drabble, author of 10 previous novels, has been moving throughout her career from a more private, self-contained style to an outward-looking, open-ended approach. 

"A Natural Curiosity" (Viking, 309 pages, $19.95), is, according to Ms. Drabble, an unplanned sequel to her previous novel, "The Radiant Way," which introduced Alix, Liz and Esther.
All are bright, lower-middle-class girls who met at Cambridge in the 1950s.
Beneficiaries of Britain's postwar social reforms, they awaken rudely in 1984 to a world they never quite foresaw: The onset of their own middle age and the radical changes under way in Thatcherian England. 

"A Natural Curiosity" takes up their stories just three years later, yet if Ms. Drabble's style and approach are unchanged, a subtle shift in tone and attitude has occurred.
The shock has worn off.
Even though the characters still disapprove of the changes, they take them as given.
Dismay and bewilderment have been replaced by a cautious pragmatism. 

This makes "A Natural Curiosity" a stronger novel than its predecessor.
The contrast between England then and now that Ms. Drabble spent so much time establishing in "The Radiant Way" has now become implicit.
Alix, flailing against a "law-and-order" climate, befriends an imprisoned serial killer.
Liz, the psychotherapist, appears on a television panel, provoking controversy merely by casting a cool eye on the hot topic of child abuse. 

Ms. Drabble herself is always on hand to comment on her characters' commentary.
Her narrative intrusions may remind some readers of Fay Weldon's acerbic asides, though Ms. Drabble is less biting, and has a greater ability to see life steadily and whole.
Her irony opens up questions rather than sealing off discussion: "Alix," she notes, "who extends sympathy . . . to criminals and murderers, finds it very hard to listen with patience to the views of a Cliff Harper {Liz's Tory brother-in-law}.
This is one of her more serious limitations, a limitation of which she is, seriously, unaware." 

"Life," the narrator, muses, "is more like an old-fashioned melodramatic novel than we care to know." Among the turns in store for Ms. Drabble's readers are the suicide of a despondent entrepreneur, Alix's pursuit of the serial killer's mother (]), and the plans of Liz's ex-husband to find out what has become of a colleague held hostage -- and presumed dead -- in the Middle East.
I was not surprised to learn that Ms. Drabble plans a sequel describing the experiences of another character who has been traveling in Cambodia. 

Intriguing as these developments sound, the heart of this novel is not in its plots, but in Ms. Drabble's effortless evocation of the atmosphere of Britain in the late 20th century, whether she is describing the end of a dinner party or the beginning of a love affair.
The narration continually locates itself in time by means of references to Britain's distant, yet still palpable, past. "Raspberry vinegar," we are told, ". . . has reached the north of England, as fish sauce reached the outposts of the Roman Empire." 

The spirit that animates this informal, informative chronicle, reaching out to include the public and the private, the trivial and the timely, is named in the title: It's the natural curiosity that keeps us tuned in to the world, no matter how bad the news, that keeps us turning the pages of our personal lives as if life were indeed, an old-fashioned melodrama. 

Molly Keane's "Queen Lear" (Dutton/ Obelisk, 233 pages, $17.95) is as concentrated and intense as Ms. Drabble's novel is diffuse and discursive.
The octogenarian Ms. Keane began writing fiction in the 1930s under the pen name M.J. Farrell.
She also wrote for the theater.
With the death of her husband and the need to raise her children, she suspended her career, starting up again only in her 60s, this time under her real name.
Two finely wrought novels -- "Good Behaviour" and "Time After Time," depicting the self-contained, fast-vanishing world of the Anglo-Irish ascendancy -- appeared in the early 1980s. 

"Queen Lear" returns to that same small world of hard-riding country gentlemen, as seen through the eyes of Nicandra Forester, who is 8 years old as the novel opens in 1904.
Although the story takes her through World War I, the Jazz Age, the "flying years of the thirties," and the shadow of World War II, events in the greater world are distant and muffled.
War looms small: The pattern of a special teapot takes on heightened significance. 

Ms. Keane focuses on a single sensibility: Nicandra's.
From childhood on, her overwhelming desire has been to love and give.
Yet, at every turn, she is thwarted: by her mother (who mysteriously disappears the same day as the handsome stableman), by her aloof father, by her flighty pet hen, and by the shallow man she eventually marries.
It's a tragic theme for a comedy of mistaken perceptions, and a comic theme for the tragedy that finally unfolds. 

Ms. Rubin is a free-lance writer living in Los Angeles. 

