.START 

U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills blasted European subsidies of farms and businesses, promising to unveil a U.S. plan later this year that would pare government handouts world-wide. 

In a speech to business executives and economists here, she cited shipyards, farms and steel companies as leading recipients of European government largesse.
Mrs. Hills said the U.S. plans to attack the subsidy habit through the current negotiating round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which she called "our best chance to control what may soon be uncontrollable." 

The trade negotiator didn't exclude the U.S. from the stinging critique, but she made it clear that she believes European subsidy troughs are deeper.
She estimated that Europeans last year spent nearly $120 billion to support agriculture, compared with about $75 billion in the U.S. 

Mrs. Hills reckoned that the European Community "squandered" an additional $50 billion in subsidies to its steelmakers, shipbuilders and manufacturers. 

Meanwhile, Mrs. Hills told reporters that she sent a deputy to hammer the West German government for its aid to Airbus Industrie, the European consortium aircraft builder.
Specifically, she assailed the German policy of protecting its Airbus participants against losses from exchange-rate fluctuations between the dollar and the mark. "Of all subsidies, that which would destroy the price mechanism in trade is the most egregious," she said. 

Participants in the Airbus consortium include Aerospatiale of France, Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm G.m.b.
H. of West Germany, British Aerospace PLC and Construcciones Aeronauticas S.A. of Spain. 

Hacking back Europe's subsidies will be a herculean task.
Earlier this year, Sir Leon Brittan, the European Community's commissioner for competition policy, said "uncontrolled state aids could be a real threat to the unity of the common market and to the system of free competition." 

Sir Leon pointed out that past government handouts have created overcapacity in the steel industry through subsidized construction of new plants that turned out to be unnecessary.
Aid to farms, railways, fisheries and coal industries have created similar distortions, he charged. 

However, EC officials mainly have fended off new subsidies so far, with little progress to show in dismantling the huge industrial subsidies that have long supported Europe's traditional industries. 

The U.S. negotiator expressed resolve. "We're trying to get an international agreement that all of us will stop paying farmers to grow crops and that we'll stop paying shipyards to build ships," Mrs. Hills said. "We mean to pull it off." 

Meanwhile, Mrs. Hills said the U.S. has yet to come up with a plan for one of its most protected, and politically powerful, industries -- the textile business.
Currently, industrialized countries like the U.S. use the so-called multifiber arrangement to shield their textile and clothing makers from cheap imports from the developing world.
The current GATT talks are aimed at slicing back those barriers and bringing textiles within the mainstream of GATT trading disciplines. 

The textile issue is highly sensitive poltically: U.S. and British textile firms are wary of a potential flood of imports from the Third World.
Meanwhile, developing countries might stymie progress on the rest of the GATT trade talks if they aren't given the chance to sell more apparel to industrialized countries. 

Mrs. Hills' speech, sponsored by the American Chamber of Commerce in London and the Royal Institute for International Affairs, was part of a five-day European tour designed to blunt what the U.S. considers anti-competitive or protectionist tendencies. 

In Paris, she attacked EC plans to limit U.S. television programming within the EC.
She also blasted the EC's local-content requirements for cars and office equipment.
Mrs. Hills' blitz through Europe -- and her sharp criticisms along the way -- signal a new phase in the U.S. attitude toward the EC's 1992 market integration. 

After some months of playing down the threat that the single market may adopt a fortress-like stance toward the rest of the world, the U.S. is again worried. 

"Of late, some provisions and directives give us pause," Mrs. Hills said. 

