.START 

On Aug. 22 the Mexican government privatized the country's largest air carrier, Mexicana de Aviacion, in an operation involving a capital injection of $140 million, which simultaneously reduced the government's share of total equity to 40%.
The government gradually will divest its remaining participation in the company.
The control of the airline was transferred to a private group made up of Mexican, U.S. (Chase Manhattan) and British investors who made the winning bid in the auctioning process that opened in July. 

Mexicana de Aviacion was one of the country's largest public enterprises.
This operation follows last year's privatization of Aeromexico, Mexico's second airline.
As control of the country's commercial airlines is transferred to the private sector, we will see two major effects: first, a permanent reduction of the fiscal resources channeled into commercial aviation by the state; and second, the promotion of a new development strategy in this sector -- which is of the utmost importance to Mexico's economy.
Both private groups in control of the airlines have announced ambitious expansion plans. 

The divestiture of non-priority and nonstrategic public enterprises is an essential element of President Carlos Salinas's plan to modernize Mexico's economy and attain the resumption of sustainable economic growth, accompanied by price stability.
Of the 1,155 public entities that existed in 1982, fewer than 392 currently remain in the public sector with an additional 185 in the process of transition.
Besides the national airlines, notable examples of enterprises that were privatized include the National Hotel Group, which is Mexico's largest five-star hotel chain, several large capital-goods groups, industrial concerns and 19 sugar mills. 

The privatization of public enterprises in Mexico has followed a closed auction procedure.
The sales agent, generally a bank, provides information about the companies to prospective clients, who then submit sealed bids.
Subsequently, the sales agent recommends a potential purchaser, based on the best offer.
The decision regarding the most appropriate buyer and form of sale is based on price criteria, the company's investment plans, employment policies, experience in the industry and export projects. 

Other large public enterprises have been closed or liquidated due to their lack of economic viability.
The best-known case is the large steel mill, Fundidora de Monterrey, which at the time of its closure in 1986 employed close to 8,000 workers.
A recent survey shows that approximately 95% of these workers have found an alternative source of employment in more dynamic sectors of the economy.
Today, an additional 181 firms are in the process of being removed from the public sector. 

Mexico's divestment program must be seen in the context of a larger, world-wide process.
Over the past few years, the world has witnessed broad deregulation and privatization efforts in both developed and developing countries (including centrally planned economies).
The pace and scope of the privatization process in different countries have been determined mostly by the way in which the public sector was formed.
In many cases, privatization has been a response to the need for fiscal austerity -- and a more efficient allocation of resources in the economy.
In some cases, short-run costs have been incurred, as in any structural adjustment program.
But the world has come to recognize that the long-term political and economic benefits of privatization projects outweigh the difficulties of temporary adjustment periods. 

The revenues from privatization in Mexico are currently estimated at $2.5 billion.
However, the net benefit for the public sector is much larger, because many enterprises operated at a loss.
As a result of the divestment process, no additional fiscal resources will be allocated to them.
In addition to the fiscal benefits, which allow the government to concentrate on its basic tasks of promoting economic prosperity and preserving civil liberties, the divestiture of state-owned companies fosters overall economic efficiency and increases employment opportunities in more efficient, private enterprises. 

Mexico's program to strengthen its public sector might be viewed as consisting of two stages.
The first, which corresponds to the process of divesting existing nonstrategic or non-priority state-owned companies, already has produced significant results.
The second stage consists of opening up new investment opportunities in some areas of the economy where different restrictions prevailed.
New programs will enable the private sector to invest in infrastructure projects, such as toll roads, bridges and hydroelectric dams.
Private investment will allow the refurbishment of the country's infrastructure, which is a necessary condition for the successful integration of Mexico into the world economy.
At the same time, it allows the government to concentrate on other areas such as education, health and social programs. 

Mexico's comprehensive privatization program simultaneously strengthens its public sector and generates new opportunities for foreign and private investment.
Our goal is to induce price-stabilized growth through increased efficiency, higher investment and broader private-sector participation in the economy. 

Mr. Ortiz is Mexico's undersecretary of finance. 

