.START 

Enthusiasm for the $32 billion European fighter aircraft program may be about to go into a tailspin. 

Warming East-West relations and tight government budgets could jeopardize the final stages of development of what was to be the next generation of fighter planes for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Western Europe. 

At the same time, a rift is growing between the partners of the European fighter consortium over the choice of radar, threatening to delay completion of the first planes beyond the 1996 target. 

"The program is being pushed further and further behind," says Ian Wild, an analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd Ltd., a London brokerage firm. 

The project grew out of a commitment by Britain, West Germany, Spain and Italy in April 1988 to develop a new fighter aircraft for the European NATO nations to replace the Tornado model by the late 1990s.
The fighter that results from the project will face competition on the export market from France's Rafale fighter and, later, from the U.S.'s advanced tactical fighter, which is planned to go into production in the next century.
But the European fighter is intended to be the aircraft of choice of the four nations developing it. 

The project has drawn many of Europe's biggest aerospace companies together to develop the body and engine of the plane.
Among the participants are British Aerospace PLC and Rolls-Royce PLC of Britain; Fiat S.p.
A.'s Fiat Aviazione unit and Aeritalia S.p.
A. of Italy; Sener Ingeniera y Sistemas S.A. and Construcciones Aeronauticas S.A. of Spain; and Messerschmitt-Bolkow Blohm G.m.b.
H. and MTU Motoren & Turbinen-Union Muenchen G.m.b.
H. of West Germany. 

Not all the pieces of the plane are fitting neatly together, however, and few decisions have been made on the most vital parts.
The most prominent battle is between Britain and West Germany over the choice of radar. 

Bonn is backing a group led by AEG Aktiengesellschaft AG of West Germany.
This group includes General Motors Corp. 's Hughes Aircraft subsidiary and the Marconi unit of General Electric Co. PLC of Britain (not related to General Electric Co. of the U.S.).
Bonn favors this group's MSD-200 radar system, based on a Hughes design, on the grounds that it is tried and tested technology. 

Britain, though, backs a radar system from a group led by Ferranti International Signal PLC of Britain.
Its partners are Siemens AG of West Germany, Inisel S.A. of Spain and Fiat.
The group's system is still on the drawing board, but some specialists say it would be easier to adapt for use in the West German air force's F-14 fighter aircraft. 

A decision on the radar has been expected for several months, but the four governments haven't yet acted.
The West German defense ministry recently threatened to use the AEG group's system for its own models of the European fighter if the Ferranti group wins the radar contract. 

The radar delays coincide with a growing feeling in the governments that they need to trim the wings of such defense projects to fit them inside tight budgets.
The mood to cut spending is further supported by thaws in NATO-Warsaw Pact relations. 

At the current arms control talks in Vienna, NATO has already pledged to cut combat aircraft by 15% this year if an agreement can be signed with the Warsaw Pact.
The U.S., meanwhile, has postponed plans to proceed immediately with its successor to the F-16 because of proposed cuts in the U.S. budget. 

"The issue comes down to money," says a defense industry analyst in London. "Politicians would like to avoid spending it if they can." 

The European fighter faces political obstacles in West Germany, where opposition Social Democrats have pledged to cancel the project if they win next year's general election.
Without the West Germans, analysts say, the fighter program loses some of its economies of scale. 

Still, a decision to cancel or slash the program isn't likely because of the impact it would have on member countries' aerospace industries, many analysts say. "This program can be postponed or prolonged, but it can't be eliminated," says Andrew Moravcsik, research fellow at Harvard University's Center for Science and International Affairs. "If the {European fighter} isn't built, those participating nations are out of the aircraft market.
You can't skip a generation and expect to be a major player in the future." 

France, once part of the European fighter group, left the program early.
Aviation specialists say the French withdrew because they weren't guaranteed a larger chunk of the work.
France is developing its own alternative to the joint fighter. 

