.START 

To get more attention this Christmas, K mart Corp. won't just run commercials touting great values in toys, clothes and appliances. 

The giant retailer is also spending big to produce two television shows, including a movie with Kenny Rogers and a special about Christmas entertaining with author Martha Stewart. 

The two projects represent the first fruits of a division that King World Productions Inc. formed a year ago June to develop and produce advertiser-sponsored television shows. 

King World, which earned its fame and fortune as a syndicator of shows produced by others, such as "Wheel of Fortune" and "Jeopardy," is becoming a producer itself.
Its first production effort was "Inside Edition," a tabloid-style syndicated show now in its second season. 

King World's newest mission is to become a significant provider of advertiser-bankrolled television specials, an expanding market.
In addition to the K mart projects, King World is developing a television movie based on the book "Free Fall" about an airplane near-disaster, which Kraft General Foods, a unit of Philip Morris Cos., is planning to sponsor as an NBC movie-of-the-week. 

"More and more advertisers are looking to create a big event, not just buy advertising spots," says Jeffrey Grant, president of the King World advertiser-programming division, who previously worked for production companies, including one devoted to advertiser-sponsored projects. 

Wall Street analysts see King World's move as contributing to its efforts to become a much broader-based entertainment company.
But the competition is getting tougher.
King World will be up against dozens of independent producers in Hollywood and divisions of the big Hollywood studios, as well as the growing number of advertising agencies jumping into the business of developing programs for advertisers. 

"King World will have a lot of competition, but you're as good as your ideas and nobody has a lock on that," says Douglas Ritter, corporate broadcast manager at AT&T, who has so far turned down the scripts King World has shown him. 

For advertisers, the price tag for these programs is high.
Clients must spend, for example, upward of $2.5 million to produce a TV movie, and then another $1 million or so to buy the time period from the network. 

But, says Mr. Grant, the advertiser gets to control the program surrounding its ads, and as the program's owner, may be able to recoup costs through syndication, with additional revenue generated by cassettes and foreign sales.
For its role, King World will generally receive "production fees, distribution fees and a piece of the back end {profit}," says Mr. Grant. 

Michael Wellman, a K mart marketing executive, says the retailer isn't necessarily expecting profit, but hopes the two programs become "classics" that can be shown year after year, and perhaps eventually sold as videocassettes. 

The Kenny Rogers movie, "Christmas in America: A Love Story," will air as a one-hour prime-time movie on NBC. "At Home With Martha Stewart -- Christmas" will air three times on the Lifetime cable channel, which has a heavily female audience. 

Both specials will be promoted in K mart stores and advertisements, where the season's theme will be "Christmas in America." Also, Martha Stewart is a K mart consultant and her special will feature dishes and silverware she helped design for the retailer. 

