.START 

Retail sales grew moderately last month, the government reported, driven by a surge in automobile buying that most analysts expect will stall this month. 

Sales rose 0.7% in August to $144.29 billion, according to a Commerce Department survey of retail establishments across the country.
But a 2.6% jump in car sales -- fueled by big end-of-model-year discounts and rebate offers -- accounted for most of the gain.
Without it, the government said, sales grew only 0.2%. 

"These figures are borderline abysmal," said Kenneth Mayland, chief economist at Society Corp., a bank holding company in Cleveland. "Now we know why Mr. Campeau is suffering," he added, referring to the recently reported financial troubles of Robert Campeau's Campeau Corp., which owns several chains of department stores. 

The government also said retail sales didn't increase in July as much as it initially estimated; based on new data, the department said sales grew 0.5% during the month rather than the 0.9% it initially reported. 

The government's monthly retail sales estimates are based on a relatively small sample of reports and frequently are revised substantially as more data are collected.
The numbers aren't adjusted to remove the effects of inflation.
They also exclude spending on services, which accounts for a large portion of consumer outlays. 

Nevertheless, Rosalind Wells, chief economist of the National Retail Merchants Association and president of a consumer research firm, concluded: "Overall, it still says to me that despite the talk of soft landings and soft takeoffs and all the jargon, underlying consumer spending is slow." 

Many analysts had expected larger gains in retail sales than August's rise.
Recently revised government economic statistics show that retail sales and overall consumer spending were stronger in the second quarter than initial data indicated. 

The financial markets read the report as a sign of weakness.
Stock prices fell and the dollar declined against major currencies. 

But the White House insisted that the retail-sales report shows that the nation's 82-month economic expansion, unprecedented in peacetime, continues.
Spokesman Marlin Fitzwater called the numbers "an indication of continued but slow growth." 

There are signs that the pace of retail sales could peter out.
On Wednesday, auto companies reported that their sales weakened in the first 10 days of September.
And with new models due out soon -- at prices from 5% to 8% higher -- most economists say car buying may continue to soften. 

Sales of other big-ticket items improved significantly last month, according to the report.
Furniture sales, a category that includes electronics and personal computers, climbed 1.6% after tumbling 2% in July.
Sales of hardware and building materials leaped 2.2% after dipping 0.2% the month before. 

"Lower interest rates and discount pricing have led to a rebound in spending on consumer durables," said William K. Mac-Reynolds, director of economic forecasting at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 

But sales of non-durable goods -- products such as clothing, food and chemicals, generally defined as having a usefulness of less than three years -- were weak in August.
Although clothing-store sales grew 1.1%, sales fell at restaurants, grocery stores, gas stations and general-merchandise department stores.
Some analysts speculated that people had cut back on various other purchases to put their money into new cars. 

