.START 

The names are as stately as granite: Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., Bankers Trust Co., Chase Manhattan Corp., Tomato Bank. 

Yes, Tomato Bank.
Since rechristening itself in April, the former Sanyo Sogo, a little-known regional bank, has grown plump with new deposits and nearly 50,000 new customers.
It's given away 100,000 cans of tomato juice and received record numbers of applicants for jobs as Tomato Ladies -- part-time employees who go door-to-door collecting deposits and promoting bank services.
The bank's passbooks and automatic teller machine cards are now decorated with the bank's bright-red, stylized tomato logo. 

Why the Tomato Bank?
Why not? 

"They've taken a ludicrous idea and generated enormous publicity," says J. Brian Waterhouse, an analyst at James Capel & Co. in Tokyo.
Deposits as of July 31 were up nearly 18% from a year earlier to 477.5 billion yen ($3.26 billion). 

Based in rural Okayama Prefecture, a region more famous for its muscat grapes than for tomatoes, Japan's 102nd-largest bank previously took its name from its location (Sanyo), as is common in Japan. 

A grape wasn't good enough for Tomato Bank President Kenji Yoshida, who dreamed up the name to attract retail customers.
As marketing gimmicks go, the tomato fulfills a Japanese fascination with small bright objects and foreign words.
Women find the tomato theme "cute." Mr. Yoshida thought the tomato was a good idea, he says, leaving it at that. 

After the name change, the bank's accounts by mail got over 1,000 customers, a third from Tokyo 400 miles away. 

Now the bank wants to plant the seeds of its success in Tokyo by opening a retail office here in November.
Tomato Bank is aiming for deposits of 770 billion yen by 1991, its 60th anniversary. 

The Tomato Bank hopes its successful theme will also allow it to sink roots elsewhere.
Once deposits in Japan grow to more than one trillion yen, the bank says, it may open offices overseas.
That could pit it for the first time against another bank using a fruit: New York already has the Apple Bank for Savings.
For now, though, the popularity of the tomato shows no signs of dying.
Declares bank spokesman Kozuo Fukuda, "The tomato effects are continuing." 

