.START 

Dow Chemical Co. boosted its quarterly dividend 22% and approved its first stock split in 13 years to reflect the surge in its earnings since 1987. 

The chemical, plastics, pharmaceutical and consumer products maker said it approved a 3-for-2 stock split and raised its quarterly dividend to 97.5 cents a share on a pre-split basis from 80 cents.
Dow said the quarterly dividend on split shares will be 65 cents a share.
Dow, which is based in Midland, Mich., last split its stock in May 1976. 

The cash dividend and the split are payable Oct. 30 to stock of record Sept. 29. 

"This stock split, combined with a second dividend increase this year, clearly illustrates management's confidence in the strength of Dow's long-term sustainable growth," said Enrique C. Falla, Dow financial vice president and chief financial officer. 

Analysts expected Dow to boost its dividend because the company has indicated it will pursue an aggressive dividend policy in the wake of several strong quarters.
The 22% increase was higher than most analysts expected. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Dow common shares closed at $101, up 25 cents. 

Dow has also taken steps recently to solidify its position in several industries through acquisitions or joint ventures.
Most recently, Dow agreed in July to acquire a majority stake in Marion Laboratories Inc., a Kansas City, Mo., pharmaceutical company.
Earlier this week, Dow signed an agreement to form a joint venture with United Technologies Corp. to develop plastic parts for the aerospace, automotive and defense industries. 

Leonard Bogner, an analyst with Prudential Bache Research, said Dow is playing catch-up with dividend payments that increased little during the company's lean years in the early 1980s.
But last year, Dow's net income nearly doubled and jumped another 30% in the first six months of this year. 

As a result of the aggressive dividend strategy, Mr. Bogner said he expects Dow's post-split annual dividend rate to increase twice in 1990 to $3.25 a share from an anticipated $2.60 a share by the end of this year. 

