.START 

As a teen-ager, Sergei Mironenko wanted to go to college.
That meant he had no choice but to join Komsomol, the Communist Party's youth organization. "It was impossible to get into university without being a member," he says. 

Now an artist in his late 20s, Mr. Mironenko has long since thrown away his membership card.
The once-powerful Komsomol is more form than substance, he says. "It does nothing for its members." 

For decades, Komsomol has been a cross between Big Brother and the Scouts, a giant organization that rammed Communist theory down the throats of Soviet youngsters while monopolizing all their group activities.
Like Mr. Mironenko, almost everyone between the ages of 14 and 28 joined, usually because their futures depended on it. 

But no more.
Komsomol -- like the rest of the Communist establishment in Mikhail Gorbachev's Russia -- is in the midst of a crisis and groping to find its way.
Over the past four years, membership in Komsomol has plunged to 36 million from 42 million.
The entire Lithuanian Komsomol just voted to leave the organization and set up its own youth movement. 

Komsomol officials have taken to debating each other over what to do.
At one extraordinarily candid meeting last month in Volzhsky, an industrial town near Volgograd, about 100 reform-minded officials showed up.
As one participant conceded privately, "The question is how to bury the corpse." 

Mr. Gorbachev's attempts to introduce elements of democracy in his country have turned once-mighty political and social monopolies into near-irrelevant institutions.
The country's labor unions have been discredited by the recent coal miners' strike, in which they played no role, while the Communist Party itself is wracked by internal feuding and under attack by the general public.
The plight of Komsomol is a window into this turmoil. 

"What is going on in Komsomol is going on everywhere," says Vadim Golovanov, a professor at the elite Komsomol Higher School in Moscow. "The main tendency in society now is to revise all old stereotypes.
The struggle against the monopoly of the Komsomol is the same as the struggle against the monopoly of the party." 

Political indoctrination in the Soviet Union starts early.
During their first year at school, children become Octobrists and wear the badge of Baby Lenin.
Three years later they don the red kerchiefs of the Pioneers, taking trips to summer camp and learning that Uncle Lenin likes boys and girls who clean their plates, the subject of one children's book.
At the age of 14, they become members of Komsomol. 

Membership has become such a formality that whole school classes are enrolled automatically.
Duties include sitting through dull political meetings once a month and waving flags at rallies.
Some members are pressed into work in the fields at harvest time. 

Komsomol bureaucrats do little to cater to their constituency.
Occasionally, they lay on a disco or visit to a movie for members.
But, says Marina Stepanova, a 20-year-old Muscovite, "It's ridiculous.
You can go to a film on your own.
You don't need Komsomol for that." 

It isn't surprising, then, that Komsomolskaya Pravda, the national youth newspaper, now receives a steady stream of letters from readers returning their membership cards in protest.
A typical one comes from Nikolai Smelov, a worker from Central Russia, who enclosed his son's card and a brief note complaining that, "collecting membership fees is the Komsomol's only occupation." 

For decades, the organization has been a carbon copy of the Communist Party, mouthing its rhetoric and blindly obeying its commands.
In return, ranking Komsomol members enjoy special privileges handed out by the party or paid for out of Komsomol's approximately $800 million in annual revenue.
The perks include access to restricted stores, big apartments and even chauffeur-driven cars.
Best of all, the officials can work their way up the system of "nomenklatura," through which the party allocates the nation's best jobs.
Komsomol's national leader, for example, is traditionally rewarded the post of ambassador to a Western country. 

"It's a kind of surrealistic game," says Konstantin Dludsky, a Komsomol official from Arkhangelsk. "You don't believe in it, but you do it." 

Mr. Dludsky was one of the Komsomol officials who discussed overhauling the organization at the meeting in Volzhsky, which a Western reporter was allowed to attend.
Maxim Sotnikov, a nuclear physicist who runs the Komsomol chapter at Moscow State University, quickly emerged as the pivotal figure during the deliberations -- and his proposals were a sign of the times in the Soviet Union. 

Mr. Sotnikov advocated cutting the organization's bureaucracy and, more significantly, ending its political allegiance to the Communist Party.
He wants to make Komsomol a democratic umbrella organization for a wide variety of interest groups.
He would scrap the current, rigidly centralized structure under which members are organized by school or workplace and instead rely on members voluntarily banding to gether to create a national youth pressure group.
The party would no longer appoint officials to hand down orders; members would democratically elect their own leaders. 

Mr. Sotnikov even questioned whether the revamped Komsomol -- a Russian abbreviation for All-Union Leninist Communist Union of Youth -- should contain the words "Leninist" or "Communist" at all. 

"We don't need a Communist youth organization," explained Mr. Sotnikov, himself a party member. "We need a general youth organization." 

His ideas sometimes seemed too radical or too vague for many of the participants.
The conversation grew increasingly heated. 

"So what is it, an organization or a movement?" one bewildered speaker from industrial Sverdlovsk wanted to know. 

"I've already explained that," replied Mr. Sotnikov, "but we'll try once more." 

A philosophy student from Moscow came to the rescue. "The movement is the axiom," he shouted impatiently. "But you need to organize a movement, give it a structure." 

The man from Sverdlovsk paused, and then gave up. "It's too complex for ordinary Komsomol members," he said. "We just need a simple declaration." 

"Our problem," an observer from the Komsomol Central Committee added unhelpfully, "is that we have different understandings of what communism is." 

The misunderstandings were eventually cleared up over coffee in the bar downstairs, which showed Tom-and-Jerry cartoons for light relief.
The agreed platform, essentially Mr. Sotnikov's program, will now be presented to a Komsomol national congress next year. 

It remains unclear whether even such radical proposals will be enough to save the organization, however.
Komsomol's power has for decades resided in its role as a pillar of the establishment.
But, already, leading universities such as Moscow State no longer insist on a Komsomol recommendation.
Even the Komsomol upper school, an elite post-graduate college on the edge of Moscow, is considering dropping the membership requirement for some disciplines, according to Mr. Golovanov. 

It is not just Komsomol's current problems that worry the Communist hierarchy.
For decades, the party has used the organization as a training ground for the next generation of leaders in politics and industry.
If the supply of eager young ideologists slows now, what does this bode for the future?
Worried, Soviet authorities have raised salaries of Komsomol officials as much as 50% to attract the disaffected younger generation back into the fold. 

Komsomol's monopoly on organized youth activity, however, is simply eroding.
Across the country, thousands of so-called informal groups have sprung up, often campaigning on local issues such as environmental protection.
Reflecting the newly sanctioned diversity, one participant at the Volzhsky meeting wore a badge proclaiming himself a member of the "Federation of Anarcho-Syndicalists." 

Membership is still a must for anyone wanting to become a teacher or join the police or armed forces.
But Komsomol's prestige has sunk so low that it is now an object of widespread ridicule, a sign that drastic changes are needed if the organization is to survive. 

A new film that is a vicious satire of Komsomol -- "Extraordinary Incident of District Importance" -- has been playing to packed houses across the country despite attempts by some local officials to prevent it from being shown.
It depicts Komsomol functionaries as toadying, power-hungry and completely out of touch with the problems of ordinary Soviet people. 

The opening sequence is of an entire class of 14-year-olds trooping into the local Komsomol committee's headquarters.
Both the children and the officials look completely bored.
After asking a few simple questions about the organization, which the children can't answer, the Komsomol chief proudly tells them they have passed, and are now enrolled in the glorious Komsomol. 

The theater audience laughs derisively. 

