.START 

Bell Atlantic Corp. hopes to eliminate about 1,200 jobs, and will consolidate several telephone operations and write off good will on some non-telephone businesses. 

The consolidation, which will result in a charge against profits estimated by analysts at $300 million or more, is expected to wipe out earnings in the fourth quarter and could continue to deflate earnings in 1990.
Bell Atlantic wouldn't specify the size of the charge, but indicated that it will reflect costs of early retirement and some refinancing of subsidiaries' debt. 

In the 1988 fourth quarter, Bell Atlantic earned $302.6 million, or $1.53 a share, on revenue of $2.7 billion.
In the full year, the company had profit of $1.3 billion, or $6.65 a share, on revenue of $10.8 billion. 

Bell Atlantic said its restructuring efforts will result in the closure of its Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Co. headquarters in Washington, D.C., which has about 900 workers. 

The consolidation is expected to result in savings of about $50 million to $100 million in 1990.
However, analysts said the savings will be offset by certain other costs related to a new medical and dental benefits trust. 

The company, which has a total of 81,000 employees, made its announcement after the stock market closed yesterday.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Bell Atlantic closed at $96.75, up 75 cents. 

Frank Governali, a First Boston Corp. analyst, said he welcomed Bell Atlantic's move, despite its impact on fourth-quarter results. "The company is reacting to changes in the industry and new regulation that provides incentives to operate more efficiently," he said.
With five of its seven states adopting regulations that tie profits to efficient operations, he said, such a bold maneuver was inevitable. 

Other industry observers weren't so complimentary.
Joel D. Gross, a research vice president at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp., characterized the action as "a big hit for a writedown." Moreover, analysts said the operating savings expected in 1990 probably would be neutralized by the creation of the medical and dental benefits trust, which the analysts estimated to cost about $100 million next year. 

As a result of labor negotiations with the Communications Workers of America and the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Bell Atlantic agreed to fund the trust to cover the costs of future health benefits for non-management retirees. 

Bell Atlantic also will be refinancing the debt on three of its telephone company units to take advantage of lower interest rates, in the hope of improving cash flow.
The company said it will also examine the possibility of writing down good will on its several small non-telephone operations, including its computer maintenance business. 

Philip A. Campbell, Bell Atlantic's vice chairman and chief financial officer, predicted the actions would strengthen the company's balance sheet in 1990 and reduce the "cost burden" associated with premium prices the parent company paid for past acquisitions. 

"We are reacting to competitive forces and laying the groundwork for Bell Atlantic's future," said Raymond Smith, chairman and chief executive. "This is our continuing effort to control costs." 

