.START 

Syncor International expects to report a ninefold increase in fiscal first-quarter earnings on a 10% to 11% rise in sales, Gene R. McGrevin, president and chief executive officer, said. 

Mr. McGrevin attributed the sharp earnings gain to tight cost controls, more judicious price cuts and personnel changes.
Syncor, based in Chatsworth, Calif., operates 84 service centers which prepare and deliver specialty radiopharmaceutical products used to diagnose cancer and heart disease. 

The company expects to report first-quarter earnings of $800,000 to $900,000, or seven cents to nine cents a share, compared with $95,000, or one cent a share, a year earlier, Mr. McGrevin said in an interview.
Sales in the quarter ended Aug. 31 are expected to be between $29 million and $30 million, up from $27.2 million a year ago. 

The first-quarter figures represent a turnaround for the company, said Mr. McGrevin, who joined Syncor last February.
Syncor had been battered by two competitors who entered the radio-pharmaceutical distribution business and undercut Syncor's prices to gain market share.
The strategy worked, as Syncor's share of the market was cut to about 50% from 80%. 

Now, by reducing labor and material costs, that trend has been reversed and the company holds a 60% market share. "Before, our prices and market share were going down, but our costs were going up.
We had the key indicators all going in the wrong directions," Mr. McGrevin said. 

The company also recently consolidated the positions of vice president of operations and vice president of marketing and sales into one position, which Mr. McGrevin said "eliminated a lot of internal conflict in the organization.
We were battling ourselves internally more than our competitors." 

Mr. McGrevin doesn't expect any new competitors to emerge because of declining returns in the business.
Also, the lack of availability of nuclear pharmacists in the U.S. would make any new player unlikely, he said.
Having to some degree "fixed" the company's core business, Mr. McGrevin said Syncor is focusing on expansion, perhaps by setting up some international medical service centers, or by providing other products or services from the 84 U.S. centers. 

The company is developing a longrange expansion plan, Mr. McGrevin said.
To be able to staff any expansion, Syncor recently begun a recruiting program for pharmacists at the college level and set up a training program for nuclear pharmacists.
It also plans a $5 million retooling of the company's computer system over the next two years. 

The company already plans to expand its home health-care services division, which provides intravenous services.
The division currently has 18 locations and its sales should expand to $12 million this year from $7 million last year, Mr. McGrevin said.
The company also expects to add four to eight new locations in this division. 

Syncor also is awaiting the release of several new products.
It anticipates introducing within the next few years a new brain scan product, two cardiac scan products and some monoclonal products. 

Mr. McGrevin reiterated that because the company is focusing on growth and its competition, Syncor is not for sale.
Earlier this month, Van Kampen Merritt, an investment banking unit of Xerox Corp., announced a bid to buy Syncor's for about $81.8 million, but it dropped the bid due to Syncor's lack of interest.
Earlier this week, Syncor announced it would buy back about 15% of its outstanding stock from a French shareholder. 

