.START 

Last December, when three paintings by Vincent van Gogh were stolen in a nighttime break-in at the Kroller-Muller National Museum in Otterlo, the Netherlands, observers wondered why thieves had taken them.
Van Gogh, who sold only one painting during his lifetime, left all his works to his devoted brother, Theo, with the result that the ownership history of virtually every oil is known.
The three pictures taken, "Weavers: Interior," "Dried Sunflowers," and a version of his early work, "The Potato Eaters," were considered unsaleable.
Everyone's favorite scenario -- theft for an amoral secretive collector -- was dusted off once more. 

The museum's director was contacted through the mail in early April and then by telephone on April 10.
The thieves were demanding ransom of five million guilders ($2.2 million at current exchange rates), and the authorities asked for proof that they could produce the pictures.
In answer, a stolen vehicle appeared parked outside the home of the museum's director on April 13 with a slightly damaged "Weavers: Interior" in the trunk.
Dutch authorities said this was the first time in their experience ransom had been demanded for stolen art.
They refused to pay and encourage future thefts for ransom. 

It seemed that the only clue was the voice on the telephone, which the police played on television, hoping some viewer could identify it.
On July 13, local police arrested two men in the village of Negmegan, near Arnhem, not far from the park that surrounds the museum.
They confessed and told the police where the other two paintings were hidden.
The investigation continues although both pictures were recovered, and both men are in jail. 

The San Francisco arrest of three men on charges of selling paintings and drawings fraudulently attributed to major masters may put an end to easy profits for Tony Barreiro, Ernest Parker Jr. and Jeff Jones.
Their patsy was a professor from Boise who discovered the deception with the help of his skeptical framer.
The professor paid a total of $9,600 for nine works purportedly by van Gogh, Rembrandt, Rubens, Chagall, Renoir and Degas, and brought them home to Boise.
The owner of the framing shop there was surprised, and asked an appraiser to have a look.
He thought they might be fakes.
With doubts put in his mind, the professor showed the works to a Sotheby's representative in Los Angeles, Sandra Kline, and she, backed by staff in New York, told him they were forged. 

Now, the professor must have asked himself how he could have believed the story handed to him along with the bargain price.
Mr. Barreiro said he had bought a large collection from a wealthy Arab sheik.
He'd been able to acquire it for only $40,000 because of the sheik's frustration in trying to acquire authentication letters from experts and other documentation for his collection.
However, the seller went on, he had sold a Pissarro from the collection that later became a focal point in a museum exhibition in Fresno.
The professor called the FBI. 

In March IFAR got several calls from law enforcement agents looking for a criminal reason that works by such great artists had been sold so cheaply.
IFAR grew suspicious when the measurements of several drawings were identical, despite their attributions to artists from different centuries.
We suggested that the art might be forged rather than stolen and asked for photos.
Then the FBI in Idaho called Virgilia Pancoast, director of IFAR's Authentication Service, with questions about a similar-sounding group of drawings and sent photographs of them to us.
The "Rubens" was signed with two b's.
The "Degas" was a wretched imitation of an outstanding late pastel "Bather," recently seen in the Degas exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. 

The professor had one more telephone conversation with Mr. Barreiro, a call in which he introduced an art dealer and his associate who might be interested in buying other works from the sheik's collection.
The "dealers" were FBI agents working undercover, and they managed to tape conversations complete with the entire incriminating sales pitch given by Messrs.
Barreiro, Parker and Jones.
The asking price was $200,000 for a collection of 67 works, including a "Picasso" sketchbook, "van Gogh" and "Rembrandt" drawings in brown ink, and a drawing by "Gauguin" offered in its "original frame with the original gallery sticker typed 'Tahiti' on the back." The purchase was followed by the arrests and seizure of more art supposedly by Dali, Toulouse-Lautrec, Matisse, Kandinsky, Leger, Corot, Schiele, and Howard Chandler Christy, whose murals grace New York's Cafe des Artistes.
Mr. Barreiro boasted of 400 works of art, many of which are not yet accounted for.
The investigation continues.
What is the source of the forged art?
Are there other victims?
FBI Special Agent Thomas McShane would like to know, at (415) 

Security at American museums generally is excellent, and there is a better than average chance of recovery in these cases.
A major theft of 81 works of Asian art at the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore in the summer of 1988 turned out to be the work of a night security supervisor there.
Almost everything he had taken over a period of weeks was recovered in his basement.
Now a security guard at the Houston Museum of Fine Arts has confessed to the theft of 63 pieces of African gold jewelry belonging to Alfred C. Glassell and valued at $3.5 million.
Discovered missing on May 30 from a locked storage area, the items were to have formed part of a summer exhibition called "The Private Eye: Selected Works from the Collections of Friends of the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston." Museum officials hoped that news of the $25,000 reward -- which exceeded the value of the melted down gold -- would reach the thief before the jewelry was destroyed. 

Within two days, Mr. Glassell received a call from a man who had the "stuff," and they made an appointment to meet outside a bank.
FBI agents arrested Cipriano Garcia Aguirre, father of five and a museum guard for three months.
Although Mr. Aguirre had another explanation of how he had come to safeguard the African treasure, he later confessed to taking the jewelry and was charged with the theft.
The recovery was announced four days after the exhibition opened, and the jewelry was promptly installed as planned. 

Ms. Lowenthal is executive director of the International Foundation for Art Research (IFAR). 

