.START 

Donald E. Panoz thinks drug research and development is risky business.
He ought to know. 

Mr. Panoz has spent 20 years building Elan Corp. PLC into a top pharmaceutical research company.
Its specialty is adapting medications to make them more effective when administered to patients. 

While Elan has been profitable with its research work, Mr. Panoz was dissatisfied with its potential for revenue growth and its ability to project revenue from year to year. "Research and development companies . . . have no solid source of revenue" because they have no control over bringing products to market, says Mr. Panoz, who is Elan's chairman, chief executive officer and its largest individual stockholder. 

So for the past two years he has been working in the Irish midlands town of Athlone to transform the company into a full-fledged international drug manufacturer, especially for niche markets.
It's too soon to tell whether the move will pay off, and a decision to develop an anti-AIDS drug has brought an unknown quantity to the mix. 

The biggest ingredient in the company's favor is a twice-a-day formula of Cardizem, one of the U.S.'s best-selling cardiovascular drugs.
Elan developed a more efficient version, Cardizem SR, for Marion Laboratories and struck a deal with Marion to manufacture the drug for the U.S. market.
Elan also has developed an antismoking nicotine patch. 

But Elan has departed from its normally cautious strategy by deciding to gamble on developing an anti-AIDS drug.
Mr. Panoz estimates that the company is spending more than 10% of total revenue on the drug.
While involvement in the anti-AIDS race gives the company new potential, analysts wonder whether it might do Elan more harm than good.
Some worry that Elan could end up looking too much like the pharmacuetical industry pariah, a one-drug company. 

Nevertheless, Terry Devitt, equities analyst with NCB Stockbrokers, calls the plan to become a manufacturer a "heroic move." Elan, he says, is "the most sophisticated" indigenous company in Ireland's burgeoning pharmaceutical industry. "There is no other company that has perfected the same range of delivery systems," he says.
But, he adds, "the bottom line is the kind of challenge they have taken on, and it's very, very different from anything they have taken on in the past." 

How difficult the transition from drug researcher to manufacturer can be was demonstrated in the first full fiscal year of the company's new strategy, which ended March 31, l988.
Because of research costs and manufacturing delays, Elan posted a loss of 2.3 million Irish pounds ($3.1 million) on revenue of 6.9 million Irish pounds.
But figures for the latest fiscal year show a return to profitability, with earnings of 1.6 million Irish pounds on revenue of 16.2 million Irish pounds. 

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration granted permission for Elan to begin human trials of the anti-AIDS drug, called EL-10, last November.
EL-10, based on a hormone secreted by the adrenal gland, was developed in 1987 by a County Kildare microbiologist, Pat Prendergast. 

The drug's FDA-approved human tests now under way in San Francisco mark the second time acquired immune deficiency syndrome patients in the U.S. have encountered the drug.
In early 1987, Mr. Prendergast took 10 San Francisco AIDS patients to Paris and carried out six months of tests in association with doctors at the Louis Pasteur Institute.
All but one of that group of patients have remained on EL-10.
Mr. Prendergast says the disease's progress in those patients appears to have been arrested by EL-10. 

But Mr. Panoz is careful not to forecast great success for the drug or to project the idea that the company's future is totally dependent upon it. "The pure fact is there is no, there is zero, clinical evidence that shows that EL-10 works.
At this juncture, there are indications," he says. 

It has taken Mr. Panoz more than a decade to establish Elan as a company with a niche technology to sell.
In 1987, with about 50 license arrangements and 30 clients, the company decided to set an independent course, using contract research as "the engine." 

Cardizem SR was ready for approval as a treatment for hypertension as well as angina, and Elan had worked out the arrangement to manufacture it for Marion, which is in the process of merging with Dow Chemical Co. 's Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals subsidiary.
Elan also had developed a new liquid-drug delivery system for the pediatric and geriatric markets.
Work on its nicotine patch was complete, and it had EL-10.
But the strategy meant a 176% increase in spending on research and the fiscal 1988 losses. 

NCB's Mr. Devitt thinks the company will need another year before it can prove it can handle the challenges of marketing and large-scale production.
Neil Buckley, Director-General of the Irish Federation of Chemical Industries, agrees that it may be "too early to say how well they have done." But, he says, "they are still in there, and they have every prospect of doing well.
But it is a niche market they are in, in my view." 

Mr. Panoz, however, is happy with a niche-market approach.
A company, he says, can grow from niche to niche.
A lot of niches can equal a pretty big market, he adds. 

