.START 

I am sitting with Stanley Kuttner in the family room of his home, watching the baseball game on television.
The first-place Chicago Cubs are playing the Montreal Expos.
It's the fifth inning, the score is tied at zero, and the Cubs have put runners on second and third bases with none out.
But the next batter pops out and the next strikes out, and it looks like the Cubs will come up empty. 

Then Expo catcher Nelson Santovenia lets a low, outside pitch get past him to the screen, and the Cubs score after all.
That's the kind of season it's been.
The TV screen records the Wrigley Field bedlam, and also flashes the news that the Pittsburgh Pirates have gone ahead of the second-place St. Louis Cardinals, 5-0, in St. Louis.
If the Cubs win and Cards lose (as it turns out they do), the Cubs would be 4 1/2 games ahead with 17 games to play in the National League East, the TV voice whoops. 

We sit quietly.
When the noise subsides, I ask Stanley if he thinks the Cubs can do it -- that is, win the pennant.
A long pause ensues. "I don't know.
They're the Cubs," he says finally. "But maybe the other teams are worse this year." 

Such phlegm and caution is bred of experience.
Stanley is 73 years old, and a lifelong Cubs fan.
He knows better than most that, down the years, the team has been far more the done-unto than the doer.
He was there when the Cubs established their reputation as baseball's all-time patsies.
Yes, he was there, a short, wiry 16-year-old in the right-field bleachers at Wrigley Field, on Oct. 1, 1932, when the great New York Yankee slugger Babe Ruth, goaded by the Cubs' bench, was said to have pointed toward the center-field seats and then hit a prodigious home run to the same spot. 

The homer is the basis of baseball's most lustrious legend, which only has been magnified by the 57-year debate over whether Ruth really called his shot.
With the Cubs again courting playoff or World Series disaster, the time seemed ripe for a revisit.
You were there, Stanley.
Did The Babe point? 

Before I reveal his answer, let me assure you that Kuttner is not some old guy who has been sitting around his family room, waiting to talk about something that happened -- or didn't happen -- in 1932.
Still wiry and still short, he is a man of parts and participations, a husband, father of five daughters and granddad of eight.
Growing up on Chicago's North Side, he played American Legion baseball against Phil Cavarretta, later the first baseman and leader of the Cubs' last pennant winner, in 1945.
Stanley played second base for one team, Cavarretta pitched for another.
Stanley did not get a hit off Cavarretta. 

He served in the Army during World War II, mopping up after the Marines on Guadalcanal and storming the beaches of New Georgia in the Solomons.
I asked if he had any war stories.
He said he had one. 

"They sent me home in 1944 to guard prisoners at Camp McCoy in Wisconsin," he says. "I met a Japanese prisoner who spoke some English.
He told me he'd been shot on New Georgia.
I told him I'd shot him.
We both had a good laugh." 

After the war, he joined the Chicago advertising firm started by his two brothers and sister.
He retired as a partner three years ago.
When golf, tennis and bowling paled, he sought part-time work. "The woman at the employment agency asked me what I could do.
I told her I couldn't do anything -- I'd been an executive," he says.
He now does odd office jobs for a suburban newspaper chain, in addition to playing golf and tennis, and bowling. 

He also watches baseball, but not as much as before. "The game takes too long now," he says. "In the old days, games started at 3 p.m. and ended around 4:30.
Now they start at 1:30 and they're still playing at 4:30." So he watches mostly on TV, and can do other things when he gets antsy. 

As a kid, though, he considered baseball a supreme treat. "My family always lived around Wrigley Field," he recalls. "We lived at Beacon and Montrose, and on Ainslie, and later at Diversey and Pine Grove.
Some of the Cubs lived in hotels around Diversey, too, and I got to know them.
When Dizzy Dean was with the team, he and I and Billy Herman and his brother-in-law went drinking one night.
I was only 21 or 22, but I held my liquor better than Dean did. 

"My brother, Chester, and I went to lots of games when we were teen-agers.
Sometimes we'd go after school, sometimes instead of school. . . . Naturally, when the Cubs won the pennant in 1932, we wanted to see a World Series game," he goes on. "The first one in Chicago was on a Saturday, and Chester and I got to the ballpark Friday night to get in line for tickets.
We stayed there all night.
We got good seats, but we were mad because other people showed up at 9 or 10 a.m. on Saturday and did nearly as well. 

"I remember a lot about the game.
There were several homers.
Ruth hit one in the first inning.
The Cubs hit a couple.
Ruth came up again in the fifth.
You could see him looking into the Cubs' dugout, moving his head like he was talking to them.
Then he waved his bat toward the bleachers and hit his home run.
When he rounded the bases, you could see him talking to the Cubs some more. 

"I didn't think any more of it right then.
It wasn't like everybody was talking about how he pointed, and then hit one.
But later, when I read things about the 'called shot, ' I thought, 'Yeah, that's what he did. '" 

I felt obliged to mention that most writers who had delved into the incident had concluded that Ruth hadn't pointed, with bat or hand.
Robert Creamer, in his wonderful biography of The Babe, sifted press accounts of the game and found only one that specifically said he had. 

Stanley Kuttner is unimpressed. "Sportswriters don't know everything," he notes, correctly. "Anyway," he smiles, "it's a better story my way, don't you think?" 

