.START 

The decline this month in natural gas prices highlights the role of weather as the driving force in price movements as winter approaches. 

Temperatures have been cooler than normal across much of the U.S. this summer, reducing the demand for air conditioning.
As a result, utilities that burn natural gas to make electricity have been able to force prices down. 

Spot prices for natural gas now range from $1.10 to $1.55 for each 1,000 cubic feet, sharply below the $1.40-$1.80 range of a year ago, according to the Houston-based Natural Gas Clearing House.
Gas from the Gulf Coast, for instance, sold at around $1.64 per 1,000 cubic feet in June but fell throughout the summer to around $1.45 now, pipeline companies say. 

Industry officials and analysts agree that prices will bounce back in October and rise further in the winter, but they don't agree on how much. 

In the longer term, the rising costs of imported oil and clean-air efforts by federal and state governments bode well for gas, a relatively clean-burning fuel.
And gas production and exploration have languished in recent years, meaning the supply could tighten if demand strengthens markedly. 

There also are short-term developments that promise to focus new attention on U.S. gas.
Among these is the approach of long-delayed futures trading in the commodity.
The New York Mercantile Exchange plans to begin trading in gas futures early next year.
Architects of the plan say they are aiming for a March or April start, which should be enough past the volatile midwinter period to allow trading to begin in relative calm. 

The New York Merc announced late last week it was finally proceeding with the futures contract after a ruling by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission that the agency doesn't need to approve the delivery mechanism.
The ruling was a response to a 1987 application to the federal agency by three pipeline companies and Access Energy Corp., a gas marketer, to establish a Katy, Texas, interchange service for futures trading. 

The ruling suggests that the gas pipeline system is deregulated enough that the New York Merc can choose any feasible delivery point for a gas contract without permission from the federal commission.
Some planners are lobbying to establish the interchange in Sabine, La., where there is access to a larger number of interstate pipelines. 

Meanwhile, though, natural gas prices have even been lagging behind oil prices, on an energy-adjusted basis.
But there are indications -- or there is a spreading perception, at least -- that the gas supply "bubble" finally is shrinking and could be blown away by the winds of a cold winter. 

"You give me normal weather, and I'll give you a good gas market," said John Olson, analyst at First Boston Corp.
He forecast that gas prices will rise to $2.10 per 1,000 cubic feet in January and February before falling again in March.
Colder winter weather would create a sharper price spike. "If you get zero degrees for 10 days in New York, you'll see prices really rise," Mr. Olson said. 

Few energy analysts are as confident of an end to the surplus gas-producing capacity of the past several years as is Dale Steffes, a Houston energy consultant.
He still holds to a prediction he made in a January 1986 report for his clients that the U.S. gas surplus would end Oct. 19, 1989. 

Mr. Steffes plans a "eulogy for the gas bubble" party -- or wake -- for Oct. 19.
What's more, he predicts that gas prices will be at least 25% higher next year, possibly averaging $2 per 1,000 cubic feet, as demand begins to outstrip domestic supplies. 

Many others are less bullish on the market. "I don't see a lot of gas demand until 1991 or '92," says Oscar S. Wyatt Jr., chairman of Coastal Corp., a large Houston-based gas producer and pipeline operator. 

"It's hard to predict when the turnaround comes," says a spokesman for Anadarko Petroleum Corp., a large gas producer. "There is no predictable pattern to prices except they go up in the winter." 

But over the long term, Anadarko is bullish. "We have refused to sell gas long-term at spot prices," the spokesman says.
Nowadays, "long-term" means one year; it used to mean as long as 20 years.
Like a lot of gas producers, Anadarko sells much of its gas under 30-day contracts -- in effect, the spot market -- and is making a few commitments for as long as six months as gas consumers become concerned about possible shortages this winter. 

Looking ahead to other commodity markets this week: 

Precious Metals 

Traders will be watching to see whether gold can shake the domination of the dollar, but they may be in for a long wait. 

On Friday, for a time, it appeared that the unexpectedly narrower July trade deficit and third consecutive monthly drop in the producer price index might be another force to contend with.
These factors helped strengthen the dollar and influenced the lowest London gold fixing in three years, at $355 an ounce. 

But later in the day, the dollar weakened and gold prices jumped.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery rose $3.40 to $363.90 an ounce, its highest close since Aug. 24. 

The dollar dropped on "rumblings of problems in the U.S. financial industry," said Dinsa Mehta, chief bullion trader at Chase Manhattan Bank, New York. "It showed how vulnerable precious metals are to short-term dollar movements." 

According to William O'Neill, vice president, research, for Elders Futures Inc., New York, there were rumors that as many as six major U.S. banks were in trouble as a result of the financial problems in the department-store empire of Robert Campeau, chairman of Campeau Corp. 

"There were also reports of heavy Asian dollar sales and a report that appeared to be true that there had been aggressive dollar sales by foreign central banks," he said.
Precious metals futures trading ended before the dollar began to regain strength late Friday. 

"It's going to be interesting on Monday if the rumors prove untrue and the dollar continues to gain," Mr. O'Neill said. 

Overall, the dollar will remain the dominating factor in the gold price, and "until it shows signs of definitely topping out, gold traders are going to be on the defensive for the most part," he said. 

Livestock and Meats 

Traders are waiting for the release of monthly figures on cattle on feed lots after the close of trading today to set the tone for the next several days. 

The figure to watch, analysts said, is "marketings," or the number of cattle moved off feed lots to market.
Cattle shipped to market last month in the seven states covered by the government survey should total about 1,720,000 head, or 2% below the record number sent to market in August 1988, said Thomas Morgan, president of Sterling Research Corp., Arlington Heights, Ill. 

If the figure is 3% to 4% lower than a year earlier, cattle futures prices might drop, said Charles Levitt, senior livestock analyst for Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in Chicago.
That's because traders may conclude that a glut is building up on feed lots that could eventually flood the market and depress prices, Mr. Levitt said. 

Conversely, a decline of only 1% would indicate less of a buildup and would be bullish for futures prices. 

Inventory figures for cattle on feed lots as of Sept. 1 are likely to show little change from a month earlier, analysts said.
The number of cattle being placed on feed lots in August is expected to be lower than a year earlier and the lowest since 1985, analysts said, because of the high cost of the cattle coming off pastures compared with prices being paid for cattle sent to market. 

