.START 

The Canadian government plans to ban smoking on all international flights by Canadian airlines. 

The ban is to take effect at the end of this year, making Canada likely to be the first country to prohibit smoking on all international flights. 

"Canada is on the vanguard of a world-wide movement," said David Sweanor, a spokesman for the Non-Smokers' Rights Association, a Canadian lobby group. 

Canada, like many other countries, already prohibits smoking on all domestic flights under two hours.
The U.S. Senate approved a permanent smoking ban on all domestic airline flights in the U.S. Thursday, but the measure now will go before a conference committee of the Senate and House. 

Canada's two largest airlines, Air Canada and Canadian Airlines International Ltd., which is a unit of PWA Corp., voluntarily extended the current Canadian ban to include all domestic and North American flights. 

The ban on international flights is part of a new law that prohibits smoking in federally regulated workplaces including government buildings, trains and banks.
A spokeswoman for Canadian Transport Minister Benoit Bouchard said the draft regulations can still be changed but she said Mr. Bouchard "feels strongly" about them. 

Gordon Sinclair, president of the Air Transport Association of Canada said the airline industry was "generally supportive" of the ban but he said it could be "a possible disadvantage" given that all other international carriers allow smoking. 

"It's a form of discrimination against a portion of the Canadian traveling public," said Jacques LaRiviere, a spokesman for the Canadian Tobacco Manufacturers' Council. 

Earlier this year, the Canadian government implemented a law that prohibits tobacco advertising in newspapers and magazines and phases out billboard advertising.
It also prevents tobacco companies from using cigarette brand names to sponsor sports and cultural events. 

Imperial Tobacco Ltd, a unit of Imasco Ltd. and RJR-Macdonald Inc., a unit of RJR Nabisco Inc., launched joint court action to challenge the constitutionality of the law.
Hearings are scheduled to begin Monday. 

Rothmans, Benson & Hedges Inc., which is 40%-owned by Philip Morris Cos. and 60%-owned by Rothmans Inc., has launched a separate court action, which is due to begin in October. 

