.START 

London stock prices fell sharply Friday in relatively active volume ignited by large early sell programs and an uncertain opening on Wall Street.
But the market rallied from intraday lows on the back of limited new account buying. 

The Tokyo Stock Exchange was closed for a holiday. 

In early trading in Tokyo Monday, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks rose 38.21 points to 34440.09 just after the market opened. 

In London Friday, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index closed down 15.5 at 2366.5, its lowest close since the 2360 on Aug. 17. 

The FT-SE 100 showed some resilience after it rebounded from a session low of 2352.7, down 29.3.
But dealers noted renewed pressure in late dealings as Wall Street lost early gains.
The FT-SE 100 never recovered to again test an early high of 2388.1. 

The narrower Financial Times 30-share index settled at 1949.7, down 16.1.
Volume was among the highest in recent weeks at 725.9 million shares, up from 515.5 million Thursday. 

B.A.T Industries paced London to early gains after news that the U.K. Panel on Takeover and Mergers decided to allow Hoylake Investments Ltd. time to clear regulatory proceedings in the U.S. before completing its #13.4 billion ($20.8 billion) offer for B.A.T. Later Friday, B.A.T said it will appeal the decision.
B.A.T closed at 819 pence ($12.71), up 18 pence (28 cents), although it had been bid as high as 830 during the session. 

Ranks Hovis McDougall, the food-products concern that often reacts counter to B.A.T price action because of a large stake held by Hoylake principals, closed at 448, down 15. 

Dealers said London showed signs of extreme nervousness, particularly in the later stages of the session, when Wall Street reversed early gains.
The reversal in New York prompted a spurt of profit-taking in London and some extremely choppy price action. 

Light new account buying helped rally some shares late in the day, but overall the lack of aggressive buying at the start of the two-week trading account lent some credence to expectations that the market is poised for further declines. 

British Plaster Board closed at 255, up 15, on new account buying and talk of possible takeover interest in the company.
The talk, however, hasn't been pinpointed even though the company's shares have been firming in recent sessions. 

Cadbury Schweppes closed at 399, up 10, on some fresh account buying, but also on talk of position-building by a possible suitor.
Dealers also noted rumors that a large shareholder moved to sell its shares to an outside party.
Neither rumor was confirmed. 

Other takeover rumors also boosted selected shares counter to the market's overall decline. 

United Biscuits closed up 6 at 393.
Midland Bank, which has been rumored as a possible target for weeks, settled 4 higher at 379. 

Storehouse, a U.K. retailer, finished unchanged at 145.
The company disclosed U.S. investor Asher Edelman boosted his stake to 9% from 8.13%. 

Dealers said the news helped support Storehouse, but they added that U.K. retailers have been receiving a lot of attention recently in takeover speculation, which muted chances for big gains in the company's shares. 

"There's still a lot of corporate activity," a dealer said. "We seem to be getting a bid a day, either rumor or fact.
But what the market needs is some confirmation.
It may be getting tired of talk." 

Elsewhere, stock prices closed higher in Zurich, Brussels, Stockholm and Milan; lower in Frankfurt; mixed in Amsterdam and little changed in Paris.
South African gold stocks closed lower. 

Share prices closed higher in Taipei and Manila, were lower in Wellington, and little changed in Sydney and Singapore.
Markets were closed in Hong Kong and Seoul. 

Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end. 

