.START 

Forecasters puzzling over whether the economy's eventual landing will prove hard or soft are beginning to harbor doubts about the cushioning ability of an important shock absorber: the businesses that provide services. 

Most analysts continue to hold the traditional view that the economy's growing service sector will tend, as in the past, to soften the impact of any new business downturn. "Service enterprises are apt to be more stable over the course of the business cycle, and this should help reduce the depth and length of future recessions," declares Geoffrey H. Moore, director of Columbia University's Center for International Business Cycle Research. 

But some economists are becoming less sanguine about service firms as a recessionary buffer. 

While "service companies still tend to be more resistant to recessions than businesses generally, some services are growing more cyclical than they used to be," remarks Steven R. Malin, an economist at the Conference Board, a non-profit research group in New York. "People who advertise don't try to spit into the wind; when sales are soft, they cut ad budgets," he says. "As ad firms grow, they're more affected by the cyclicality of ad buying." 

He adds: "Any firms that have become more capital intensive -- securities firms and real-estate companies are examples -- have also become more cyclical." 

The tendency of service businesses -- at least so far -- to be less vulnerable in recessions reflects partly their not having to cope with the inventory pileups that typically plague manufacturing firms.
Service expenses such as health care and shelter also are less easily postponed when the economy turns sour than, say, buying a new car or television set.
Service jobs, moreover, are often hard to eliminate; even in a recession, a pair of scissors needs a barber. 

Such factors have clearly served to cushion recent recessions.
Jobs in service businesses, in sharp contrast to jobs in general, increased in every recession of the past two decades.
Over the course of the latest recession of 1981-82, service-industry employment rose about 200,000, against a 2.7 million drop in goods-producing jobs; even so, overall unemployment soared to nearly 11% from about 7%. 

Analysts who fear that such a cushioning may not materialize in any new economic downturn note that many service firms, like manufacturing companies, have struggled to improve efficiency in recent years.
In the process, some service jobs once deemed essential are no longer so.
Examples range from computer-operated trains at major airports that can run without an engineer to home facsimile machines that can do the work of messengers and mail deliverers. 

Looking ahead, Mr. Malin of the Conference Board ticks off several service occupations that he believes may eventually be wiped out.
On his list are librarians and middle-management secretaries, whose work can be done by computers; dentists who specialize in cavities, for which preventatives now exist; and keyboard operators, whose work can be done by optical-scanning devices. 

"I gave up my own secretary," the economist says, "when my computer took over such chores as putting mailing labels on my correspondence." Computers, he adds, enabled the Conference Board recently "to cut our chart-room staff to only four people from about 15." 

The fortunes of many service companies, in addition, have grown increasingly entwined with those of manufacturing concerns, which recessions normally hit hardest.
Behind this is a push by manufacturers to focus more on actual production and to farm out service-type chores to service companies. 

"If an auto maker lays off 5% of its work force, we have to flex downward too, though not quite as sharply since we have equipment that must go on being serviced, even if it isn't handling quite as many people," reports Joseph Neubauer, chairman of Philadelphia-based ARA Holding Co. 

ARA, which employs 120,000, provides such services as laundry work, food supply and health and child care to scores of companies.
With annual sales of about $4 billion, the firm has "greatly benefited from more and more manufacturers farming out servicing responsibilities, which we can do more efficiently because it's our specialty," Mr. Neubauer says. 

Eastman Kodak Co. recently farmed out its personal-computer operations to a service concern, Businessland Inc. Kodak is in the photographic-products business, a company official says, not the computer business. 

Service companies, more so than corporations in general, have gone deeply into debt in recent years, and this also renders them more vulnerable in any new recession. 

In 1979, when as now the economy had been expanding for years, the total debt of service companies amounted to 20% of their combined assets, while the corresponding debt-to-assets rate for corporations generally was nearly 22%.
But by 1987, the latest year available, the ratio for services was almost 30%, while the rate for all corporations was still near 22%. 

In the same period, the so-called coverage ratio of service businesses -- their cash flow divided by their interest payments -- fell to 2.3-to-1 from 4.5-to-1.
The coverage ratio for corporations as a whole also declined, but not as sharply -- to 3.1-to-1 from 5.4-to-1. "The severe deterioration of the service sector's financial health leaves it more vulnerable than in the past in the event of a recession," says Richard W. Kopcke, an economist at the Boston Federal Reserve Bank.
He attributes this balance-sheet decline to "extensive, highly leveraged takeover activity in such service industries as retailing and airlines," as well as a "thirst for capital to expand" at many fledgling but fast-growing service businesses. 

Mr. Kopcke also questions the view that in a new recession spending on services would hold up significantly better than spending on manufactured goods.
He cites such service activities as vacation travel and eating at restaurants as "highly postponable items" if the economy slumps. 

For all of this, most economists continue to regard the service sector, on balance, as a large cushion in the event the economy finally turns down in coming months. 

"Even with the elimination of many service jobs, overall employment in services will keep rising in the next recession simply because of the sector's explosive growth," predicts Scott D. Aguais, an economist for DRI McGraw-Hill.
He estimates that the sector's share of total private employment, now about 64%, will reach 67% within four years.
He also reckons that service productivity gains, negligible of late, will "speed up appreciably and this should help limit inflation" in the service sector. 

The importance of the service sector to the economy's continuing growth can be seen in a recent economic forecast by Morgan Stanley & Co.
It projects a rise of 2.4% annually in consumer spending, adjusted for inflation, in the final three months this year.
But within that total is a 1% drop in spending for durable goods, offset by a healthy 3.5% gain in outlays for services, as well as a lesser increase in spending for nondurable items such as food and clothing. 

Change in employment levels during periods of recession; in millions of jobs at Columbia University 

