.START 

Ralston Purina Co. agreed to buy Nestle S.A.'s troubled Beech-Nut Nutrition Corp. baby-food unit, gambling it can overcome problems that have lingered at Beech-Nut since the unit was stained by scandal seven years ago. 

Beech-Nut, the U.S.'s second-largest baby-food maker, hasn't been profitable for several years, according to analysts, partly because of the image damage it endured over the sale of apple juice that turned out to be water, sugar, and flavoring. 

While the letter of intent's terms weren't disclosed, analysts estimate Ralston-Purina paid about $85 million for Beech-Nut, which has annual sales of about $150 million.
Among other things, the agreement is subject to completion of a definitive agreement. 

Despite the problems the unit has encountered, Ralston will get a bargain in Beech-Nut, according to John McMillin, a food industry analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities. "Food companies are typically being acquired for 2 1/2 times annual sales.
Ralston is probably paying little more than half Beechnut's sales," he said. 

Ralston wouldn't comment.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday, Ralston Purina rose $1.75 to $87.25. 

Beech-Nut's share of the $837 million a year U.S. baby-food market is about 18.2%, a distant second to Gerber Products Co. 's 70%, according to analysts.
H.J. Heinz Co. ranks third with an 11% share.
Beech-Nut has boosted its market share from 16% in the past three years, in part through expanded marketing and new-product campaigns that wiped out profit margins, Mr. McMillin said. 

"Ralston finds Gerber's profit margins, which are about 25%, very appealing.
They probably hope they can cut costs and introduce other new products and make money," added Mr. McMillin. "And they got a bargain because Nestle wanted out." 

Nestle, based in Switzerland, put Beech-Nut on the block several months ago.
The unit, based in Fort Washington, Pa., has three manufacturing plants and about 1,100 employees. 

Ralston, based in St. Louis, said BeechNut fits into its array of other food lines, including such cereals for children as Cookie Crisp.
Ralston had sales of $5.88 billion last year. 

Ralston has been in an acquisition mode for some time.
In February, William Stiritz, chairman and chief executive officer, said the company might bid for certain food assets sold off by the new owners of RJR Nabisco Inc.
But despite RJR's entering agreements to sell several pieces under Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., Ralston hasn't been a buyer. 

The sale of Beech-Nut would free Nestle to pursue its rumored acquisition plans in the U.S., where analysts have long considered its most likely target to be Gerber.
With Gerber, based in Fremont, Mich., Nestle would have the baby-products lineup it dreamed of when it acquired Beech-Nut in 1979 for $35 million.
Nestle, the world's largest supplier of formula for infants, invested an additional $60 million in Beech-Nut, increased marketing budgets and boosted sales. 

But although Beech-Nut's managers promised Nestle the company would be profitable by 1982, Beech-Nut was never able to successfully compete against Gerber.
The juice scandal forced Beech-Nut to pay a $2.2 million fine and $7.5 million to settle a lawsuit brought by a Scranton, Pa., supermarket chain. 

Also, in 1988, two former top executives were sentenced to a year and a day in prison and fined $100,000 each for their role in the consumer fraud.
Earlier this year, a federal appeals court overturned the conviction of Neils L. Hoyvald, the company's former president, on a technicality.
The panel also overturned the conviction of John F. Lavery, former vice president, manufacturing, for violation of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, but left intact his conviction on certain other charges. 

