.START 

"This slightly built romance," wrote Thomas Hardy in the preface to one of his lesser-known works, "Two on a Tower," "was the outcome of a wish to set the emotional history of two infinitesimal lives against the stupendous background of the stellar universe, and to impart to readers the sentiment that of these contrasting magnitudes the smaller might be the greater to them as men." 

Peter Ackroyd, the author of "First Light" (Grove, 336 pages, $19.95), has plainly read "Two on a Tower," and has made not only its Dorset setting but its thematic concerns his own.
Yet while Hardy, with relative constraint, chose in his 1882 novel to focus upon the "infinitesimal lives" of his hero and heroine, Mr. Ackroyd -- a 40-year-old English author whose "T.S.
Eliot: A Life" (1984) and "Chatterton" (1988) made him a hot commodity on these shores -- devotes at least as much attention to "the stellar universe" as to any given character. 

Not that he stints on characters, mind you: If Hardy gave us two main figures, Mr. Ackroyd fields a good dozen.
The most prominent is Mark Clare, the capable and earnest leader of an archaeological team that, as the novel opens, is preparing to excavate a neolithic tomb in Dorset's Pilgrin Valley.
The others -- all of whose lives are, in some way, affected by the digging -- include Evangeline Tupper, a civil servant who has come from London to oversee the dig; Joey Hanover, a music-hall comedian who has come to Pilgrin Valley to retire; and the rustic Mints, father and son, whose people have lived in the valley for generations, and who appear to have an ominous knowledge of the tomb and its contents. 

Indeed, as the dig proceeds, Mr. Ackroyd seeks to create a sense of mystery and menace centering on both the tomb and the Mints.
We are meant to understand, too, that there is some abstruse connection between Mark's underground explorations and astronomer Damian Fall's probings in the other direction.
For a time, in fact, Mark suspects the crypt to be that of an ancient astronomer.
Hardly a page goes by without a heavy reminder that this novel treats big issues: man and nature, life and death, time and space. 

Yet he does so chiefly by having his characters utter reams of windy, fatuous pseudo-profundities about the Earth and the cosmos.
Damian observes, for instance, that "the stars take on the shapes we choose for them. . . . They become the images of our own selves, shining down and comforting us." And Joey reflects that the stars "are not fires above us but souls, the souls of those who came before us and light our way. . . . They are the word for far.
They are the word for dream." 

Melodramatic overstatement of this sort is the rule here.
Damian sits "crouched under the vast emptiness of the universe." The word time is Mr. Ackroyd's tireless refrain: "Time.
Past time.
Future time.
Imaginary time.
Other times curving around them." 

Like Hardy, Mr. Ackroyd writes a rather unpolished prose.
Yet whereas Hardy's stylistic coarseness suggests a guileless man struggling to convey a difficult and enigmatic vision, Mr. Ackroyd's suggests sheer sloppiness.
Too often, moreover, he seems condescending toward his characters and glib about the immense abstractions he addresses. 

Only rarely does the novel flicker into life.
While a couple of the characters are occasionally plausible, most are one-dimensional, and a few are outright disasters.
Joey's wife, Floey, for example, is little more than a fountain of unamusing malapropisms: "a wild fruit chase," "The Hound of the D'Urbervilles." Evangeline, eternally and hyperbolically, professes the most obviously insincere emotions, proclaiming everything in sight the most "bizarre" or "wonderful" of its kind that she has ever seen.
This routine reaches overkill almost immediately. 

The only letup comes when Evangeline is with her lover, Hermione Crisp, whom she calls Baby Doll.
But it's hardly a pleasant change, since Mr. Ackroyd's apparent main purpose in these scenes is to squeeze cheap laughs, a la Kingsley Amis, out of the idea of lesbianism.
The intended joke is that while Hermione wears a suit and tie and resembles "a company director with a crewcut," Evangeline considers her "the essence of femininity" and says things like "Baby Doll always looks her best in something frilly." This gag is not only unfunny but offensive. 

Nobody undergoes anything remotely resembling development.
At the end of the novel, one is left wondering: Why these people?
Why these traits, these quirks, these personal histories?
For these folks' widely divergent attributes don't add up to anything; they merely coexist.
There's no shape to it at all. 

Nor does Mr. Ackroyd work up much genuine suspense in regard to the mysteries of the tomb -- a major failing, for he makes liberal use of the supernatural to plug up holes in his plot and to account for inconsistencies of characterization.
For all of Mr. Ackroyd's patent desire to convince us that he is communicating a transcendent vision, there's little vision here, and altogether too much mystical posturing. 

Mr. Bawer is a free-lance writer living in New York. 

