.START 

Wall Street may be hot for UAL Corp., but the flying public hasn't been so bullish lately on its United Airlines unit. 

Throughout the summer, United's service has been a disaster -- with about four out of ten of its flights arriving late or cancelled.
The carrier recorded its worst on-time performance since the Department of Transportation started keeping track two years ago -- and has ranked consistently at or near last place among airlines. 

The carrier's on-time arrivals of flights from 119 airports toppled to 63% in June from 74% in May.
In July, the number dipped to 62%.
United also accounted for almost half of the flights on what Department of Transportation nickname the "List of Shame:" flights that arrive late at least 80% of the time.
The average delay on the 60 United flights: 47 minutes and 42 seconds. 

Things got so bad this summer that the Department of Transportation called United executives to find out what was wrong. "They took a nose dive," says a department official.
Last year during the same months, United recorded a respectable 81%. 

Internal department analysis shows that American Airlines, a unit of AMR Corp. and United's biggest rival in Chicago, trounced United's hourly on-time performance into O'Hare Airport in July. 

United's recent performance is even prompting jokes on late night television.
Comedian Jay Leno fumed about a late flight.
He wouldn't name the carrier, he said, but "the passengers were real United" in their anger. 

United's problems apparently have a combination of causes, including bad weather at some of the East Coast airports that it uses and its heavy reliance on Chicago O'Hare, where traffic often gets jammed up.
But the biggest cause has been a slowdown by United's pilots union in protest of management demands for contract concessions. 

The pilots campaign, coined "withdrawal of enthusiasm," involved, among other things, taxiing slowly for take-off, ordering elaborate maintenance checks between flights and flying with so much fuel that planes were slowed by their weight. 

Under still another tactic, labeled "Sweet Sixteen," the pilots purposely arrived more than 15 minutes late; the point at which the transportation department marks a flight late in the monthly on-time statistics it releases to the public.
Because of the time wasted by the delays, many pilots exhausted the monthly overtime they were allowed to work under government regulations. 

Crew shortages began to crop up.
A flight from Newark International Airport was stalled two hours because a pilot had to be flown in from Chicago.
The same week, a flight from Chicago managed to take off after a long delay only because an off-duty pilot, a "dead head," in the passenger's section volunteered to join the cockpit crew. 

A United Airlines spokesman declined to comment on the carrier's performance. 

Things are likely to get better because the pilots are backing away from their campaign as they get closer to buying out UAL.
But the summer's problems may have done permanent damage in exhausting the loyalty of some flyers. 

Gary Curtis, a Chicago businessman, is peeved at United because he was stranded for an hour on a plane that needed a light bulb replaced.
Finally, Mr. Curtis yanked out his cellular phone from his briefcase and booked a seat on American Airlines. 

"I grabbed my baggage from overhead, walked off the plane and retrieved my ticket," he fumes. "I made my mile walk to American.
Half an hour later, I was on an American flight leaving for Los Angeles.
That's survival in the air." 

Says Mr. Curtis: "I decided if I want to get somewhere on time, I have to fly somebody else." 

Thomas G. Ford, a dentist from Orlando, Fla., purposely avoided flying United on a trip last week to San Francisco because he got fed up with its delays this summer.
Mr. Ford says that as he boarded United planes it wasn't unusual to see a mechanic crowded in the cockpit with the crew.
He says, "It's unnerving." 

The number of complaints filed with the Department of Transportation about United increased late this summer.
The biggest gripe: flight problems such as delays and cancellations.
Another sign of trouble is that some travel agents report that United is doling out coupons to mollify disgruntled passengers. 

"I've had a rush of United vouchers in the last two weeks," says Luci Alvarez of Great Escape Travel in downtown Chicago. 

United is also scoring poorly among seasoned travelers tracked by an Orlando, Fla., newsletter that's being flooded with complaints. "Overall, it's dismal," says Michael Ashington-Pickett, editor and publisher. 

