.START 

Small investors are bailing out of a few large junk bond mutual funds even as the big-money crowd is scouring the market, making low-ball bids for junk. 

Fidelity Investments' $1.8 billion High Income Fund had a net outflow of nearly $13 million Friday.
That was narrower than Thursday's $20 million outflow, which was a one-day record for the fund. 

Small investors also pulled out money at a slower pace Friday from the $1.2 billion Vanguard High Yield Bond Portfolio, which had seen $17 million flow out Thursday.
And the exodus slowed at the $1.1 billion T. Rowe Price High Yield Fund, which had shrunk $10 million on Thursday. 

Fund groups said they didn't lose control of much of the outgoing money, as a large part of it was transferred into their own money-market funds. 

Mutual funds are among the largest holders of junk, accounting for about a quarter of the whole high-yield, high-risk market.
Any more bad news could drive down prices further for junk debt securities, which were battered by last week's cash crunch at Campeau Corp., the big real estate and retailing company. 

Most of the small investors' flight has been from the direct-marketed, "no load" mutual funds.
There has been considerably less shrinkage in the assets of funds sold through brokers, who are encouraging investors to stand pat.
And so far, fund managers said, they have had enough cash to pay off departing investors without being forced to sell much of the junk holdings at distressed prices. 

But last week's frenetic activity raises questions about how investors might fare if portfolio managers, faced with persistently strong redemptions of fund shares, are forced to dump chunks of their holdings.
That is because liquidity -- the ability to buy and sell bonds in a market -- has eroded for many junk bond issues.
Any large-scale attempt to sell would compound the problem. 

Moreover, heavy selling by funds would have to come from their larger, more liquid junk issues, analysts said, because these are the most actively traded.
Already, "quality" junk came under some selling pressure Thursday and Friday because these issues are the easiest for mutual funds to sell, traders said. 

Among the so-called quality issues that tumbled: 

-- R.H. Macy 14 1/2% bonds due 2001 were quoted at 98 7/8, down about two points Friday from recent levels.
One point is equal to $10 for each $1,000 face amount. 

-- Kroger 12 7/8% bonds due 1999 were quoted at 103 1/4, down about 2 3/4 points on the day. 

-- Safeway 11 3/4% bonds maturing 1996 fell one point to 

-- Ralph's Supermarkets 14% bonds due 2000 fell about four points to 101.
Ralph's is a Campeau unit. 

The Merrill Lynch High Yield Index finished at 184 Thursday, a decline of three index points from Monday's level.
Generally, the junk bond market for the week fell four to five points. 

As mutual funds facing redemptions sold some issues, traders said, a number of bargain hunters were trying to pick up these bonds. 

"Some of these portfolio managers are like Jesse James -- they're trying to steal bonds," said Alan Schlesinger, head trader at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp., noting that most buyers were bidding below the market. 

Investors continued to abandon the bonds of two Campeau units -- Allied Stores Corp. and Federated Department Stores Inc. Allied's 11 1/2% bonds maturing in 1997 were quoted late Friday at 27, down an additional point from the previous day's levels.
Federated's 16% bonds maturing 2000 were quoted at 60.
In approximately one month, the Allied debt has fallen 27 points.
Federated's 16% issues have tumbled about 22 points. 

This week the selling is likely to continue, albeit on a more selective basis, analysts said. 

"I think some of the lower tier credits like Allied, Federated, Interco and Wickes may continue to languish, but some of the higher quality credits that have been beaten down may rally," said Robert Lupo, managing director at Smith Barney. 

About $1.5 billion in new junk debt is scheduled to be offered to investors this week.
Despite last week's debacle, most issues are expected to be sold.
Merrill Lynch officials said they still have a full order book for $100 million of debt of Bib Co., a maker of products including baby bibs. 

"What the market wants to see are deals in non-recessionary businesses," said Brian Doyle, a senior analyst at Salomon Brothers. "In recession-oriented businesses, you are going to see {investors demand} lower leverage." 

"There have to be completely different criteria," said one money manager who declined to be identified. "We are going to demand different covenants." 

Friday's Market Activity 

U.S. Treasury securities ended unchanged to 1/2 point higher ($5 for each $1,000 face amount) after a session of wild, rumor-driven trading. 

"The werewolves were out here today," said one financial market analyst. 

Rumors varied from failing money center banks and special Federal Reserve meetings.
All were denied.
There also was a rumor that President Bush was shot. 

The benchmark 30-year Treasury bond -- the 8 1/8% issue maturing 2019 -- dipped to a 7/32 loss at one point, and rebounded one point from there in afternoon trading. 

The roller-coaster session started on firm footing.
Prices initially rallied in response to news of an unexpected 0.4% drop in August producer prices. 

Bonds then slipped into losses when analysts saw that the so-called "core inflation" rate -- producer prices minus the volatile food and energy component -- rose 0.5%.
The rise in core inflation dashed hopes of a near-term easing by the Federal Reserve. 

Prices again reversed direction around midday, as participants began to focus on the dollar's advance, which has been triggered by the slimmer-than-expected $7.58 billion July trade deficit, the smallest trade gap in nearly five years. 

The strong dollar spurred rumors that a large Japanese insurance company bought about $1 billion of 30-year bonds early in the afternoon, as well as a large amount of December bond futures contracts.
As a result, bond prices soared to nearly a one-point gain from the day's nadir. 

Outside of the junk market, most high-grade issues closed about unchanged. 

On the new-issue front, a $200 million issue of Student Loan Marketing Association notes was priced to yield 8.29% through lead underwriter Goldman Sachs & Co. 

The non-callable three-year notes were priced one fifth of a percentage point above the comparable Treasury note. 

According to figures provided by Securities Data Co., corporate new issuance last week almost tripled from the prior week, with about $3.5 billion in debt coming to market through Thursday. 

The previous week, about $1.3 billion in new corporate debt was issued. 

