.START 

Four competing reorganization plans were filed in the Public Service Co. of New Hampshire bankruptcy case, setting the stage for hard bargaining among various parties over the utility's future. 

None of the proposals has yet won the support of all the parties, and the failure to compromise could lead to a prolonged battle. 

Still unresolved is the key question in the case: whether rates will be increased enough to satisfy the interests of investors in the troubled utility, or whether increases will be held down in the interests of the utility's customers. 

The proposed reorganization plans have stated values of $1.9 billion to $2.2 billion for PS of New Hampshire.
Creditors and shareholders have said they won't support a reorganization with a value of less than $2.2 billion.
Wilbur Ross, a representative of the equity holders, said, "We're not trying to gouge, but there is a level below which it doesn't make sense for us." 

But state officials, arguing that investors shouldn't benefit at the expense of ratepayers, have indicated that the level of rate increases needed to provide that value might be unacceptable. 

All the proposed reorganization plans, with minor variations, foresee secured and unsecured creditors receiving full payment of their total claims of about $1.72 billion in either cash, new debt or stock, depending on the offer.
But what's left for shareholders would be sharply reduced under the plans offering lower values. 

The newest of the four plans comes from United Illuminating Co., New Haven, Conn., which proposed merging with PS of New Hampshire into a new holding company.
The plan proposes seven annual rate increases of 5.5% a year, and has a value of $2.2 billion for the New Hampshire utility, United Illuminating said.
Such a merger would combine the two companies with the largest stakes in the long-delayed Seabrook, N.H., nuclear plant, PS of New Hampshire with 35.6% and United Illuminating with 17.5%. 

PS of New Hampshire also filed an internal reorganization plan, backed by creditors and shareholders, that would require similar rate increases and values the company at $2.2 billion.
Unsecured creditors would get 38% to 45% of the common stock in the reorganized company, existing preferred shareholders would get 41% to 43% and the stake of existing common holders would be diluted to 13% to 19%. 

While endorsing the internal reorganization, investor groups indicated that they likely could support the United Illuminating proposal as well. 

However, some investor groups oppose the other two plans.
These are an offer by Northeast Utilities, Hartford, Conn., to buy PS of New Hampshire for $1.9 billion and raise rates 5.5% for seven years, and a bid by New England Electric Service, Marlborough, Mass., to buy the company for $2 billion as part of a plan that would require rate increases of only 4.8% annually for seven years. 

State of New Hampshire officials, who earlier said that seven years of 5.5% increases would be acceptable, have indicated that they now favor the New England Electric plan because it provides for the lowest rate increases.
They also contend that the internal reorganization plan proposed by PS of New Hampshire management has hidden costs that could result in increases a decade from now. 

Exactly how the differences between the state and investors might be resolved isn't clear.
Under bankruptcy law, creditors and shareholders have a say in approving a reorganization plan, but the state doesn't.
However, state officials could seek to block or delay rate increases that exceed the amount they deem acceptable. 

If an agreement can't be reached, creditors have threatened to try to circumvent the state by supporting an effort to reorganize PS of New Hampshire into a federally regulated holding company. 

That, however, could lead to lengthy litigation because of opposition by the state.
Because PS of New Hampshire is the first major utility in 50 years to file for Chapter 11 protection from creditors, there isn't any precedent as to whether a utility can use bankruptcy proceedings to switch to federal regulation without the normally required state approval.
PS of New Hampshire filed for Chapter 11 status under the federal Bankruptcy Code in January 1988 because it wasn't able to make interest payments on its huge debt, much of which was taken on to finance its Seabrook stake. 

