.START 

Ex-smokers, beware: You run an increased chance of suffering a stroke for at least 10 years after you stop smoking. 

That's a lot longer than the two to five years shown in previous research.
The sobering conclusion, based on an Australian study of 422 stroke victims, may discourage some smokers from quitting and crimp increasingly popular anti-smoking drives in the U.S. and Europe. 

"There is the danger of people saying, 'Why stop smoking?
Is it worth it? '" said Dr. Godfrey Fowler, a physician at Oxford University's Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford, England, who studies smoking.
For just this reason, "researchers have been very nervous about publishing such a result.
From a public-health point of view, it might be counterproductive," agreed Dr. Roger Shinton, an epidemiologist and stroke specialist at Dudley Road Hospital in Birmingham, England. 

But Dr. Shinton saw a larger significance in the Australian study, reported in this week's issue of the Lancet, a leading British medical journal.
Public-health officials no longer can "say it's all right to smoke as long as you stop before you get into trouble.
That's an out-of-date message." The new message should be "never smoke, because if you smoke at all for any given length of time, the risk you get . . . never leaves you." 

The latest research, led by a University of Melbourne team, also found much stronger links between current smokers and stroke -- plus indications that smokers' spouses also may be more likely to suffer strokes. "The persistent nature of the risk even after cessation of smoking and the possible risk associated with passive exposure strengthens public-health arguments against smoking," wrote Dr. Geoffrey A. Donnan, the lead researcher, in the Lancet report. 

Compared with nonsmokers, smokers in the Australian study experienced a three to four times greater risk of developing the most common type of stroke.
Earlier investigations found smokers' risk was two to three times greater.
The new findings back the long-suspected relationship between stroke and smoking, said Dr. John Bamford, a neurologist at St. James University Hospital in Leeds, England. "This goes along with what has been established in coronary disease for several years." 

Strokes, the result of interference with the brain's blood supply, are the third leading cause of death in both the U.S. and Europe.
Many victims survive their first stroke only to die from subsequent ones. 

The Australian scientists compared the stroke patients' smoking patterns, other personal habits and health history against those of a similar-sized control group from the Melbourne area. 

Ex-smokers showed a lower risk of developing strokes than current smokers, and this hazard diminished over time.
But "this trend was not significant, and an appreciable risk was still apparent after 10 years," the Lancet article reported.
The Australian researchers said their surprising observation differed from two prior studies because those involved fewer ex-smokers. 

Any smokers discouraged by the latest research should remember that "by changing from a current to an ex-(smoker), you are still dropping your (stroke) risk considerably," Dr. Shinton noted. 

Nonsmokers in the Australian study ran a 60% greater chance of developing a stroke if their spouses smoked.
While the observation wasn't statistically significant, it marks the first time scientists have detected a potential link between so-called passive smoking and stroke. 

