.START 

Greece is set to introduce over-the-counter trading in a move to expand financial services before the European Community frees the movement of capital by the end of 1992. 

The president of the Athens Stock Exchange, Nikitas Niarchos, said government authorization to start OTC trading is expected later this week. 

Companies eligible to trade OTC will be relatively small, high-growth ventures with share capital of more than 100 million drachmas ($590,000).
Greece has 40,000 firms registered as small or medium-sized enterprises, but no estimate has been made of how many will be eligible for OTC trading. 

The companies which opt to be traded OTC will raise funds directly from the capital market, bypassing high-interest bank loans, as well as red tape. 

"Companies in Greece are currently paying 25% in interest rates and bank charges as opposed to around 6% abroad," said Dimitris Economidis, president of Economdis Electro-Optics, whose company will be among those trading OTC. 

"Although share capital of 100 million drachmas is high for many businesses, OTC trading will definitely spur growth," Mr. Economidis predicted. 

The new secondary market will also act as a testing ground for companies that may eventually raise the 170 million drachmas capital needed for a listing on the main exchange. 

"OTC trading means small and medium-sized enterprises can become living cells in the economy," said Giorgios Pervanas, vice president of the Athens Stock Exchange. "Those companies will have a real chance to develop," he added. 

Companies that do apply to trade OTC will have to prove they are sound.
They must show healthy profits over a three-year period before trading approval is given.
Out of three published balance sheets submitted for stock exchange endorsement, the two most recent will have to be certified by an accountant. 

Once a company gets approval to trade its shares in the OTC market, it is required to submit biannual balance sheets.
Companies that have been operating for less than three years will be approved for listing on a case-by-case basis. 

Mr. Pervanas said other innovations planned by the stock exchange include the introduction of brokerage firms and fully automated trading.
He said two brokerage firms had been approved and would begin operating shortly. 

The stock exchange, supervised by the National Economy Ministry, has a listing of 119 companies.
Trading volume in 1988 totaled 49.13 billion drachmas, down from 61.5 billion drachmas in 1987. 

Trading at the Athens Stock Exchange is conducted by open outcry and transactions are in cash with a 24-hour settlement.
Foreign investors may buy and sell freely on the exchange. 

Orders for securities are placed directly with an official broker or through a bank operating in Greece.
There is no capital gains tax in Greece. 

