.START 

For the president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Paul E. Gray was amazingly unscientific in his Aug. 17 editorial-page article, "Nuclear Reactors Everyone Will Love." New is not synonymous with successful.
It is synonymous with untried. 

His premise is fundamentally unsound.
He criticizes water-cooled reactor technology -- which is the standard throughout the non-communist world -- for the size and complexity of plants designed 15 and 20 years ago.
And he praises gas-cooled technology -- which has been abandoned by virtually the entire world, after decades of development and billions of dollars -- for advanced safety characteristics that they could incorporate at some indefinite time in the future. 

Virtually every theoretical advantage that he attributes to gas-cooled reactors already is being applied to advanced water-reactor technology.
The next water-cooled power plants will incorporate a number of major improvements over those of the past -- they most likely will be much smaller, modular, simpler, and they will have passive safety systems that do not require skilled operators.
Gas-cooled reactors could well have these features when they are designed, tested, developed, prototyped, licensed and ready for commercial use in three or four decades.
Advanced water-cooled reactors, based on successful operating experience around the world for more than a quarter of a century, will offer these advances in the mid-1990s. 

Gas-reactor technology could become an efficient and effective source of electricity in the 21st century.
But we can't wait for decades to tackle such pressing problems as finding substitutes for imported oil, cutting back on the burning of fossil fuels to reduce environmental problems, and meeting the growing demand for electricity.
We need water-cooled reactors that incorporate all these advances -- and that will exist in the near future when we need them. 

Walter Meyer 

Director 

Institute for Energy Research 

Syracuse University 

Syracuse, N.Y. 

Based on more than 40 years of experience operating utility power plants, I question the economics of Mr. Gray's modular reactors.
A good large plant will overwhelm the good small plant of similar technology every time. 

The economics of big nuclear plants has not been destroyed by their large scale nor by their safety record but by unconscionable delays.
The utility must be confident that unexpected regulatory delays are improbable unless a real safety threat is established.
Until then no prudent utility is likely to propose any nuclear project. 

The physical size of the gas-cooled reactor module can only be very large, since the graphite core alone will probably be larger than the core and pressure vessel of the "big" conventional nuclear plant. 

Since it will take 10 gas-cooled reactor modules to match the output of a single conventional nuclear plant, that means 10 control systems, 10 construction projects, and staffs to maintain and run 10 units.
Process engineering using conventional scaling factors would indicate that the total project costs of the 10 small gas-cooled plants would be roughly twice those of the large conventional plant. 

Robert M. Lundberg 

Los Altos, Calif. 

