.START 

The wedding of UAL Corp. 's management and pilot union prompts the same question as any shotgun marriage: How long can it last? 

Though driven together by their desire to block an outside bid for the company, the two groups pursuing UAL are more accustomed to combat than collaboration.
Until recently, United Airlines' pilots were still staging a work slowdown in protest of management's demands for contract concessions.
And it wasn't so long ago that UAL Chairman Stephen M. Wolf vowed to oppose any employee bid for the company -- saying he didn't want the pilot union for a boss. 

In May 1988, Mr. Wolf wrote a letter to employees, blasting an earlier $4 billion takeover proposal from the pilot union. "We do not see how {employee} ownership . . . of a debt-laden United benefits our pilots or other employees," he wrote, adding, "We believe that a costly adviser group to our pilots has done them a disservice." 

Now these longtime adversaries have teamed up to launch the most ambitious experiment yet in employee ownership.
Last week, UAL's directors approved a $6.75 billion joint offer submitted by the pilot union, UAL senior managers and British Airways PLC.
The transaction, which still faces several hurdles, would give employees and management 85% ownership, making UAL the largest worker-owned company in the nation by a wide margin over the next biggest, Avis Inc. 

The buy-out would also reshape corporate governance at UAL, giving union employees broad new powers.
For example, they would get three of 15 seats on the board, the same number as management.
Moreover, management would be required to meet regularly with labor representatives to thrash out corporate policy. 

Yet, despite the board's endorsement, questions already are being raised about how well the plan would work.
Besides the huge debt required to finance the transaction, there is skepticism about whether a management-union partnership could be nimble enough to compete effectively in the rough-and-tumble airline industry. 

"It's going to be very tough to manage," says Wesley G. Kaldahl, retired senior vice president of American Airlines. "It's something that's never been tried and been truly made to work" in such a sizable company, he adds.
Even some key players in the labor-management bid say the alliance could prove fragile. "This isn't a marriage made in heaven," says one person involved in putting the bid together. "This is a marriage of convenience." 

Employee ownership has produced mixed results in other industries.
Studies by the government's General Accounting Office and the private National Center for Employee Ownership show that, in many cases, productivity doesn't improve as expected.
Labor is also sometimes reluctant to take steps to improve efficiency. 

Within the airline business, such arrangements haven't fared much better.
A 1984 employee-ownership plan at Eastern Airlines that gave workers broad representation faltered quickly. "Both union leaders and senior managers kept letting their personal differences interfere," says Joseph Blasi, a Rutgers University professor who studied the Eastern situation. 

Mr. Blasi says Eastern's managers never looked upon labor's board members as equals.
Labor, meanwhile, used its board seats to haggle over wages. "United has to guard against the same thing happening," he cautions. 

For now, however, the honeymoon is on at UAL.
The pilots, Mr. Wolf says, "have been guided throughout our discussions by a desire to do what is best for their membership and United." He predicts that the buy-out would infuse UAL with "entrepreneurial vigor." 

Most pilot-union leaders chalk up their past disputes with management to traditional collective-bargaining posturing.
Over the weekend, the union began asking its members to discard all anti-management buttons and stickers from the cockpits of United's jets. "We must now demonstrate that employee ownership means cooperation and employee-management peace," said J. Stephen Smith, vice chairman of the United pilot union, in a message to members. 

So far, reaction from the pilot union rank and file has been positive. "I personally feel there's no other choice," says Robert McGowan, a DC-10 co-pilot based in California.
Mr. McGowan says he's talked to some 75 pilots in the past few days who believe "it's better for employees to be owners and operators than for some speculator to come in and raid the airline." 

There is still a chance the plan could collapse.
Among other things, the pilot union has to persuade its members to give up $250 million in concessions (which go beyond what it has denied management) and to transfer $200 million out of one of their pension plans.
What's more, the machinists and flight attendants at United haven't decided whether they will formally support the bid.
Brian M. Freeman, the machinists' financial adviser, has accused the pilot union of using "blue-collar-mail" to force the other unions to support their bid "just so they can declare victory." 

Partly because of these uncertainties, Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis, whose own takeover proposal was what sparked the battle for the airline several weeks ago, wrote to the UAL board last week to say he would remain in the wings with a competing bid -- betting, in effect, that his best chance is to wait for the management-pilot plan to fall through. 

If the employee buy-out does succeed, both labor and management will be under considerable pressure to make it work, especially if an economic downturn destroys profits and management has to ask the pilots for new wage reductions and productivity gains. "One of the most perilous issues is whether labor and management can function under economic pressures of a high debt load, with little room to maneuver," says Mr. Blasi, the Rutgers professor. 

Airlines could well face profit-eating fare wars and fuel-cost increases in the near future, says John Pincavage of the Transportation Group, a New York investment-banking firm.
He also notes that yields, or the amount of profit airlines take in on ticket sales, declined in June and July. 

To help pay for the takeover, the buy-out group is borrowing $7.2 billion.
That debt will cost the company $600 million to $700 million in interest payments a year.
At its current operating level, analysts say, United generates about $1.1 billion in cash annually to pay its interest bill.
The pilot concessions would add only modestly to that. 

"That doesn't leave a big cushion," says Helane Becker, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.
A 6.5% drop in United's revenue, projected at $9.1 billion for this year, would be enough to wipe out its profit, Ms. Becker notes.
Such concerns are likely to prompt a serious review of the proposed transaction by the Department of Transportation, which could threaten to suspend United's operating certificate if it appears that financial problems would undermine safety. 

UAL and pilot-union advisers say tax advantages available to employee stock-ownership plans would help the company pay down its debt more rapidly.
UAL can deduct from its federal taxes the principal it borrows to pay for the employee stake.
And because its lenders can deduct 50% of the interest they earn on UAL's loan, the buy-out group has been able to line up financing at a more favorable interest rate. 

The two groups have also attempted to head off potential conflicts through a number of special provisions in their plan, says Stuart Oran, a lawyer with Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison who is serving as the pilots' legal adviser.
The pilot-union leaders, for instance, have agreed not to strike for at least seven years and have promised concessions -- including a 10% pay cut, fewer vacation days, more flying hours and higher medical deductibles -- that just a few months ago the union said would lead to "indentured servitude." 

The difference now, says Frederick C. Dubinsky, chairman of United's pilot union, is that "we wouldn't be investing in someone else's company, but in one we own." 

In return for the concessions, management has consented to meet on a monthly basis with labor leaders to foster "an environment of mutual trust." The two sides also agreed to a special task force so that captains could directly communicate their suggestions for running the airline more efficiently to management. 

Moreover, employees would have "super-majority voting rights" to block certain moves, such as major sales of routes or aircraft, and could influence the selection of eight outside directors who would make up the majority of UAL's board. 

But will management find this arrangement too much of a straitjacket?
Until two months ago, Mr. Wolf, the UAL chairman, appeared steadfastly opposed to giving the pilots any additional say in the company.
In a recent letter to employees, he hinted at the shotgun nature of the alliance, explaining that he had become convinced UAL would succumb to a takeover following Mr. Davis's $240-a-share, $5.75 billion, offer last month. 

"The only question was not 'Will it happen? ' but 'What form it will it take? '" he wrote.
A UAL spokesman says that, once the situation became clear, Mr. Wolf decided the best course was to put the company in employee hands. 

Still, tensions arise.
Even after the two sides had submitted their joint offer to the board, they fought over UAL's request to call the bid "management-led." 

Mr. Wolf isn't known for being cozy with labor.
As chairman of Tiger International Inc. a few years ago, he once told the unions that if they didn't agree to wage concessions, Tiger's board would liquidate the company within 24 hours.
When the pilots dawdled over signing an agreement, he went ahead and imposed the reductions. 

At United, the cool, reserved Mr. Wolf has held his distance with union leaders.
Because of his refusal to budge in contract negotiations with the flight-attendant union, the attendants haven't had a pay raise since November 1986.
The pilots have been working without a contract for more than 18 months. 

Relations between UAL and the pilots had been rocky for a year before United became a takeover target.
Pilots simmered over a memo Mr. Wolf sent out in July of 1988 about the need to cut labor costs.
Mr. Wolf wanted more productivity, an extension of a lower-wage "B scale" and a freeze on the wages of higher-paid pilots. 

The message didn't sit well with pilots at a time when United was enjoying record profits.
What irked them in particular was that the UAL board had paid Mr. Wolf a $5.8 million bonus in 1988. 

Mr. Dubinsky, the United pilot-union chairman, warned of a strike this fall, and in recent months relations reached new lows.
To protest the lack of progress in their contract talks, United pilots began flying "by the book" -- meaning, for instance, that aircraft taxied more slowly at O'Hare International Airport in Chicago, the airline's main base.
Such tactics help explain why only 62% of United's flights arrived on time in July -- its worst record ever. 

The pilots' refusal for most of the year to work any voluntary overtime has forced United to cancel dozens of flights for lack of crews.
And at a cost to United of $200,000 a day, two Boeing 747-400 aircraft sat idle for months because the pilots refused to fly them without a new contract agreement. 

Amid such scrapping, some United managers would bitingly refer to the pilot leader as "Mad Dog Dubinsky." The pilots called Mr. Wolf "Ice Man" for his obstinacy on the contract issues. 

The pilots have shown how sensitive they can be in their business dealings throughout the takeover battle.
Some early false steps by Mr. Davis cost him their support for his bid.
In a meeting with Mr. Dubinsky and his advisers, Mr. Davis was asked why he wanted to own United.
After saying how he wanted a premier airline to leave to his children, he explained: "When I was a boy, I liked to play with toys.
I still like toys.
They've just gotten more expensive." Mr. Davis then cupped Mr. Dubinsky's two cheeks in his hands like a playful father and exclaimed, "Let's have some fun]" 

"That meeting was the end of Davis," one pilot adviser says.
Adds Mr. Dubinsky, "We weren't about to be trifled with as some rich kid's toy." 

An adviser for Mr. Davis who attended the meeting confirms that Mr. Davis told the pilot leaders that when he was a child he played with toy airplanes, but that Mr. Davis immediately added he didn't consider United a toy.
The adviser argues that the real reason the pilots wouldn't join the Davis bid was that Mr. Davis insisted on control, and "they were looking for a deal in which the unions have control." 

When Mr. Wolf and Mr. Dubinsky met to discuss the buy-out seriously for the first time on Aug. 24, things went more smoothly. "Surprisingly or not, the two men found they weren't very far apart on what they wanted for the airline," says Eugene Kailin, the pilot's financial adviser at Lazard Freres & Co. 

Just five days later, the 27 members of the pilot union's governing board arrived in New York from various parts of the country to deliberate on the proposal; their concurrence was essential.
After nearly three days of debate, they approved it unanimously.
Then the 27 members stood up and applauded. 

All that was left was for Mr. Wolf and Mr. Dubinsky to sign on the dotted line.
The two men met at 8 a.m. at Le Restaurant in New York's Regency Hotel.
Both men signed the agreement papers, smiled and shook hands. 

To maintain such a blissful relationship, executives at other employee-owned companies counsel the importance of tolerance and patience. 

"Managers have to realize they're not just there to run the business in a traditional way -- they have to open themselves to dialogue with the employees," says Joseph Vittoria, chairman of Avis, which substantially reduced operating expenses and customer complaints in the first full year after employees acquired a majority stake in 1987. "That often means being patient, because you're going to get some crazy ideas." 

