.START 

Spending more, earning more, inflating more, building more -- that's the message expected from this week's indicators. 

The consumer price index, personal income, personal consumption and housing starts all are thought to have jumped in August, according to a survey by MMS International, a unit of McGraw-Hill Inc., New York. 

But that doesn't necessarily mean the trend will continue.
Several economists point out that recent indicators are distorted by two significant factors -- falling oil prices and robust auto production, neither of which is expected to continue indefinitely. 

"What it's all telling you is the economy is still growing, somewhere close to its long-term potential growth rate.
There is certainly no evidence the economy is running out of steam," said Robert H. Chandross, chief economist at Lloyd's Bank, New York. 

In the overall economy, inflation is still around 4.5% and looks like it will hover around that level "from here on out," Mr. Chandross said. 

The August producer price index, reported Friday, slid 0.4%, pushed down by a 7.3% drop in energy prices.
Excluding food and energy, producer prices jumped 0.5%.
The more down-to-earth measure of August inflation, the consumer price index, is expected to show a rise of 0.2%, the same as in the two previous months. 

The reasons?
Consumer prices, which are measured farther down the pipeline than producer prices, don't react as strongly to energy prices; and the cost of services plays a big role in the consumer index. 

Charles Lieberman, managing director of financial markets research at Manufacturers Hanover Securities Corp., New York, says a drop in energy costs means lower gasoline and fuel costs to consumers, which frees up more disposable income for discretionary spending. 

But Mr. Lieberman, who also expects a 0.2% increase in the CPI, said that "everything in the service sector is pretty much rising, and at a decent clip." 

Fortunately, consumers have been earning more; they also have been buying more.
August personal income is expected to rise 0.3% and would have risen further but for the continuing telephone workers' strike, economists said.
Consumption is thought to have outpaced that gain with a jump of 0.7%, largely because of auto sales that have been buoyed by incentive programs. 

"There's no question that {auto makers} managed to unload inventories by discounting," Mr. Lieberman said. "In effect, they've trained consumers to buy only when prices are discounted." 

Economists said the batch of numbers that came out last week and the data expected this week probably will do little to spur any credit action by the Federal Reserve.
The Fed recently eased credit a bit when it appeared the economy was halting. 

One area where that earlier easing seems to be paying off is in housing, economists said.
August housing starts, due tomorrow, are expected to at least maintain July's 1.4 million-unit annual rate and possibly reach 1.5 million. 

And the government signs off on second-quarter real gross national product Thursday.
Its final revision of the figure isn't expected to make much of a change in last month's 2.7% estimate. 

