.START 

Democrats and civil-rights groups scored a victory earlier this year when they rejected President Bush's choice to be civil-rights chief.
Now, the Republicans see a chance to settle the score. 

As Congress gears up to consider reversing the effect of a series of Supreme Court decisions this June covering job bias, GOP lawmakers are lying in wait.
They hope to use the debate not only to preserve the essence of the court decisions but to paint Democrats into a political corner by forcing them to defend such controversial positions as race-based quotas. 

Those who oppose the court's decisions, charges Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah), a senior member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, support "equality of results and reverse discrimination instead of equality of opportunity and color blindness." 

These political divisions make it "difficult to reach an early revision," says House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.).
Civil-rights groups, such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, have made passage of the legislation a top priority, but, says NAACP Executive Director Benjamin Hooks, "This may be a long-term fight, so we are digging in." 

The pending partisan struggle comes at a time when civil-rights advocates in Congress, having withstood the Reagan administration's assault on affirmative action, had hoped to be able to set their sights on the next generation of legislation.
Instead, "the Supreme Court is making the country refight the civil-rights battles that were won in the 1960s and 1970s," charges Ralph Neas, executive director of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights. 

The Democrats drafting the bills are trying to tiptoe around an explicit debate over affirmative action.
They are, for instance, unlikely to include provisions aimed at reversing the effect of a ruling that struck down state and local government programs setting aside a certain number of contracts for minority-owned and women-owned businesses. 

But Republicans are already labeling their efforts an endorsement of fixed percentages for minority hiring. "The only alternative is to embrace quotas," says Wisconsin Rep. James Sensenbrenner, the ranking GOP member of the House Judiciary subcommittee on civil and constitutional rights. 

The Supreme Court's decisions, while not directly addressing the core of the controversy over affirmative action, sharply narrowed civil-rights laws covering employment discrimination and made the methods of proving violations much more difficult.
Republicans, including President Bush and Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, have made clear that they don't believe remedial legislation is necessary.
But when William Lucas, the former Michigan sheriff who was Mr. Bush's nominee to be assistant attorney general for civil rights, agreed with the president's assessment, his rejection by the Senate Judiciary Committee along party lines was virtually guaranteed. 

Republicans were infuriated by Mr. Lucas's defeat -- Senate GOP Leader Robert Dole of Kansas slammed it as "crass political partisanship" -- and have since redoubled their attacks on the Democratic plans.
Sen. Hatch calls the Supreme Court decisions "sound, reasonable and genuinely moderate" and warns that if Democrats insist on trying to reverse them with legislation, he may do the same to cases from the 1970s that upheld affirmative-action plans. 

Other Republicans believe they can use the debate over the civil-rights legislation to advance the cause of racially neutral, tax-based programs designed to foster economic growth among the poor, including enterprise zones and special venture-capital tax breaks for investments in poor areas. "Quotas don't produce any meaningful results," says Sen. Phil Gramm (R., Texas). "We need more jobs, more growth, more opportunity." 

"This is an opportunity for Republicans to change the emphasis in civil-rights policy to one that is more constructive, emphasizing economic opportunities," says Alan Slobodin, a former GOP lawyer on the House Judiciary Committee now with the conservative Washington Legal Foundation. 

But Democrats are proceeding with plans to introduce their comprehensive bill later this month in both the House and Senate. "We are going to have to respond to these assaults," says Rep. Don Edwards (D., Calif.), chairman of the House Judiciary subcommittee on civil and constitutional rights. "We shouldn't be going around narrowing in a mean-spirited way these civil-rights laws that have worked for so many years." 

The legislation, which is still being drafted, is expected to require employers to justify their hiring practices when workers challenge them as discriminatory.
That's the way the Supreme Court had interpreted the law from 1971 until last June, when it ruled in a case involving Alaska salmon canneries that workers bear the burden of discrediting the employer's justification for hiring practices. 

To undo a Supreme Court decision that allowed white firefighters in Birmingham, Ala., to challenge an eight-year-old, court-approved affirmative-action plan, the bill would also set a statute of limitations on bringing such challenges. 

In addition, it would write into law previous Supreme Court rulings barring employment practices that are unintentionally discriminatory and 

barring discriminatory terms and conditions of contracts between private parties.
If enacted, the legislation would be the first substantial new law aimed at battling race-based job discrimination since the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972, which extended the landmark 1964 Civil Rights Act to public and private employers. 

Besides the opposition from its GOP critics in Congress and the administration, the Democrats' bill will also likely be opposed by business interests, who fear it may go further than just overturning the effect of the Supreme Court rulings. "The hue and cry that resulted after those decisions was overblown," says Frederick Krebs, a U.S. Chamber of Commerce lobbyist. "Those cases were a fine-tuning.
Once you dip into it legislatively, you'll probably create more problems for us." 

Major Job-Bias Decisions of 1988-89 Supreme Court term: 

Martin vs.
Wilks: Allowed, 5-4, workers to file new lawsuits claiming reverse discrimination under court-approved affirmative-action plans. 

Wards Cove Packing Co. vs.
Atonio: Imposed, 5-4, tougher standards on employees trying to use statistics to prove discrimination. 

Patterson vs.
McLean Credit Union: Ruled, 5-4, that an 1866 civil-rights law, giving all citizens equal rights to make contracts, doesn't allow lawsuits involving harassment on the job or other conditions of employment. 

