.START 

The governor of the National Bank of Hungary, Ferenc Bartha, said he expects the Hungarian forint to become a fully convertible currency by 1995 at the latest. 

"I expect full convertibility of the forint between 1992 and 1995, including for capital transactions and internal convertibility," Mr. Bartha said at a news conference here. 

Mr. Bartha, who was in Brussels to sign Hungary's first borrowing denominated in European currency units, said Hungary is preparing the second phase of a reform program aimed at making its economy more market-oriented and at reducing the country's $18 billion foreign debt. 

In the past year, Hungary has passed legislation to encourage foreign investment and turn some state-owned companies over to private investors; it has cut subsidies to various economic sectors; and it has lifted many price controls and started to develop its own capital market. 

Mr. Bartha said the Hungarian government is negotiating with the International Monetary Fund for "structural funds" to help it with the next phase of its economic liberalization. 

He said legislation is in the pipeline that would make the central bank independent of the state and would decentralize commercial banking. 

Since legislation was passed at the end of last year allowing the creation of private companies and encouraging foreign investment, Mr. Bartha said, a total of 1,000 such companies have been set up, involving total investment of $400 million. 

The rapid pace of economic and political change in Hungary has brought with it problems such as a large external deficit and rising inflation. 

Mr. Bartha said the deficit has been aggravated by Hungary's relaxation of travel restrictions.
But he said the government is confident conditions will "become normal" again in a couple of years. 

He said the rise in inflation to its current level of about 15% was due mainly to large cuts in subsidies and easing of price controls. "Given the situation, we regard this as a good result," he said. 

