.START 

One of the latest tricks in the drug war is "boot camp" for drug offenders.
Newspapers and television show young men in dungarees and T-shirts doing pushups or marching while being watched by a "tough but fair" drill instructor. 

It all looks very impressive -- at least to people whose idea of boot camp comes from movies like "Private Benjamin." If you've been through boot camp, however, the idea is someplace between silly and scary -- maybe some of each. 

To begin with, military boot camp isn't set up to straighten people out.
It accustoms recruits to being part of a group, makes them want to be part of a larger group, gives them a common set of experiences they can build on, and teaches them to work together. 

The most important thing drill instructors hold out to every recruit is the promise that if they play by the rules, they will be rewarded.
They will wear a uniform, contribute to society, be respected. 

What's the promise of drug "boot camp"?
That the participants can go back to their old neighborhoods?
That they can wear an "I survived drug boot camp" T-shirt?
Or do people really expect that each offender sent to boot camp will come back several weeks later committed to steady work, voting and paying taxes? 

Sure, everyone has heard about the former juvenile delinquent who credits military boot camp with turning him around.
But I can't think of many like that.
The young men who do best in boot camp -- and subsequent military service -- almost always enter boot camp pretty squared away.
They come into the military with a self-confidence and self-discipline that the drill instructors build on.
The juvenile delinquents, wise guys and goof-offs are often the first people to foul up so badly that even the Marines give up on them. 

What's going to happen to a platoon full of delinquents, shirkers and misfits? 

Sure they can be punished -- kept from dessert, made to do pushups until their arms ache.
They can be given short haircuts and early reveille, and they can be yelled at incessantly. 

But punishment has never been the purpose of boot camp.
The 50 pushups for a dirty rifle are an incentive to keep the rifle clean henceforth.
And the controlled rage of drill instructors works with young men who, for the most part, are not used to being bellowed at by authority figures.
It works because it is different.
But will real or feigned anger work with people who think rage is the norm, and that punching, kicking or stabbing is an accepted way to show displeasure? 

The other thing about boot camp is that most of it is not marching, close order drill, inspection or pushups.
It's school.
It begins with aptitude tests to find candidates to learn electronics, engine repair, meteorology and other skills. 

After that, it's classes in basic military knowledge -- how to recognize people of different rank, how to salute, to wear the uniform.
There are classes in first aid, in military history, in hygiene, in wearing a gas mask.
Sailors learn to tie knots, to fight fires.
Marine recruits learn to use a rifle.
Everyone learns a new terminology. 

But what are the lessons in drug boot camp?
What potentials do we test for?
What skills does society need?
Riflery is out, of course.
Do we substitute how to make change?
Fill out a job application?
Can we teach the skills in six or 12 weeks?
Can we guarantee they'll be used? 

Another part of boot camp is medical.
Every recruit receives a physical and sees a dentist.
Men with poor eyesight are fitted for glasses.
Overweight people are given diets.
All to a good end: healthy people work better, fight better. 

Do we do the same for drug boot camp?
Give the recruits eye exams and make sure they become stronger and healthier?
So they'll work better?
Fight better? 

Work at what?
Fight at what?
Fight whom? 

That's the scary part: Because there's one other thing you get from boot camp -- a sense of kinship with your fellow recruits. 

That makes sense if you're staffing an infantry battalion, an aircraft carrier or a naval station.
You want people who'll stick together, be willing to risk their lives for one another.
But what if you send people with those values back to the same environment they came from -- back to a place of no jobs, no future, no mission? 

What happens if the people you've just trained are stronger and healthier than they once were and there's no one to fight except the police?
No battles to win except the ones they start?
What happens when the drug users and the drug dealers, the muggers and the thieves apply the lessons of close order drill, standing watch and self-discipline to the professions that sent them to boot camp in the first place? 

Boot camp's a good idea -- for the military.
It should stay there. 

Mr. Earls, who lives in Middlefield, Conn., spent 11 weeks in Navy boot camp many years ago. 

