.START 

When Kirk Kerkorian agreed to sell MGM/UA Communications Co. to Qintex Group for $1.5 billion Friday, it was viewed as one of his shrewdest deals yet -- and the apparent end of an unusual last-minute bidding war between two Australian moguls, Rupert Murdoch and Christopher Skase. 

But the sale has left Hollywood buzzing with questions about how MGM/UA engineered the final bidding.
People familiar with the bidding say Mr. Murdoch's News Corp. and its Fox Inc. subsidiary complain they were led to believe that a News Corp. bid of $1.4 billion would be accepted quickly by the MGM/UA board. 

It also isn't yet clear how Mr. Skase's Qintex Group, an Australian operator of resorts and a large Australian television network, is going to pay for MGM/UA, one of the oldest movie studios. 

On Friday, MGM/UA announced it had reached a revised agreement with Qintex to sell the company for $25 a share, or a total of $1.5 billion.
That topped News Corp. 's surprise bid on Wednesday of $23.16 a share, or $1.4 billion, and an earlier Qintex agreement in March to buy the company for $20 a share, or about $1.1 billion. 

Analysts say Mr. Kerkorian, who has now signed a binding agreement to sell his 82% stake to Qintex, has once again managed to get a hefty premium for one of his assets. "It's a new high benchmark," says Alan Kassan, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. Qintex is "paying 13 to 14 times a best-case cash flow.
It's a very high price." 

This won't be the first time Mr. Kerkorian has come out ahead after buying Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer 20 years ago.
Since then he has sold, repurchased and resold pieces of the studio, augmenting his fortune. 

Mr. Kerkorian began trying to sell MGM/UA some 18 months ago, and a long list of companies expressed an interest, including Walt Disney Co., MCA Inc., and Davis Cos., controlled by Marvin Davis.
But many of those who negotiated with Mr. Kerkorian said he frequently vacillated over what he was willing to sell.
He also seemed determined to hold on to the famous MGM lion logo. 

Sources say Qintex wanted to buy the whole company but was rebuffed by Mr. Kerkorian.
In March, Mr. Kerkorian agreed to sell the company to Qintex but only on the condition that he could buy back certain MGM assets, such as the logo, the MGM library of 34 films and the MGM television group, among other things -- making the effective purchase price for Qintex about $600 million. 

But Hollywood soon became rife with rumors that Mr. Skase was having difficulty raising the money.
And although Qintex announced that it had bank commitments of $400 million and was negotiating with equity partners, Mr. Kerkorian became nervous.
He also began to consider, once again, selling the company as a whole.
Outsiders speculate he may have become less optimistic about running MGM as a small studio at a time when many independent movie producers are failing. 

But sources say it was primarily his nervousness over the ability of Qintex to come up with the financing that led MGM/UA to reopen talks with News Corp. and Fox Inc. 

In March, Mr. Murdoch's companies lost out to Qintex after bidding $19.80 a share.
But the Qintex agreement gave MGM/UA the right to terminate the pact if it accepted a higher bid. "Since Kerkorian was going to ask for more money {for the whole company}, he wanted a solid buyer," says a person close to the negotiations. 

Mr. Kerkorian couldn't be reached for comment.
An MGM/UA spokeswoman said: "The merger agreement allowed us to continue our discussions with Fox and, given the nature of the entertainment community, we were often in contact with them." Other officials at MGM/UA declined to comment.
Officials at News Corp. and Fox Inc. also declined to comment. 

People close to the negotiations say News Corp. and Fox Inc. were led by MGM/UA to believe that if they made an offer at an agreed upon price, the acquisition would be assured.
News Corp. officials "were invited to bid.
They were told that their {$23.16-a-share} bid had been accepted.
They were told that if they made a deal by {a certain} date, the company would be theirs," says one insider. 

"We thought we had it," Mr. Murdoch said in an interview with the Financial Times of London.
Although he indicated that he would be flying to Los Angeles to meet with Mr. Kerkorian, Mr. Murdoch said: "We aren't going to pay $26 a share." 

Mr. Skase couldn't be reached for comment.
David Evans, president and chief executive officer of Qintex Entertainment, which is affiliated with Qintex Group, says that after announcing the Fox offer, MGM/UA invited Qintex to participate in a bid. 

Mr. Skase apparently managed to allay Mr. Kerkorian's fears about his financing by disclosing more details about his negotiations with potential equity partners.
Qintex also agreed to deliver an irrevocable letter of credit for $50 million as part of the final agreement. 

To finance the bid, Mr. Evans says Qintex expects to increase its previously announced bank commitments of $400 million and is continuing to negotiate with "substantial companies with clout" overseas about equity partnerships.
He "doubts very much" that Qintex will sell any part of MGM/UA to help finance the acquisition. 

Analysts point out that Qintex is assuming $400 million in MGM/UA debt in the transaction.
And they add that the movie business requires big cash outlays. 

Mr. Kerkorian will receive roughly $1.2 billion from Qintex for his stake in MGM/UA, including the 10 million preferred shares he holds.
He controls almost all of the preferred shares, for which Qintex is paying $18 a share.
On Friday, MGM/UA shares closed at $22.625, up $1.875, in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. 

