.START 

Entrepreneurs rejoiced as a key congressional committee switched gears and voted to repeal one of small business's biggest bugaboos: Section 89 of the tax code dealing with employee benefits. 

But lobbyists fretted that small business still doesn't know what substitute legislation may demand.
Some worried that the new law could still shackle business owners with burdensome requirements. 

While the House Ways and Means Committee late last week voted to repeal the complex employee-benefits legislation, it also voted to replace it with a simpler provision. "This may be a significant new reform, but it doesn't look like any repeal I've ever seen," says John Motley, chief lobbyist for the National Federation of Independent Business, the largest small-business association, which has aggressively pushed for total repeal. 

Section 89 of the tax code requires companies to distribute fringe benefits fairly among top employees and rank-and-file workers.
The once little-noticed provision of the 1986 tax-revision law has stirred an outcry from both business and labor groups complaining that the provisions are too confusing, and that compliance is too costly. 

Small businesses especially have attacked the law as too burdensome to administer, claiming that companies have to pay large sums to consultants just to figure out the law.
In recent months, both the House and Senate have moved to curtail provisions of the law, but small-business groups have pressed for repeal. 

While most political experts say the Ways and Means Committee turnaround on the Section 89 issue is an important victory for entrepreneurs, business owners still face uncertainties.
For one, it's still unclear how the Senate will reconcile its bill to curtail provisions of the law with the new House approach.
Moreover, business needs to have Congress act formally on Section 89 as soon as possible so owners can decide whether to cancel or keep any new insurance plans. 

The latest confusion began when Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski last week told three small-business groups that he had decided to reverse positions and support repeal.
Earlier, the Illinois Democrat had supported curtailing the law but opposed eliminating it. 

In place of Section 89, Rep. Rostenkowski is proposing rules setting anti-discrimination requirements.
These are designed to make compliance simple to determine without hiring outside help.
The rules would cover what Mr. Rostenkowski calls "executive-only" health plans and the health plans of professional service organizations, such as law firms.
Small companies would have to match each executive's benefit plan with one for lower-paid staffers.
Larger companies would have to match the plans on a ratio of one executive to 25 other employees. 

Not everyone is happy. "It took one tax committee four pages and seven examples to explain {the proposal}," says the NFIB's Mr. Motley. "They're saying either you offer the same plan to everybody or look ridiculous by choosing among your employees," he complains.
He also says if the Senate tries to combine those rules with the current Senate version of Section 89, a much tougher law than the one the Ways and Means Committee proposes could result.
Under the Senate bill, for example, a company could be required to offer any benefits to 90% of employees and pay at least 60% of the costs. 

A Senate aide familiar with Section 89 says Rep. Rostenkowski "has moved the line with this new proposal, but he hasn't abandoned the principle.
My gut feeling is the Senate will say if it's a better way to go, let's go with it." The Rostenkowski plan, he says, would remove a tax deduction for benefit plans that the government believes blatantly discriminate between higher-paid and lower-paid employees, but wouldn't try to get businesses to expand coverage. 

Some small-business groups say the worries about the Rostenkowski action are misplaced.
The new proposal is cause for rejoicing and "removes a major stress factor for small businesses around the country," says John Paul Galles, executive vice president of National Small Business United, based here. "I feel very confident Rep. Rostenkowski will keep his promise and repeal Section 89," he says. 

Dirk Van Dongen, president of the National Association of Wholesaler-Distributors, calls Rep. Rostenkowski's new provisions safe harbors that are better for businesses than no rules at all. "They're like a high jump that's six inches off the ground.
They're easy to administer and tame in what they require," he said. "By having them, you avoid any contention as to whether your plan discriminates or not." 

Rep. Rostenkowski, in another reversal, also said he will support extending the 25% tax deduction for personal and family health insurance for self-employed business owners, which was scheduled to expire.
Earlier, he had opposed the measure, a stance the NFIB has termed "Rosty's revenge," or a way of punishing the group for its stand for repeal of Section 89. 

A key to the action on Section 89 was the fact that a repeal bill, put forward by Rep. John LaFalce, (D., N.Y.), chairman of the House Small Business Committee, has 317 co-sponsors, enough to win full House approval.
Congressional aides say the House Democratic leadership wasn't willing to prevent the bill from coming to a vote in order to support a powerful committee chairman.
Since it was clear that Section 89 would be repealed in the House, the aides say, Rep. Rostenkowski apparently decided to do it in committee, perhaps using it as a bargaining chip on other issues. 

