.START 

"The Famous Teddy Z," a sitcom premiering tonight, is expected to be one of the hottest new shows on CBS this season.
The pilot is funny and well-written, but there's another reason "Teddy Z" got on the air: CBS wanted Hugh Wilson, and Columbia Pictures had him. 

Two seasons ago, CBS canceled Mr. Wilson's critical hit "Frank's Place" because of anemic viewership.
But the CBS Inc. unit didn't want to lose the talent of Mr. Wilson, a writer and producer who had created such hits as "WKRP in Cincinnati," so it gave him a "commitment," or a promise to air another of his efforts in the future.
In the meantime, Columbia Pictures Television wooed Mr. Wilson away from another studio with an exclusive multimillion-dollar contract.
That meant CBS had to make a deal with Columbia to get a show for the fall that would be produced and written by Mr. Wilson. 

In the next several weeks, 25 new shows will premiere on the three major networks and News Corp. 's Fox network.
Many came to fruition because producers were able to fit a complicated mix of trendy concepts (comedy is hot this year), network-writer relationships and favors into the holes each network needed to plug. 

Columbia Pictures Television is this season's big-league studio with the most new series, a total of five.
To bring in those winners, it vied with a half-dozen major studios and a few strong independent producers to anticipate the networks' needs.
A look at the genesis of Columbia's five winners provides a peek at the process by which programs get on the air and how a studio can rise to the top in television. 

In recent years, the television unit of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. has followed a strategy of emphasizing comedy over drama and pursuing veteran hit-making writer/producers, like Hugh Wilson, with juicy contracts.
Just as importantly, Columbia never loses sight of the fact that the big money in TV production comes from selling reruns for syndication.
As a result, it avoids presenting a series concept to a network that is topical or gimmicky and thus might have too short a shelf-life, regardless of whether critics would applaud its freshness. 

Columbia's winners this season demonstrate how it was able to mobilize its stable of writers, producers and actors to serve the networks' very specific needs.
Take "Living Dolls," an ABC series about four teen-age girls modeling in New York, the kind of low-concept show critics get sniffy about. 

ABC had decided that first-place NBC was winning Saturday nights "by default," getting no competition for its successful comedies, says Ted Harbert, executive vice president, prime time, for the ABC Entertainment unit of Capital Cities/ABC Inc. Specifically, ABC wanted comedies that would appeal to the kind of people who stay home Saturdays, and hoped for that rarity, a show that appeals to both young viewers and mature ones. 

Columbia had attracted such a "bi-modal audience" with the long-running "Facts of Life." Knowing that ABC liked the idea of young models, the studio turned to Ross Brown, a writer under contract who had worked on "Facts of Life" as well as ABC's popular "Who's the Boss?" Mr. Brown was made head writer and executive producer on "Living Dolls" and told to make the show a "planted spinoff" of "Who's the Boss?" 

Spinoffs are created when a sidekick from a hot show becomes a central character for a new show, as "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" begat "Rhoda." In this case, ABC and Columbia decided to run a special episode of "Boss," now in its sixth season, in which the daughter of character Tony Micelli (Tony Danza) befriends another girl who is about to become a model.
That hastily planted character will turn up four nights later on "Living Dolls," and ABC can always have Tony and daughter visit her in future episodes.
This may seem uncreative, but ABC's statistics-keepers know that fewer viewers than ever bother to try new shows and such a ploy may help. 

"Free Spirit," a show about a pretty witch who plays housekeeper to a divorced attorney and his kids, is another frothy comedy.
ABC liked the idea but rejected the first script, written by a playwright under contract to Columbia. 

Columbia ordered a quick rewrite from a writer with another studio, and once the pilot was accepted, assembled a staff of writers from within Columbia's ranks.
One key was the right actress to play Winnie, the witch, and Columbia went for Corinne Bohrer, whom ABC happened to have in a "holding deal." 

"There is no guarantee a network will put on a show just because you use an actor they're holding," says Scott Siegler, president of Columbia Pictures Television. "But they liked the pilot, and I think Corinne is the perfect cross between Elizabeth Montgomery {of "Bewitched"} and Goldie Hawn." 

"Peaceable Kingdom," about a gutsy woman zookeeper who lives right on the zoo grounds with her kids and pet seal, is another one of those warm-hearted family shows that make critics cringe.
But, says Kim LeMasters, head CBS programmer: "We needed a lot of new programs at 8, and we thought this show could really help us out.
We liked the concept when it was developed, but we were afraid it could be a little soft.
We told Columbia it needed marquee value, somebody like Lindsay Wagner with whom they had a holding deal, and that's exactly who they got." 

Finally, Columbia is on the air with "Hardball," a joint production with NBC, which wanted the kind of male, action/adventure show that would attract young men on Friday nights the way "Miami Vice" once did.
A script was written by an NBC Productions staffer, but NBC wasn't satisfied and thought of Frank Lupo, whose many successes included one that helped change NBC's fortunes, "The A-Team," and who had moved to Columbia. 

"Hardball" is a buddy show about undercover cops that teams a cocky, longhaired younger man with a bull-headed, paunchy older guy.
Columbia had long been trying to corner actor John Ashton after such films as "Beverly Hills Cop," and he got the part of the older cop.
NBC, a unit of General Electric Co., was keen on hiring a strong-jawed young actor named Richard Tyson, who is already being promoted as the season's new sex symbol. 

Getting all these shows on the air, though, doesn't mean money in the bank for Columbia.
The amount networks pay toward production costs has stayed flat in recent years while the costs have escalated, so a studio can be out millions of dollars with no payback if a show doesn't last long enough to be syndicated -- and only about 9% survive that long. 

Gary Lieberthal, chairman and chief executive of Columbia Pictures Television, says that a popular sitcom starting now could pile up $25 million in deficits over four years, which is how long Columbia waits before it tries to sell a series to TV stations.
However, he says, the syndication revenue for that show could exceed $100 million over four more years, the kind of bonanza that keeps studios going.
He also claims that Columbia is so good at nursing shows along, keeping plot lines and characters fresh, that it manages to keep more than 30% of its shows on long enough to syndicate. 

In fact, says Mr. Lieberthal, one of the main reasons Columbia wanted to do "Living Dolls" is that it's "the kind of show local stations would want to run at 5 p.m. in reruns.
If we're right and it lasts, it's very good business." 

New for 1989-90 

The Famous Teddy Z (CBS) 

Free Spirit (ABC) 

Peaceable Kingdom (CBS) 

Living Dolls (ABC) 

Hardball (NBC) 

Returning Series 

Married . . . With Children (Fox) 

Who's the Boss? (ABC) 

Designing Women (CBS) 

My Two Dads (NBC) 

Source: Columbia Pictures Television 

