.START 

Corestates Financial Corp. turned up the heat in the bidding war for First Pennsylvania Corp. by offering to acquire this bank-holding company for stock valued at $18.50 a share, or $721.5 million. 

The battle for control of First Pennsylvania is a complex one.
First Pennsylvania already has an offer on the table from Reading, Pa.-based Meridian Bancorp Inc. for stock valued at $18 a share, or $704 million. 

Also, in 1986, First Pennsylvania had agreed to be acquired by Marine Midland, the New York-based unit of Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp. of Hong Kong.
But Marine Midland agreed to step aside after Meridian offered to pay it $30 million to acquire its 24.9% voting stake in First Pennsylvania, plus another $100 million for the First Pennsylvania preferred stock it holds. 

Corestates didn't emerge as a suitor for First Pennsylvania until Meridian, an aggressive, out-of-town competitor, came forward with an offer for First Pennsylvania. 

Corestates, a stalwart in the Philadelphia banking community, had to contend previously with out-of-town competition when Pittsburgh's PNC Financial Corp. took over Provident National Bank and when Mellon Corp., also of Pittsburgh, acquired Girard Bank. 

Under the terms of the Corestates offer, First Pennsylvania shareholders would receive Corestates stock valued at $18.50.
The Corestates offer expires at noon EDT today. 

Meridian said it would like to top Corestates's bid for First Pennsylvania, but it failed to meet a deadline of 5 p.m. Saturday for submitting a higher offer.
It couldn't be learned which bank insisted on the tight deadline. 

Meridian said it learned of the Corestates offer after the market closed Friday.
Meridian disclosed details of the Corestates bid over the weekend.
A spokesperson for Meridian said it still planned to submit a higher bid for First Pennsylvania. 

Corestates said it hadn't intended to disclose its bid until today. 

A Corestates spokesman said "we have made a complete offer" for First Pennsylvania.
He declined to comment on whether Corestates was negotiating with Marine Midland. 

Officials of First Pennsylvania couldn't be reached to comment on the Corestates bid. 

