.START 

The ABC network, which has been locked out of the financially lucrative late-night market, is studying program proposals, ranging from comedy to news shows, to air in the time slot after its highly rated "Nightline." 

Late-night success has eluded the Capital Cities/ABC Inc. subsidiary for the last five years.
A one-hour "Nightline" quickly bombed, as did talk shows with Greg Jackson, Jimmy Breslin and Dick Cavett.
The most recent attempt, "Day's End," which offered a review of the day's news and highlights from the network's "Good Morning America" talk show, was dropped last spring after 13 weeks of market testing in 28 cities. 

Currently, ABC ceases programming at midnight and the network's 200-plus affiliates program the late-night period themselves, generally with syndicated shows or movies.
By contrast, CBS Inc. 's affiliates air "The Pat Sajak Show" and affiliates of General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co. get "The Tonight Show" and "Late Night With David Letterman." 

ABC hopes to have a project ready to show stations at January's National Association of Television Programming Executives convention in New Orleans, where syndicators hawk their new shows.
Among the proposals ABC is studying are four comedy-oriented shows, which are typically a hit with men aged 18-34, the demographic group most desired by advertisers. 

"Products like soft drinks, shampoo, sneakers, beer and beauty-care products are all looking for late-night shows to reach their audience," said Bill Croasdale, senior vice president and director of network sales at the ad agency Backer Spielvogel Bates, a subsidiary of Saatchi & Saatchi Co. "ABC has yet to get a foothold in that door and it must.
It's just too valuable a time period to keep ignoring." 

Last year, programs airing after 11:30 p.m. accounted for $429 million in total advertising revenues for the three networks, although ABC earned only about $61 million.
Late-night competition for young adults has increased recently, especially with the addition of "The Arsenio Hall Show," syndicated by Paramount Television, a unit of Paramount Communications Inc. CBS may cut the 90-minute "Pat Sajak Show" to one-hour and air a comedy-oriented show at 12:30 a.m. 

Among the hosts ABC is looking at for comedy projects are Rick Dees, a popular Los Angeles disk jockey, Jeff MacGregor, a former host of the canceled syndicated show "The New Dating Game," and standup comedian Kevin Meaney.
Another possible show involves Merrill Markoe, who was once head writer at NBC's "Late Night With David Letterman." 

In addition, Koppel Communications Inc., an independent production company headed by "Nightline" anchor Ted Koppel, has offered a proposal for a one-hour, news-oriented program, a spokeswoman for Mr. Koppel said. 

Mr. Croasdale of Backer Spielvogel said ABC would face a tough task if it tried to follow a news broadcast with an entertainment show because of the different audiences the shows attract.
Michael Brockman, president of late-night, daytime and children's programming at ABC, acknowledged the juxtaposition could pose a problem. "The dilemma we face in creating a midnight show is one created by the success of 'Nightline, ' " Mr. Brockman said. "There isn't really enough advertiser support for another news show.
And there isn't any intelligent way to extend 'Nightline, ' so I've decided to create a program in which I'll have to recruit almost an entirely new audience." 

ABC won't produce "a talk show per se with a desk and sofa," said Mr. Brockman, who, prior to joining ABC, launched "The Pat Sajak Show" on CBS. "We're tapping the strengths of the personalities involved with each project." 

Some affiliates said they were skeptical about ABC's potential for success.
One reason is that the affiliates have purchased syndicated programs and movie packages and are unwilling to move those shows for an untested ABC project. 

"I just spent millions of dollars last year on a movie package that would last me five years," said an ABC affiliate general manager, who asked not be identified. "I don't think I would initially take something offered by the network." 

Mr. Brockman admitted that support among ABC affiliates would be an "uphill battle," mostly because the network in the past has failed to demonstrate long-term support for any program that followed "Nightline." 

"Because of the past inconsistency, {the affiliates} have a 'show me' attitude and I don't blame them," Mr. Brockman said. 

ABC can't even count on the eight stations it owns, since they are allowed to run autonomously.
For example, WABC in New York didn't run the programs hosted by Messrs.
Breslin and Cavett when the network aired them, and ran a syndicated talk show, since canceled, with comedian David Brenner instead. 

