.START 

Congress has come to rely extensively upon the private enforcement of public purposes.
Private enforcement is fervently defended as an efficient policy instrument and as a participatory, democratic mechanism that allows "concerned citizens" to redress social problems ranging from procurement fraud to environmental pollution. 

In truth, the driving force behind the expansion of private enforcement is neither efficiency nor democracy but interest group politics.
In purpose and effect, private enforcement provisions are off-budget entitlement programs for the Democratic Party's political constituencies.
Environmental law, where citizen suit provisions are particularly numerous, provides the best illustration. 

Congress wanted citizen suits to be widely utilized, and therefore instructed courts to compensate environmental plaintiffs for their attorneys' fees "when appropriate." But fee awards are not supposed to produce a profit for enforcers.
Similarly, statutory fines are payable not to the plaintiff but to the U.S. Treasury.
This arrangement ostensibly serves to ensure that citizen-plaintiffs are motivated not by private gain but solely by public, environmental considerations.
In practice, however, advocacy groups -- and only advocacy groups -- can and do reap sizeable rewards under these rules. 

Although citizen suits are authorized under almost every federal environmental statute, all but a handful are brought under the Clean Water Act.
Few private actions are filed by unorganized "concerned citizens"; more than two-thirds are mass-produced by highly professional advocacy groups.
Five environmental groups account for more than half of all such actions. 

Environmental groups concentrate on the Clean Water Act because this statute makes citizen suits cheaper to bring and to win, and financially more rewarding, than any other environmental statute.
The unique, highly detailed record-keeping system developed under the act reveals each individual polluter's specific violations of regulatory standards.
In less than a day, environmental organizations train student volunteers to scan records and identify infractions.
They then serve large numbers of companies with near-identical, form-letter complaints. 

Moreover, the act authorizes district courts to impose civil penalties of up to $25,000 per day.
Legally, these fines are payable to the U.S. Treasury.
However, environmental groups usually threaten targets with an expensive trial, only to settle the matter for a substantially smaller sum -- so long as the defendant agrees to pay an environmental group or cause. 

These payments consist of attorneys' fees (which are calculated on the basis of the going rates of for-profit attorneys, thus producing a windfall for low-cost environmental litigators), and of so-called "credit" programs, to be paid for by the alleged violator in lieu of a portion of the fines.
Such programs finance research projects, grants to environmental organizations for "educational" purposes, and land acquisition. "Credit" payments to environmental groups (although not normally the group bringing the action) may amount to more than $400,000. 

For alleged violators, private settlements are usually cheaper than trials or Environmental Protection Agency enforcement actions.
Environmental groups have no interest in obtaining winning fines for the Treasury, and will "trade" even a relatively modest credit project for very high fines.
A reasonably representative analysis of a set of 29 cases in the period from 1983 to May 1985 showed that more than 65% of a combined settlement amount of almost $1 million went to environmental organizations. 

Industry representatives have denounced private enforcement actions as extortion; environmental organizations have responded that they care only about the environment.
But the debate about motives misses the point.
Private attorneys general must choose among enforcement targets.
Since the social costs and benefits involved in these decisions are extremely uncertain, private enforcers can calculate them only impressionistically.
The only factors they can and, as long as they face cost constraints, will assess are their own costs and benefits.
The problem is not that enforcers may not be "true" altruists; it is that even the most altruistic enforcers will seek to maximize private rewards, not public benefits. 

As a result, environmental organizations pursue economically and environmentally inefficient enforcement strategies.
Like most environmental statutes, the Clean Water Act is written upon the presumption -- the pretense, rather -- that nothing but zero risk will do; it establishes a legal standard of zero discharge.
Hence, the act is easily overenforced. (If applied as written, it would prohibit the preparation of a scotch and water without a permit.) Studies by the EPA and by independent analysts strongly suggest that enforcement of the act generates high economic losses, and that the act is likely the most excessively enforced environmental statute. 

Economics aside, the high level of water pollution enforcement may not even be environmentally beneficial.
More likely than not, private enforcement of the Clean Water Act has reduced industry's incentives for voluntary compliance with the law.
It may also have impeded technological innovation by making industry prefer fail-safe equipment to more advanced but untested devices.
And it creates incentives to pollute the air and the land rather than the water. 

Although water pollution by towns or sewerage authorities is far more frequent and serious than corporate pollution, not one of the 162 recorded actions brought by environmental groups between 1978 and 1984 was filed against a municipal entity.
A private corporation's capacity for fast, authoritative decision-making makes settlement negotiations less expensive and more profitable than negotiations with government officials who worry about the legality of settlements and about their accountability to the electorate. 

Finally, some environmental groups maximize their private rewards by bringing scores of actions not over substantive environmental violations but for non-compliance with the act's voluminous paperwork requirements.
These actions generate tens of thousands of dollars in attorneys' fees but no discernible environmental benefit. 

Environmentalists and their patrons in Congress argue that private enforcement must be extensive because the EPA, due to its alleged "capture" by corporate interests or to a lack of resources, systematically underenforces environmental statutes.
In effect, this argument equates more enforcement with better enforcement.
But apart from the fact that environmental statutes are easily overenforced, Congress itself does not believe that increased enforcement would be unquestionably better.
If it did, it would not, as it now does, prohibit profitable enforcement.
For why should the enforcer's motives matter, if every enforcement action generates environmental benefits? 

Properly structured, environmental bounty-hunting could improve the environment.
Private attorneys general could be treated like the government's deputies, and be placed under the Justice Department's supervision.
Fee recovery and credit projects could then be abolished; in order to entice private enforcers, the government would make discretionary grants for enforcement actions to environmental groups or, for that matter, to bountyhunters.
Private enforcers would collect adequate rewards, thus securing the benefits of extensive private enforcement; government oversight would prevent excessive or erratic enforcement. 

Either a system of limited but strictly altruistic enforcement or a more extensive system of environmental bounty-hunting under executive control would better serve the public than the scheme Congress has adopted, which permits rewards in the form of credit projects, a currency valued only by environmental organizations, while prohibiting "profits." But only the existing policy permits legislators to confer benefits upon a political constituency. 

Through the current system, Congress has managed to establish an environmentalist enforcement cartel: Court-awarded attorney fees and credit projects provide an entitlement program for environmental organizations; the prohibition on profits keeps everyone else out of the enforcement market. 

This bizarre arrangement makes no environmental sense.
But then, private rights to sue and object, to complain and to comment, have not sprung up in areas ranging from banking regulation to broadcast licensing to surface mining to housing law because they have been shown to have beneficial results.
They have proliferated because in an era of budget constraints and seemingly permanent Republican control of the White House, the Democratic Party has come to endorse compulsory philanthropy as its idea of voluntarism. 

Mr. Greve is executive director of the Center for Individual Rights, a public-interest law firm in Washington, D.C.
An expanded version of this article will appear in the Fall 1989 issue of the Public Interest. 

