.START 

The federal appeals court in New York will decide whether obtaining inside information through a breach of confidence among family members constitutes insider trading. 

The ruling, which would be the first on the issue by a federal appeals court, is expected to help define the scope of insider trading, a murky area of securities law.
Defining insider trading is especially difficult when the investor isn't a corporate insider but has simply heard the information by accident. 

In the case, information was inadvertently leaked through a chain of communications within a family.
The case involves Robert Chestman, a former broker and vice president of the New York brokerage firm Gruntal & Co. Mr. Chestman was convicted in March on 30 counts of securities and mail fraud and one count of perjury in relation to the 1986 sale of Waldbaum Inc. to Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co.
He was sentenced to two years in prison and to pay approximately $250,000 in restitution to people who sold Waldbaum stock on Nov. 26, 1986. 

The government's star witness was Keith Loeb, the nephew by marriage of Waldbaum President Ira Waldbaum.
Mr. Loeb testified that he passed material nonpublic information to his broker, Mr. Chestman, before the public announcement of the $50-a-share sale to A&P.
The government said Mr. Chestman then bought 11,000 Waldbaum shares for himself, Mr. Loeb and other clients. 

Mr. Loeb learned of A&P's takeover plans through a family grapevine initiated by Mr. Waldbaum.
During the trial it was disclosed that Mr. Waldbaum told his sister to gather her shares in anticipation of the sale.
The sister was an older woman in frail health who asked her daughter to give her a lift to the bank to pick up the stock certificates.
The daughter, in turn, asked her sister -- who was married to Mr. Loeb -- to pick up her children from school so she could take their mother to the bank.
That sister told her husband about the plans, and he passed them on to Mr. Chestman.
No member of the Waldbaum family was accused of wrongdoing. 

Elkan Abramowitz, a New York lawyer representing Mr. Chestman, said his isn't an insider-trading case because "the information came from a non-insider, a distant relative of Ira Waldbaum who did not get the information in a corporate capacity." The appeals court will hear arguments the week of Oct. 9. 

Harvey Pitt, an insider-trading expert and a partner at Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson in Washington, D.C., said a critical point is the reliability of the source of information.
If someone acts on information overheard in a conversation between people who aren't identified, there is no wrongdoing, he said. 

However "Mr.
Chestman knew that the information emanated from the family who owned the business.
That it was reliable, and that he acted on it, is critical here," said Mr. Pitt. 

JIM BEAM SUES its insurer over legal fees in fetal-alcohol suit. 

Jim Beam Brands Co. won a key legal victory in May when a jury in Seattle ruled the company couldn't be held liable for a child's birth defects.
The child's parents claimed the company failed to warn consumers of the risks of drinking alcoholic beverages during pregnancy. 

The Deerfield, Ill., distiller is back in court, claiming Travelers Indemnity Co., a unit of Travelers Corp. of Hartford, Conn., balked at reimbursing Beam for legal fees incurred during that successful defense. 

The New York law firm of Chadbourne & Parke and the Seattle law firm of Stafford, Frey, Cooper & Stewart, which both represented Jim Beam, were selected with Travelers' consent, the complaint said. 

According to the complaint, filed last week in federal court in New York, Travelers encouraged the distiller to "defend the litigation with particular and thorough diligence in light of the novel issues involved." Beam says Travelers was breaching its insurance contract by refusing to pay the legal fees. 

The fetal-alcohol case was viewed as having national significance.
If Jim Beam, a unit of American Brands Inc. of New York, had lost, lawyers said, many other such cases might have been filed against liquor companies. 

William Tribou, second vice president of Travelers, said he couldn't comment on the suit because he hadn't seen the papers.
He said Travelers already paid Jim Beam in excess of $500,000 for legal fees and had "strong legal and factual reasons" for not paying the additional fees in dispute. 

Mr. Tribou said continuing discussions were held with Jim Beam and American Brands over the disputed fees, which he said totaled several million dollars. 

FSLIC SEEKS criminal restitution in Sunrise Savings case. 

The Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. asked a federal court in Miami to order two former officers of the defunct Sunrise Savings & Loan Association to repay $2.9 million in "misapplied funds." 

The two are Robert C. Jacoby -- former chairman, president and chief executive officer of the thrift -- and Thomas Skubal, who was vice president of the savings and loan's mortgage unit.
They were recently convicted on various charges, including fraud and misapplication of funds, in connection with real-estate loans to developers.
Sentencing, which had been scheduled for last week, has been set for Oct. 

In recent years, the FSLIC has become increasingly aggressive in seeking restitution in criminal cases involving wrongdoing in the thrift industry.
Although prosecutors concede the chance of collecting much money is slim, they say they are under considerable pressure from the Bush administration to make the effort. "There are going to be a lot of these cases coming up," says Howard Feinstein, special counsel for the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which oversees the FSLIC.
In October, the FSLIC will come under the jurisdiction of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. 

In the Sunrise case, the amount being sought includes $1.3 million, the price of a 26-carat diamond ring purchased by a real-estate developer.
Mr. Jacoby was convicted of misallocating the thrift's funds by letting the developer cover the purchase with a construction loan. 

Lawyers for Messrs.
Jacoby and Skubal say they will fight the FSLIC, arguing that neither man received any of the money in question. 

NEW JERSEY'S HIGHEST COURT will be a defendant in a suit by two lawyers. 

Filed by Mark Guralnick and Joel Wayne Gerber, of Mount Laurel, N.J., the suit challenges the state's system of arbitrating fee disputes between lawyers and clients rather than letting such conflicts go to court. 

The arbitration panels, comprising both lawyers and lay people, are arms of the New Jersey Supreme Court.
Their mission is to hear both sides and then come up with a fair -- and binding -- settlement. 

The lawyers say the system is unconstitutional because it deprives them of a right to a trial before a jury in such fee disputes. 

The federal suit names the New Jersey high court, an arbitration panel and a former client in a divorce case who the lawyers claim still owes them $1,000. 

"I feel entitled to have the same redress in court that other citizens have, ' said Mr. Guralnick. 

JURY REJECTS religious defense to sex-for-hire charges. 

When the Los Angeles City Attorney's office accused the leaders of the Church of the Most High Goddess of running a brothel, the defendants countered that the sexual practices in question were an integral part of their religion. 

High Priest Wilbur Tracy and High Priestess Mary Ellen Tracy said at their trial last month that rites for would-be members include sexual relations with Ms. Tracy, as well as donations to the church.
The Tracys' lawyers argued that to construe the rites as prostitution would deny the Tracys their First Amendment right to practice religion according to their beliefs, regardless of how unconventional the beliefs may be. 

"The question became whether they honestly were practicing their beliefs or using the beliefs as a front for illegal activities," said Jonni Hoffman, deputy city attorney. 

Rendering their decision earlier this month, the jury rejected the defense and convicted the High Priest and Priestess. 

But, with the help of First Amendment advocates who took up their cause, the Tracys are planning to appeal. 

