.START 

Punitive Award Allowed 

In Arbitration Cases 

THE FIRST Circuit Court of Appeals has issued a decision that may change the way small-business owners write contracts.
The ruling allows arbitrators in disputes to award punitive damages. 

Small-business owners often include an arbitration clause in contracts to avoid costly litigation if a disagreement arises.
An arbitrator usually awards compensatory damages if the other party is declared guilty, for example, of malicious or fraudulent conduct. 

But the court said that just because the parties agreed to resolve their dispute through arbitration "does not mean they should be required to surrender a legitimate claim to damages." 

Many attorneys believe the new ruling will encourage companies to seek punitive damages when they otherwise may have been satisfied with a settlement. 

Thomas Elkind, a Boston attorney with Gaston & Snow, recommends that businesses now make sure they stipulate in contracts that punitive damages would be excluded from any arbitration judgment. 

The First Circuit Court of Appeals covers Puerto Rico and all of New England, except Connecticut.
Unless the Supreme Court rules otherwise, Mr. Elkind says he expects circuit courts in all 50 states to follow the First Circuit Court's ruling. 

Little Guys Win One 

In Beverly Hills 

BEVERLY HILLS hardly seems the place for the little guy to get an even break, but some small-business owners recently struck a blow for equality in this ghetto of glitz. 

The arena for this victory was the Beverly Hills Chamber of Commerce.
For decades, the chamber allocated voting power on a perfectly plutocratic basis: the more the company paid in dues, the more votes it got.
As a result, a single large company had as many as 52 votes. 

This situation didn't sit well with some small-business owners, particularly ones whose operations were located in the less tony parts of Beverly Hills. (Yes, there are less tony parts of Beverly Hills.) Some of these businesspeople felt their areas were being slighted by city government on such matters as police protection, street maintenance and public parking for customers. 

"And the city was greatly influenced by the chamber" on such matters, says Russ Levi, a local businessman who led the effort to change the voting rules.
The reformers' campaign included mass mailings to local residents, businesses and government officials. 

As a result, the chamber recently changed its rules so that any single company can have a maximum of 10 votes.
This brings Beverly Hills in line with many of the other 3,500 chambers of commerce around the country, which in the past decade or so have put a cap on voting power. 

But Beverly Hills and the others still have a way to go to meet the U.S. Chamber of Commerce's suggestion for business democracy: One firm gets one vote. 

Advisory Group 

Gets Sexism Complaints 

THE SERVICE Corps of Retired Executives, whose members are mostly men, wants to get savvier in advising women entrepreneurs. 

The volunteer group of retirees, which is funded by the federal Small Business Administration, has gotten complaints from women, says John Daniels, SCORE's executive director. 

Women starting companies say that certain SCORE volunteers have asked such non-business questions as: "What does your husband think of this?
Who will watch the kids while you're working?" Mr. Daniels says he's heard from one woman who appreciated business advice from a male volunteer, but disliked his addressing her as "dear" and "honey." 

SCORE's older volunteers tend to make these gaffes, Mr. Daniels says, because they retired in the 1960s when women managers were scarce. 

But SCORE's younger members are attempting to enlighten their elders in various ways.
SCORE is making a videotape to train members on do's and don't's of advising women.
It also has prepared a checklist on interviewing skills and is trying to recruit more retired women executives. 

New Magazine Targets 

Family Businesses 

THE CROWDED magazine field will get yet another entry this November, with the debut of Family Business. 

Philadelphia-based MLR Enterprises hopes for 100,000 initial circulation, and says it is prepared to put several million dollars into the venture.
The monthly magazine has hired former Psychology Today editor in chief Jack Nessel as editor. 

"It's high risk," concedes Leonard Zweig, publisher.
One problem has been to convince potential advertisers that family business means more than mom-and-pop stores.
And the recent problems of Venture magazine underscore how hard it can be to identify and exploit a niche that involves small-business readers. 

Mr. Zweig counters that family business is a big niche, with at least 1.5 million companies between $1 million and $100 million in annual revenue.
And he says Family Business will capitalize on feelings of isolation felt by family business owners, whose problems include lack of a successor, estate taxes and family feuds. 

The new publication comes at a time of increased interest in family business among major accounting firms and investment houses.
And at least one new publication has already appeared.
Last October, McGraw-Hill began publishing a newsletter called Business Week Newsletter for Family Owned Business. 

