.START 

With regulators clamping down on the penny-stock industry, one of its largest and most controversial brokers, Blinder, Robinson & Co., is feeling the pressure. 

Profits and revenue are sliding and the once-bustling underwriting business is dormant at the 20-year-old Denver company, long considered the nation's biggest broker of the low-priced, high-risk stocks. 

In an interview, penny-stock mogul Meyer Blinder moans: "Right now, with the way the climate is, everyone is against the penny-stock market." 

Blinder Robinson, a unit of Blinder International Enterprises Inc., reported a $14.8 million loss for the year ended Jan. 27 on revenue of $74.2 million.
That's a sharp reversal from the previous year, when Blinder Robinson earned $7.5 million on revenue of $136.2 million. 

More recent quarterly results from the brokerage company aren't available, but Blinder's parent reported a $3.4 million loss on revenue of $25.4 million for the six months ended July 28. 

Mr. Blinder, the tough-talking, 67-year-old president of the company that bears his name, complains that Blinder Robinson is under siege by regulators and the media.
Regulators are "burning down the house to get rid of some termites," he says. 

It's all due to the intense scrutiny the $10 billion penny-stock business is getting these days from federal and state securities regulators.
They estimate that fraud and stock manipulation in that market cost investors $2 billion annually. 

Investigations, enforcement actions and brokerage company closings are up sharply since 1987, when the penny-stock regulators began in earnest to crack down on abuses.
Both Blinder Robinson and its biggest competitor, Denver-based Stuart James Co., were hit with enforcement actions by securities regulators this year. 

"People are starting to come out of the woodwork" to talk about fraudulent practices in the industry, says Frank Birgfeld, district director for the National Association of Securities Dealers in Denver.
The NASD oversees the over-the-counter market. "That kind of publicity could hardly help the situation" at penny-stock companies, Mr. Birgfeld adds.
There are some 325 penny-stock brokerage companies in 29 states. 

Penny stocks are generally priced below $3 a share.
They include many of the 13,000 issues that trade on the over-the-counter market -- but outside the computerized Nasdaq system.
Price quotes for the issues appear daily in the "pink sheets" published by the National Quotation Bureau.
Certainly, many of the stocks aren't worthless and are issued by legitimate companies. 

Blinder Robinson, once the penny-stock industry's most prominent member with 1,100 brokers in 35 states, has had repeated run-ins with the Securities and Exchange Commission over the past 11 years.
The agency has brought a series of enforcement actions against Blinder Robinson with mixed results.
Last year, federal agents raided the company's offices. 

These are tough times for Mr. Blinder and his firm.
After winning dismissal of a six-year-old SEC action against it, Blinder Robinson became the target in May of a sweeping enforcement action by the state of Florida that could result in more than $5 million in penalties and put the company out of business in the state. 

The company also has been hauled into court by former customers, who have filed class-action lawsuits charging it with securities fraud, excessive markups on stocks and racketeering.
The cases are pending in federal court in Philadelphia.
Blinder Robinson has denied any wrongdoing and vowed to vigorously defend itself against the legal actions. 

But the mounting pressure is clearly taking a toll.
Blinder Robinson was once known as the king of penny-stock initial public offerings, averaging about a dozen a year.
So far in 1989, the company has underwritten only one IPO, Bonso Electronics, according to the IPO Reporter, a newsletter on new issues.
Mr. Blinder blames the regulatory clampdown for the dearth of underwritings. "I don't know if we'll be able to do any more," he says. 

Things have gotten so bad that the brokerage company's parent, headed by Mr. Blinder, has asked shareholders to change the company's name to Intercontinental Enterprises Inc. to distinguish it from the brokerage unit.
According to Mr. Blinder, "Everybody thinks Blinder International is the broker-dealer." The issue will be voted on at the company's annual meeting scheduled for Oct. 16. 

Mr. Blinder last month told Denver newspapers he was selling his headquarters building and moving his operations out of the state to escape harassment from reporters and regulators.
Now, Mr. Blinder says he isn't planning to move, though he says he would sell his building for the right price. 

Some penny-stock brokers say that Stuart-James, which has about 1,500 employees and 50 offices nationwide, has eclipsed Blinder Robinson as the industry's biggest broker.
The company was founded in 1983 by Stuart Graff and James Padgett, two former employees of Blinder Robinson. 

Mr. Graff, who was named in the pending SEC action against Stuart-James, resigned as the company's chairman two weeks ago, but will serve as a consultant to Stuart-James.
Marc Geman, the company's general counsel, says the resignation was prompted by Mr. Graff's desire to devote less time to the company's operations, rather than by the concern's run-ins with regulators.
Stuart-James has denied the charges brought by the SEC. 

"We aren't feeling any heat," Mr. Geman maintains.
He quickly adds: "We recognize that there's a lot of focus on the industry at the moment, but the focus is mainly on pink sheets and on blind pools," which are securities issued for companies that don't yet have any business operations. 

Stuart-James officials are working hard to shed their image as purveyors of speculative penny-stocks. "We have taken ourselves out of penny deals," says Elizabeth Wills, vice president of compliance. "There's a significant difference between most of our deals and those that come out under $1." 

Stuart-James proudly notes that the average price of the five IPOs it has either managed or co-managed this year is $1.55 a share, up from an average of 24 cents a share for the six new issues it was involved in last year, and the 11-cent-a-share average on the eight IPOs it brought in 1987. 

CELEBRATIONS AND CIRCUIT BREAKERS: The National Association of Securities Dealers celebrated its 50th birthday Friday with a luncheon in Washington.
Among the speakers at the gathering were Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, Hambrecht & Quist Chairman Gordon Macklin and MCI Chairman William McGowan. 

Today, however, it's back to work.
The Board of Governors of the NASD, which runs the Nasdaq trading system in addition to other tasks, is scheduled to decide whether the agency will renew its pact with the Securities and Exchange Commission to shut down Nasdaq during steep drops in stock-market prices if the commission requests it. 

The agreement, reached last year, removed a roadblock to a plan by the SEC and the major stock and futures exchanges to establish across-the-board trading suspensions, known as circuit breakers.
Joseph Hardiman, NASD president, said a decision probably will be announced tomorrow. 

Friday's Market Activity 

The Nasdaq Composite Index lost 1.21 to 467.57 on 130.9 million shares.
For the week, the composite was down 0.8%. 

The Nasdaq 100 Index of large nonfinancial stocks lost 0.90 to 443.92.
The Nasdaq Financial Index dropped 1.23 to 

The stocks of two companies that are in the midst of takeover talks were hurt.
Analysts say the weakness in the junk-bond market is reducing interest in many takeover stocks.
LIN Broadcasting, which has proposed merging with BellSouth and is also an acquisition target of McCaw Cellular Communications, slid 1 1/8 to 105. 

Dunkin' Donuts, a company that is being pursued by a group including a unit of Unicorp Canada, saw its stock fall 1 to 45 1/4. 

Lincoln Telecommunications plunged 5 to 60.
The stock has suffered since the company announced that it was lowering to 10% from 20% the threshold of ownership for triggering its shareholder rights plan. 

Mail Boxes Etc. slid 3 1/4 to 27 after a federal jury ordered the company to pay millions of dollars in damages related to the sale of shares of its predecessor company. 

Qintex jumped 1 1/8 to 7 3/8.
The company amended its agreement to acquire MGM/UA Communications, salvaging the merger. 

First Executive's rights, which began trading on Tuesday, dropped another 1/4 to 1 1/2, a 14% decline.
On Thursday, the rights lost 30% when they fell 3/4 to 1 3/4.
Analysts have linked the drop to news that I.C.H., which holds 20% of First Executive, will sell its rights. 

DDI Pharmaceuticals gained 5/8 to 5 1/2.
Traders say a favorable article on the company's Orgotein painkiller in the current issue of the American Journal of Medicine has spurred interest in the stock, according to Dow Jones Professional Investor Report.
Orgotein is used in the treatment of a degenerative joint disease. 

