.START 

A tremendous change is taking place in West Germany.
Only yesterday the political parties shoved and jostled one another to grovel at East German ruler Erich Honecker's feet like so many German dachshounds.
Overnight they are shoving and jostling one another to prove that they are more anti-Honecker than thou.
The Social Democrats, who used to insist proudly that they invented the New Ostpolitik and therefore had first call to be received by Communist dictators, are now desperately defending a long-arranged visit to East Berlin against the Christian Democrats' charge that such a visit "betrays" the refugees from East Germany. 

The Social Democrats did not have the sense to call off the visit, but they swore to confront the East Germans with "reform" demands -- whereupon they suffered the supreme humiliation: The communists withdrew their invitation.
This is what the free part of Germany has come to. 

The Christian Democrats (CDU) of course do not look much better.
They have faithfully and brainlessly "continued" Social Democrat Willy Brandt's Ostpolitik.
CDU Chancellor Helmut Kohl received Erich Honecker with military honors in Bonn only two years ago this month; so did German President Richard von Weizsaecker, also of the CDU.
The East German regime was as repressive then as it is now.
West German payments to Erich Honecker total about seven billion Deutsche marks a year ($3.5 billion U.S.), with nary a demand on granting full human rights -- Bonn was satisfied with some reciprocal visiting and better transit travel and the release of prisoners.
No wonder Erich Honecker can boast that his is the most successful communist regime in the world, the prop of the U.S.S.R. 

The Social Democrats and their allies, the Greens, laid down the line that there must not and will not be a German reunification.
Both parties have openly given their reason: such a call destabilizes the Honecker regime and angers Erich Honecker.
Egon Bahr, architect and chief negotiator of former Social Democratic Chancellor Willy Brandt's Ostpolitik treaties, has called the idea of German reunification "a lie," "hypocrisy" and "baloney." The latter term (in German "Quatsch") he actually hurled at an East German audience only last year.
And The Christian Democrats, who at first fought Mr. Brandt's Ostpolitik, became thoroughly intimidated by it and the success it seemingly enjoyed with the voters.
They never expressly forswore reunification but never stood up for it either, hiding behind alibis: Reunification is, at best, a long way off; it can be achieved only with the support of "our neighbors,"; it is possible only within "a European solution." 

East German refugees were long smeared with the imputation that they were "merely economic refugees" seeking the good life (as if it were indecent for anybody except West Germans to seek the good life).
This is not the fashion any more, but some diehard Honecker stabilizers still insist that the great flight movement has nothing to do with a wish for reunification; that the refugees are "merely seeking freedom." 

Now even Mr. Bahr foresees reunification (although he used the Nazi term "Anschluss." What worked the great change?
A sheer coincidence: The Hungarians happened to open their borders while thousands of East German summer holiday tourists were in the country, and these availed themselves of the unexpected chance to go West.
This caused a television sensation, but actually anybody with eyes to see -- and the Germans should have eyes to see, considering the reproach that they closed their eyes to Hitler's crimes -- could see East German dissatisfaction turning into desperation for many years.
After all, what did the East Germans build and maintain the Wall for? 

As long as only a few people managed to get across the Wall, West German politicians could and did assure one another that if the East Germans did not come in masses it meant that they would not come in masses.
West German politicians were convinced that fascist governments may go but that communist regimes are for eternity -- the Thousand Year Reich at last -- leaving appeasement and "peace in our time" as the only option.
Election campaigns were fought in the free part of Germany on the theme of who gets the redder carpet and who is more loved by the oppressors. 

But now the refugees are streaming across the border and alarming the world.
In the middle of the crisis, Erich Honecker was hospitalized with a gall stone operation.
It is becoming more and more obvious that his gallstone age communism is dying with him: the Bonn intelligence service "Bundesnachrichtendienst" reported that Gorbachev adviser Valentin Falin has warned that "widespread dissatisfaction among the East German population is likely to lead to hardly controllable mass demonstrations within a relatively short time -- next spring at the latest." Mr. Falin based his assessment on the fact that East German leaders flatly refuse to entertain any idea of reform. 

Their reason was convincingly explained by Professor Otto Reinhold, chief propagandist of East Germany's Communist party.
Other states, Mr. Reinhold said, have a national tradition.
East Germany, the so-called GDR, has nothing of the sort. "What right to existence would a capitalist GDR have next to a capitalist Federal Republic of Germany?" He asked, and answered: "None at all, of course." But things are moving fast.
Erich Honecker is gravely sick.
Among the bunch of faceless party hacks at the top, no one offers serious hope for change.
Yet no West German politician realizes that the only way to avert the catastrophe Mr. Falin foresees is to take up the cause of the oppressed, to demand freedom for them without ifs or buts, to show them that they are not alone -- vide the Social Democrats just making fools of themselves.
If the East Germans feel left alone, if they do take to the streets, what will happen?
Will they meet the time-tested response of tanks and guns, as East Germans did in the great uprising of June 17, 1953, as Beijing's students did in May 1989?
We soon will know. 

Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's alleged rival Yegor Ligachev visited East Berlin last week to assure Erich Honecker that the Soviets stand by him according to their common "treaty of friendship and support." "Support" against whom?
Mr. Ligachev expressly cited West German "chauvinists" who are "dreaming of swallowing up the GDR." 

He also announced that Mr. Gorbachev will himself attend the 40th anniversary of the GDR on October 7.
Will he call for reforms?
Or rather will he promise to "support" the East German system as Brezhnev "supported" the Prague hardliners in August 1968?
We have been told that "the Brezhnev doctrine is dead." How dead is it?
The world should stand ready to take measure of Mikhail Gorbachev within three weeks. 

Mr. von Loewenstern is editorial page editor of the German daily, Die Welt. 

