.START 

The dollar could inch higher after Friday's whipsaw movement, but bullish sentiment about the currency is clearly flagging, many traders say. 

Any gains are seen as likely to be limited despite the healthy state of the U.S. economy and the nation's relative political calm, as the dollar can't gather momentum to top crucial resistance levels and central banks remain intent sellers. 

Trying to push the dollar up sharply from current levels "will be tough," said Kevin Logan, chief economist at Swiss Bank Corp. 

Dollar bulls had to run for cover Friday when the currency's roller-coaster action took the market by surprise. 

The dollar initially soared on news that the U.S. merchandise trade deficit shrank to an unexpectedly narrow $7.58 billion in July from $8.01 billion in June.
The currency sustained those gains despite a barrage of sales by central banks of the U.S., Western Europe and Canada. 

But at mid-afternoon, the dollar dived on massive profit taking and apparently groundless rumors that a major U.S. bank was in financial trouble because of junk-bond losses.
The rumor mill also produced false talk that President Bush had been shot, exacerbating the fall, traders said. 

In late afternoon New York trading Friday, the dollar was at 1.9660 marks, down from 1.9755 marks late Thursday, and at 146.43 yen, down from 146.86 yen.
Sterling was at $1.5650, up from $1.5535. 

In Tokyo Monday, the dollar opened at 145.90 yen, up 0.05 from Thursday's close.
Markets were closed there Friday for a holiday. 

The dollar's broad trading ranges Friday took it to three-month highs of 2.0040 marks and 149.00 yen and then to intraday lows of 1.9350 marks and 144.40 yen.
Friday's dealings could best be described as "a massacre," said Walter Simon, a trader at Bank Julius Baer & Co. 

"Between 1.96 and 1.9350 {marks} there were basically no prices and no bids," he said.
He added that dealings were reminiscent of June 15, when the dollar was propelled by favorable trade data and hit the year's highs of 2.0475 marks and 151.85 yen only to tumble on profit-taking. 

As for this week, "I would guess that the first move is back up for a technical correction," said Mr. Simon.
But even so, he said the dollar may have problems rising far above resistance at 1.9675 marks. 

While it may be too soon to say this year's dollar rise is drawing to an end, the mood about the U.S. currency has changed, many currency analysts say. 

Earlier this year, the superstrong dollar withstood the Federal Reserve's easing of monetary policy, a round of interest-rate increases overseas, massive intervention and bearish statements by a number of major monetary officials.
But, as on Friday, even highly questionable rumors can cause a substantial retreat. 

The dollar's vulnerability stems from the Federal Reserve's easing of credit during the summer, which produced lower rates that have diminished the attractiveness of dollar-denominated securities, some analysts say. 

Lower U.S. rates didn't destroy the dollar's climb, but they have "taken out one of the most important props for the dollar's rise," said Mr. Logan of Swiss Bank. "The momentum doesn't seem to be enough to take it above two . . . marks" now that interest rate differentials have narrowed. 

The improbability of further Fed easing in the near future, while buoying the dollar, isn't enough to fuel a sustained rally, many currency traders said. 

The U.S. producer-price index rose 0.5% in August excluding the volatile food and energy category, suggesting that underlying inflation is still high enough to prevent imminent interest-rate reductions. 

Interest rates aside, central banks remain a primary obstacle to a stronger dollar. "Intervention remains a major block to significant appreciation," said Diego Giurleo, senior manager of treasury services at the Royal Bank of Canada.
Central banks, he said, "showed the guns" Friday when they zapped the dollar with sales after the trade data were released. 

But although worries prevail about more intervention and interest-rate boosts in Europe and Japan, the dollar isn't likely to dive below support at 1.95 marks anytime soon, Mr. Giurleo said. 

Hints about the central banks' dollar views will be sought when officials from the Group of Seven major monetary nations gather in Washington Sept. 23 for the semiannual International Monetary Fund/ World Bank meetings.
G-7 nations include the U.S., Japan, West Germany, Britain, France, Canada and Italy. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York Friday, gold for current delivery jumped $3.40 to $363.90 an ounce.
The close was the highest since Aug. 24.
Estimated volume was a heavy six million ounces. 

