.START 

The World Bank, with its capital recently boosted, actually reduced its net lending to the developing world in its latest financial year. 

In its annual report to be released today, the international agency said lending minus repayments at its main unit, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, fell 44% to $1.9 billion from $3.4 billion the year earlier.
Gross lending at the IBRD in the year ended June 30 fell slightly to $11.3 billion from $11.6 billion. 

However, this lending contraction probably won't last long.
The World Bank's IBRD unit, which has 151 nation members, approved loans totaling $16.4 billion, an increase of 11% from $14.8 billion for the previous year, indicating disbursements will soon pick up.
The bank also said it expects to lend between $20 billion and $25 billion in its current year. 

There is considerable frustration in the developing world that the World Bank hasn't lent more actively, especially when some other lenders are pulling back from these nations.
The World Bank, its critics say, has just had a capital increase and is awash with funds that it could lend to the developing world. 

But supporters of the World Bank contend it is constrained by the lack of economic management in the countries themselves.
The bank links an increasing proportion of its lending to broad economic programs in developing countries.
World Bank supporters say that if developing countries don't have credible economic programs, the bank must hold back its lending. 

For example, in the fiscal year just ended, the World Bank approved loans of only $700 million for projects in Brazil, while it approved $2.23 billion of credits for projects in Mexico, which has followed more rigorous and orthodox economic policies.
Like many other lenders to the developing world, both the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are having growing problems with late payments on their loans.
The World Bank and its International Development Association unit, which makes loans and grants to the poorest countries, have overdue principal and interest payments on almost $4 billion of loans, an increase from about $3.4 billion of such troubled loans the year before.
The list of bad borrowers remains virtually the same, with Peru, Zambia, Panama, Syria, Honduras and Nicaragua holding the largest outstanding arrears as of June 30. 

Meanwhile, one of the World Bank's sister institutions, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, forecast that recent robust growth in world trade will be sustained this year. 

The Geneva-based international trade treaty organization said in its annual review of international trade that it expects growth of about 7% in the volume of world merchandise trade this year, following estimated growth of about 8.5% in 

Among other things, GATT attributes the predicted continued growth in world trade to technological innovation, lower oil prices, the growing importance of manufactured exports, the growth of international joint ventures and mergers, and the greater integration of national financial markets. 

