.START 

the high-yielding, high-risk paper that let self-styled raiders terrorize corporate giants, fueled company growth, buy-outs and mergers, and made some of its purveyors billionaires -- seems to be coming to an end. 

As prices plunged last week, market professionals sounded both nostalgic and apprehensive about the go-go decade of the 1980s even as they talked about a new, more cautious era where merger deals and buy-outs are likely to be much tougher to finance. 

Even Michael Milken, who personified the junk-bond market until his indictment on 98 felony counts earlier this year, calls for a return to equity.
In a talk to big junk-bond buyers last week, Mr. Milken told them it was time for some companies to de-leverage, urging many companies to swap their junk debt for a combination of equity and higher-grade debt carrying a lower interest burden. 

Spurred by the troubles of highly-leveraged retailer Campeau Corp., a disorderly rout last week slashed an estimated $10 billion of value out of the $200 billion junk market.
Many investors who wanted to sell couldn't find any buyers, and there were widespread fears that some junk-bond financed companies, despite the relatively strong economy, were close to defaulting on their heavy interest payments. 

"This is the junk-bond market's October 19," says Lazard Freres & Co. investment banker Stephen Rattner, referring to the date of the stock market's 1987 crash.
Mr. Rattner, who has used junk bonds to finance many merger deals, notes that while last week's decline "looks like a cataclysmic event," dissatisfaction with the junk market "has been building for a while." 

Nobody thinks the junk market will collapse, but on the other hand, nobody's sure just how long the current outbreak of panic selling will last.
At the Beverly Hills operation of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., once Mr. Milken's redoubt and still the most important investment bank in the junk market, there is a conspicuous lack of confidence. "I don't have an answer" to how bad things will get, says Joseph W. Harch, co-head of junk-bond sales for Drexel. "We'd be taking big positions if we knew." 

Last week's nosedive sent shock waves through Wall Street, hurting stock prices at times and producing some unusual, panic-driven developments. "Things were so crazy that I actually heard that I was dead," says Raymond Minella, co-head of Merrill Lynch & Co. 's merchant banking division, which includes the junk-bond unit.
At Morgan Stanley & Co., "a lot of us had the cold sweats," says a junk-bond trader who asked not to be identified. "You just didn't want to pick up the phone because it might require you to do the one transaction that would wipe out your year-end bonus." 

Junk bonds will undoubtedly continue to be an important part of the financial landscape, and some have rushed to defend the market's long-term viability. "I would be far from taking the view that (the current collapse of prices) is a nail in the coffin of the junk-bond market," says John Brookmeyer, a senior investment official at Prudential Insurance Co. of America, the nation's largest insurer and one of the top three investors in the junk market. 

Nevertheless, Mr. Brookmeyer acknowledges that many of the junk bonds in his portfolio took some serious body blows since August.
He also concedes that almost a year ago, Prudential, suspecting trouble, decided to drastically upgrade the quality of bonds in its $6 billion junk portfolio. 

Prudential wasn't alone.
Many junk-bond investors, including mutual funds, have been anticipating a downturn and increased the amount of cash they have in their accounts relative to junk bonds. 

Many investment bankers and major institutional investors say the current crunch in the junk market will have long-lasting effects on the volume and pace of corporate mergers and buy-outs, which so dramatically reshaped the face of corporate America in the 1980s and which were often fueled by junk bonds. 

"It seems fairly clear that financial buyers, or bust-up artists, are going to have a much harder time putting companies into play," says Lazard's Mr. Rattner. 

Even before last week's rout, some corporate acquirers and takeover artists had been shunning the junk-bond market because they feared the presence of junk bond financing damaged their credibility and gave their targets grounds for impugning their bids.
Two of this year's biggest takeovers, those of airlines NWA Inc. and UAL Corp., have been junkless -- funded by equity and bank debt.
This year's biggest attempted hostile raid in the U.S., Paramount Communications Inc. 's failed $10.7 billion bid for Time Inc., relied solely on bank loans for financing the initial offer. 

Some takeover professionals, looking for any semblance of a silver lining, argue that the easy accessibility of junk bonds led many bidders to over-price takeovers, such as Campeau's acquisition of Allied and Federated, and now deals will be able to be done at more realistic levels. "Prices will come down some, to a point where you can get the deals done because they make more sense," says Charles Nathan, co-head of mergers and acquisitions at Salomon Brothers Inc. 

Of course, cheaper takeover prices could be bad news for the stock market, especially stocks of companies perceived as takeover targets, since takeover speculation has been a driving force in the post-crash recovery. 

But Mr. Milken, seemingly siding with his critics who have argued that many companies' stock prices have been held down by the burdensome interest payments called for by their junk bonds, argues that a shift away from junk is now the best way for investors to make money. 

Speaking to a group of junk-bond buyers at an Institute for International Research in New York late last week, Mr. Milken said that rather than using junk bonds to buy out companies' stock, investors should instead buy companies' junk through a combination of equity and higher-grade debt. "You have much, much higher returns if you raise the capital and buy the debt of the company," he said. 

Such comments are an abrupt departure from the once-prevailing view that junk bonds could justify paying almost any price for a company.
Now, more and more acquisitions and buy-outs from the last decade appear to be highly unsound, and are running into what appear to be insurmountable debt burdens. 

Veteran corporate raider Carl Icahn says he believes we are entering an erawhere the acquirers of such unsound targets and their junk-bond investors "are going to have to pay the piper." 

Already paying is Robert Campeau, who has now lost voting control of his department store empire to a group of investors and lenders.
The full extent of Campeau Corp. 's problems remains unknown.
More debt-laden companies could run into similar if not more dire straits, particularly if the economy takes a turn for the worse.
Such companies would be restructured either in or out of bankruptcy court, with junk-bond holders undoubtedly being asked to sustain major losses. 

The rise of junk bonds -- and the corporate restructuring they fostered -- was arguably the most important financial development of the 1980s.
Raiders began attacking big corporations using junk bonds.
Then corporate America realized it could use junk bonds to defend itself, with recapitalizations and leveraged buy-outs that put billions of dollars of junk debt on companies' balance sheets. 

Some milestones in the junk era: In 1979, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. acquired Houdaille Industries Inc., the first New York Stock Exchange-listed company to be snapped up in a leveraged buy-out; in 1984, T. Boone Pickens Jr., backed by Drexel and a huge offer of junk bonds, launched an unsuccessful but lucrative $13 billion hostile bid for Gulf Oil Co., showing that no company was too big to be immune from junk-bond attack; in 1986, KKR snapped up Beatrice Cos. for $6.2 billion, then a record price for an LBO, selling $2 billion in junk bonds through Drexel. 

Junk bonds made celebrities out of previously anonymous businessmen like Mr. Milken, who earned $550 million in 1986; Ronald Perelman, who wrested control of glamorous Revlon Co. and became a billionaire, and LBO magnate and socialite Henry Kravis of KKR, which earlier this year completed the largest takeover in history, the junk-financed $25.3 billion buyout of RJR Nabisco Inc. 

Then, just as the triumph of junk bonds seemed complete, Mr. Milken was forced out of Drexel Burnham earlier this year under a plea bargain the securities firm reached with the government. 

Mr. Milken was considered a master at exchanging junk bonds on the verge of default for new bonds, a practice that may have artifically lowered the reported default rate of high-yield bonds.
Many in Mr. Milken's awesome network of junk-bonds buyers were either so loyal -- or so beholden -- that they willingly bought or sold on his advice.
Some investors believe the junk-bond market's current problems are attributable to the absence of Mr. Milken as chief market maker. 

Mr. Milken couldn't be reached for comment, a spokesman said.
A Drexel spokesman said, "This is a professional market with hundreds of people on the buy and sell side.
The market responds to its own supply and demand characteristics and to major defaults." 

Others, too, say Mr. Milken's absence is coincidence, and the market's current problems would have arisen whether Mr. Milken was active in the market or not.
For example, in April, a Harvard University study cast doubt on the relative safety of junk bonds, finding that junk bonds have a default rate of 34%, or much higher than the rate junk-bond professionals have boasted about. 

Next came a few high-profile defaults.
Integrated Resources Inc., a Drexel client, defaulted in July on nearly $1 billion in debt; Resorts International Inc. failed to meet interest payments on $925 million in junk debt.
All told, more than $3 billion in junk bonds have defaulted this year, a substantial increase. 

Meanwhile, Congress, in its massive bailout of the thrift industry, is pressuring thrifts to sell junk bonds; they own an estimated $13.5 billion of junk bonds, or about 7% of junk bonds outstanding. 

Indicators have pointed to a sick junk-bond market since this spring.
Many junk-bond prices tilted lower despite a big drop in interest rates and no signs of recession.
So far this year, the returns to investors from junk bonds have been far outstripped by returns from almost every sector of investment-grade debt securities, including Treasury, corporate and mortgage-backed bonds. 

Now Wall Street itself, which made so much money from the junk-bond craze, is being stung by the junk-market shakeout.
Not only do many Wall Street firms own hundreds of millions of dollars in junk bonds, but Wall Street also has sizeable amounts of its own capital tied up in what were supposed to be short-term loans to clients that made acquisitions.
The loans were supposed to be replaced by sales of junk bonds, but with that market so uncertain, it isn't clear when the Wall Street firms will be able to get their money back. 

At First Boston Corp., which advised and helped finance Campeau's burgeoning retail empire, the collapse of Allied and Federated bonds have saddled the investment bank with paper losses totaling well over $100 million on Campeau-unit bonds it owns.
Campeau "has been a career shortner," says a First Boston executive.
First Boston, following its failure to sell $475 million of junk bonds for Ohio Mattress (now dubbed "burning bed" among traders), has its own capital locked in a "bridge loan"; it also shares a $400 million bridge loan to Federated with PaineWebber Inc. and Dillon Read & Co., and has a $1 billion bridge in place for the $1.2 billion acquisition of the Petrolane unit of Texas Eastern. 

Merrill Lynch has about $1.4 billion of bridge loans outstanding; the largest is a $1 billion bridge to Time Warner.
Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. also has a $1 billion bridge loan outstanding to Time Warner. 

Drexel, the leading underwriter of junk bonds, says it has only $400 million in bridge loans outstanding, but industry executives say it has the Street's largest portfolio of junk bonds.
A spokesman declined to quantify Drexel's exposure. 

For a while, the junk-bond market seemed to be a liquid public market.
Now, it is being exposed for what it really is: A place where highly risky loans to lower quality companies are traded.
As recent days have demonstrated, the market's liquidity can be thin or non-existant at times.
Price quotations have recently varied widely from sale prices actually realized by bondholders. 

Yet despite its current problems, investment professionals say there will continue to be junk-bond offerings for solid companies with good earnings which for any number of reasons don't qualify for a higher-quality debt rating.
But the distinction between "good junk" and "bad junk" will be crucial, both for underwriters and investors. "People have tried to make the junk-bond market into a commodity market, but it isn't," says Drexel's Mr. Harch. "The market is very credit specific and will become more so." 

An example of a solid company that seems to have thrived on the strength of junk-bond financing is FMC Corp., which makes armored combat vehicles and other military equipment.
In 1986, the company, its shareholders and employees bought out its stock in a leveraged buy-out financed by junk. 

Last week, as other junk issues fell, FMC's $200 million issue closed little changed.
Says Amy Minella, a manager of junk-bond investments for closely held Deltec Securities Corp., FMC "is just another example of the junk bonds that deserve a wide investment following." 

Linda Sandler contributed to this article. 

Total returns (price and income) for the periods ended Sept. 15, 1989 

