.START 

HURRICANE HUGO LASHED Caribbean islands, causing widespread damage. 

The storm, considered the region's most powerful in a decade, battered resort islands in the northeastern part of the sea with 140 mph winds, damaging homes, severing communications and leaving at least six people reported dead.
Hardest hit was Guadeloupe, the most southerly of the Leeward Islands, where 80 people were hurt and about 4,000 left homeless.
Damage also was reported on Martinique, Antigua and Dominica. 

The hurricane swept toward the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.
National Guard troops were mobilized and residents rushed for last-minute supplies. 

UKRAINIANS STAGED a rally to demand recognition for their church. 

Tens of thousands of Ukrainian Catholics joined what was considered the Uniate Church's biggest service since World War II, urging Kremlin leader Gorbachev to restore its legal status and end decades of repression.
The protesters also marched through the city of Lvov, near the border with Poland.
The demonstrations came on the 50th anniversary of Stalin's annexation of the western Ukraine from Poland. 

Poles demanded the withdrawal of Soviet troops at rallies and memorial services across the country to mark Moscow's invasion of Poland. 

Israel's Rabin will visit Cairo today to discuss Egyptian President Mubarak's plan for ending the 21-month-old Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories, the defense minister's office said.
But Prime Minister Shamir's right-wing Likud bloc of the Israeli cabinet issued a statement Sunday rejecting Mubarak's peace proposal. 

East German emigres in Budapest said East Germany and Czechoslovak authorities have begun seizing passports in an effort to stop the flood of refugees fleeing to the West.
More than 15,500 refugees have arrived in West Germany since Hungary opened its borders last weekend. 

Moslem leaders expressed support for a new Arab League peace plan aimed at ending Lebanon's civil war, but warring factions battled sporadically as Arab mediators sought to implement a cease-fire.
While Lebanon's Christian patriarch voiced backing for the plan, Christian Gen. Aoun apparently remained undecided about the truce call. 

Apartheid foes in South Africa plan to press a seven-week-old anti-government defiance campaign this week with demonstrations, boycotts and marches.
The government has ordered police to refrain from disrupting peaceful demonstrations, and anti-apartheid rallies were held last week in Cape Town, Pretoria and Johannesburg. 

China's Deng appeared in public for the first time in more than three months, and indicated that Beijing would continue its "opening to the outside." The senior Chinese leader, who had been reported in failing health, made his remarks Saturday during a meeting in Beijing with a Nobel Prize-winning Chinese-American physicist. 

Sri Lanka offered a unilateral cease-fire to Sinhalese extremists if they participate in an interparty peace conference.
The talks began last week.
The move by Colombo's government followed a week of violence in the Indian Ocean island nation, in which as many as 350 people were killed. 

McDonnell Douglas Corp. recommended that airlines add several parts to the DC-10 that could prevent an accident like the July crash in Sioux City, Iowa, that killed 112 people.
The rear engine had exploded, severing hydraulic lines.
The FAA is expected to soon make the alteration mandatory on DC-10s. 

Walesa told a rally of about 250,000 workers in the city of Czestochwa that Poland's new Solidarity-led government needed firm support from the work force to make a country "of our dreams." In Warsaw, Communist Party leaders prepared to decide today whether to abandon communism and create a new leftist party. 

Iran's President Rafsanjani called for Iraq to relinquish Iranian territory seized in the last days of the Persian Gulf war, or Tehran "will make it retreat by force." The statement was considered the toughest by an Iranian leader since a truce in the eight-year conflict took effect in August 1988. 

Three bombs exploded in the Colombian city of Cali, about 185 miles southwest of Bogota, killing at least one person.
A newspaper that has crusaded against the country's cocaine traffickers said one of its reporters was slain by thugs.
Meanwhile, a leading presidential contender urged against extraditing more drug suspects to the U.S. 

