.START 

Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis put aside his active pursuit of United Airlines Friday, saying he can't compete against a $6.75 billion pilot-management buy-out of UAL Corp. if that group holds together. 

But instead of conceding defeat, he submitted a backup bid of $300 a share, equal to the pilot-management offer accepted Thursday by the UAL board, in case that transaction falls apart.
One person familiar with the Davis strategy estimated there is a 40% chance the pilot-management buy-out will collapse, even though most analysts and takeover stock traders put it at only 5% to 10%. 

Davis aides said $250 million in annual cost concessions by the pilots gave the pilot-management group a bidding advantage of $50 a share.
If Mr. Davis's only chance of winning is the rival group's collapse, he would just be raising the price unnecessarily by raising his bid now, they added. 

"The idea behind this $300 is let's not be silly and bid against ourselves," said John Davis, one of Mr. Davis's two sons. "We can backstop this thing at $300 and see if they're able to put it together." 

Some takeover stock traders called the Davis move a public-relations ploy to put the best face on being outbid.
One person familiar with UAL called it "a graceful exit" after a six-week seige that began Aug. 7 with disclosure of a Davis offer of $240 a share, or $5.4 billion. 

However, people familiar with the Davis strategy see potential rifts between UAL Chairman Stephen Wolf and the pilots, and between the white-collar pilots and blue-collar machinists, who haven't yet joined the bid, over features of the buy-out. 

They believe the pilots could tangle with management over the fact that employees will own 75% of UAL but only control three of 15 board seats.
They also believe the price management pays for 10% of UAL -- $15 million for 1%, plus options for 9% at no extra charge -- may provoke friction.
They believe the machinists may resent the idea of a pilot-dominated airline so much they will try to torpedo the deal. 

On the other hand, the pilots have been seeking to buy the airline for more than two years, and the machinists can't legally do much to block them.
Federal labor laws bar wildcat airline strikes, and the machinist contract doesn't expire until November. 

"I think in the end there will be a meeting of the minds among all the employee groups," said Michael Derchin, an airline analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
He said the employee involvement is likely to blunt any regulatory concerns about debt leverage or foreign ownership.
British Airways PLC is investing $750 million for a 15% stake in UAL. 

So far, the machinists haven't begun talks about joining the pilot-management group.
They are balking at a demand by management that details of the bid remain secret. 

For Mr. Davis, UAL may become the second major airline to have eluded his pursuit, which could intensify questions about the seriousness of his interest in making acquisitions.
He finished third in the bidding for Northwest Airlines parent NWA Inc. in June. 

However, as in NWA, Mr. Davis has evidently gained substantial profits on his UAL stock as a consolation prize.
He accumulated a reported stake of 3.5%, or about 750,000 shares, when the stock was about $160 a share.
His average cost may have been even less. 

On Friday, UAL stock fell 75 cents a share to $279.75 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Assuming Mr. Davis sold around the current market price, his profit before expenses would be about $90 million.
On NWA, he pocketed $48 million minus $18 million in expenses. 

But aides describe Mr. Davis as a "disciplined buyer" and an "identifier of value" rather than a financial manipulator. "He wants to own an airline and has been dealt two tough hands," said one.
They note that Wall Street takeover stock traders appreciate that he has forced his two most recent targets to be sold.
But they acknowledge such questions will persist until he makes another major acquisition.
His last, the Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. entertainment company, was in 1981.
Earlier this year he purchased Spectradyne Inc. for $650 million. 

