.START 

personalized advertising in its weekly magazines -- is expected to pull in an extra $20 million to $25 million in ad revenue in its first year alone, says Donald M. Elliman Jr., the magazine group's executive vice president of marketing. 

The figure is surprisingly large for a start-up program, and shows just how important the new plan will be in generating ad revenue for the magazine group in the 1990s.
Indeed, Time magazine group officials are already planning to expand the program, which premieres in January, to include more magazines and types of ads.
The plan, known as Target Select, initially includes Time, People and Sports Illustrated, as well as Money and Entertainment Weekly on a more limited basis. 

Target Select uses a computerized process known as selective binding to place different ads in different subscribers' magazine copies.
The process can also personalize ads, greeting subscribers by name or listing a local store address.
In effect, it allows Time's national magazines to compete head-to-head with local newspapers and with direct mail. "Subscribers can receive Time publications whose ads have information geared specifically towards them," says Bruce Judson, the magazine group's director of marketing, who spearheaded the program under Mr. Elliman. "The possibilities are tremendous." 

Target Select won't be announced officially until Friday, but it's already jolting other publishers into action, and could well transform the magazine ad business.
While selective binding has been around for about 15 years, it had been used only by a handful of smaller magazines like Farm Journal.
But Time's titles account for about 20% of all U.S. magazine ad revenue, and any splash Time makes tends to turn into a tidal wave. 

Hearst and Diamandis Communications are among the magazine publishers now exploring selective binding.
Ziff-Davis's PC Magazine is testing the process.
And industry executives say Washington Post Co. 's Newsweek is scrambling to be able to offer its own program early next year to compete with Time.
No other magazine companies, though, have the reach of Time; its three weeklies alone have combined circulation of almost 10.5 million and had ad revenue of $942 million in 1988. 

Still, Time is making an expensive gamble.
It has invested millions in a new technology that could well turn out to be a very expensive gimmick.
Time declines to quantify its investment, but says the program will be profitable in its first year.
Other magazine publishers are watching carefully: "Selective binding has been around for 15 years, and no one has really been able to make it work right," says Claeys Bahrenburg, group publishing director at Hearst magazines, publisher of Cosmopolitan and Redbook. 

Mr. Bahrenburg says Hearst has created a task force to look into selective binding, and says it is considering using the technology not just for advertisers, but to tailor articles to subscribers.
Sports Afield, for example, could give fishing buffs a heavier dose of angling articles. 

But Mr. Bahrenburg adds that magazines using selective binding to personalize ads may risk undermining their national ad base and hurting their overall cachet. "This raises some major issues on how we sell our product: You're selling demographic slices" rather than a national magazine, he says.
Mr. Judson, however, counters that Target Select "enhances the franchise of Time magazines." 

In any case, Target Select is expensive enough that it doesn't seem likely to spark an immediate stampede away from national ads.
The plan, in part, will allow marketers to advertise specifically to three groups of subscribers: catalog shoppers, people who have recently moved and affluent readers over 50 years old.
A furniture company, for example, could advertise only in magazine copies going to subscribers who just moved. 

But that kind of pinpointing, derived largely from reader surveys, doesn't come cheap.
Time magazine currently charges about $28 to reach each 1,000 subscribers.
But advertisers who want to target high income older people -- and Time promises to reach 700,000 of them via the three weeklies and Money -- will pay more than double that rate, or about $68 for each 1,000, according to the 1990 rate card.
Reaching recent movers will cost $51 for each 1,000. 

Target Select also will use a process called ink-jet printing to allow national advertisers to personalize their ads.
An auto maker's ad could list the nearest dealership, or even offer a discount to selected subscribers.
Depending on complexity, industry executives say ink-jet printing can add 35% to the cost of an ad, and could even double the price.
Even more costly, Time is offering customized programs for advertisers.
American Express, for example, could place personalized ads only in magazine copies going to gold-card-carrying subscribers. 

"The day is here when magazine advertisers can be as personalized as direct mail," Mr. Judson says.
Indeed, the ink-jet capability is sure to make a lot of direct marketers angry, and it's certain to scare newspapers, which are already facing a bleak retail ad market.
It swipes especially hard at cooperative ads, in which a retail outlet and a brand share a single ad; the ink-jetting program can tailor a national ad right down to the zip-code level, listing the nearest retail outlet where a nationally advertised brand is sold. "It's better targeting than anything available in local newspapers," Mr. Judson says. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

NEW ACCOUNTS: Times Mirror Co., Los Angeles, awarded the $5 million ad account for its Newsday and New York Newsday newspapers to Margeotes Fertitta & Weiss, New York.
The account had been handled by Holland & Callaway Advertising, New York. . . . Glenbrook Laboratories, a unit of Sterling Drug, said Lintas New York and Dugan/Farley Communications Associates, Upper Saddle River, N.J., will handle advertising for Therapy Bayer Aspirin, a new analgesic.
Lintas, a unit of the Interpublic Group, will handle consumer ads; Dugan/Farley will create a trade campaign.
Billings haven't been determined. 

