.START 

A federal jury decided against awarding any punitive damages to the daughter of the founder of Mail Boxes Etc., who claimed that the company and its top official fraudulently induced her to sell her 23% stake. 

Thursday, the jury had awarded plaintiff Nancy Tash, daughter of the company's late founder, Gerald Aul, $2.5 million in compensatory damages to be paid by the company.
The jury further found that Anthony DeSio, Mail Boxes' president and chief executive officer, should pay more than $1.5 million in compensatory damages.
Herbert Goffstein, a defendant and a former company official, wasn't found liable for any damages. 

In her lawsuit, Ms. Tash alleged that the company and Mr. DeSio defrauded her in 1983 by inducing her to sell 700,000 shares of the company's stock for $50,000 and a $300,000 note to a new company controlled by Mr. DeSio.
Ms. Tash alleged that Mr. DeSio had devised a scheme to make her believe that the company was performing poorly, when it was in fact posting higher sales.
The company said it plans to appeal the verdict. 

Mail Boxes Etc. is a franchiser of postal-business and communication-service centers.
It said its insurance carriers have reserved rights to deny liability for actual coverage of the award and maintain that the company's policy limit is $1 million.
Gary Smith, a Mail Boxes official, said the company will have to meet with the insurers to determine how the verdict will be handled. 

CO J.MBB AIB+ RTRSY .START 

The New York Stock Exchange announced the listing of two foreign banking firms. 

Mitsubishi Bank Ltd., Tokyo, will list American depository shares with the symbol MBK.
It will continue to trade on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. 

Allied Irish Banks PLC, Dublin, has started trading with the symbol AIB.PR, representing non-cumulative preference shares.
It is an initial public offering. 

The American Stock Exchange and the Chicago Board Options Exchange said they began trading put and call options on the American depositary receipts of Reuters Holdings PLC, a London news and information services company. 

