.START 

Monetary measures to cool Spain's overheated economy are beginning to take hold, just in time to let the Socialist government claim success for its policies in next month's elections. 

Economy Minister Carlos Solchaga said signs of a slowdown in private consumption, coupled with significant reductions in Spain's inflation and money-supply growth rates during August, indicate that further austerity measures won't be needed. 

"Though consumption remains strong, a certain deceleration is already visible," he told a press conference. 

Measures imposed earlier this year to tighten credit and bring forward some tax payments "are having their effect and will surely make other measures unnecessary," he declared. 

His statements, coinciding with publication of a slower-than-expected 0.2% gain in Spain's consumer-price index in August, give a strong boost to the government's campaign for re-election on Oct. 29. 

After several months of unfavorable statistics, Mr. Solchaga was able to announce a significant slowdown in Spain's principal money-supply indicator in August, reflecting slower credit growth.
Liquid assets held by the public grew 10.3% in August from a year earlier, compared with a rate of 12.4% in July, he said. 

Though Spain's trade deficit widened to $2.35 billion in August from $1.81 billion a year earlier, Mr. Solchaga said the figures were "not bad" and indicated slower import growth. 

The reduction in total domestic demand, meanwhile, was being achieved without significantly affecting the buoyancy of investment spending, he added. 

Following the August inflation figure, which brought Spain's year-to-year inflation rate to 6.6% from 7.4%, Mr. Solchaga said he aimed to lower inflation for all of 1989 to below last year's 5.8%.
He indicated that the Socialists, if re-elected, would propose a 1990 budget that would be neither expansionary nor restrictive.
He declined to give details, but he said spending wouldn't be allowed to outpace the rate of economic growth. 

In part, his remarks amounted to a rebuttal of suggestions from the Communist coalition that the Socialists plan new economic austerity measures if re-elected next month. 

Though the Socialists are widely expected to win the elections, the main issue is whether they will retain a parliamentary majority.
If they don't, some analysts think they could be forced to rely on the Communist coalition for support in parliament, potentially heralding a leftward shift in economic policies. 

In statements clearly designed to counteract such pressures, Mr. Solchaga offered left-wing voters the prospect of several more years of strong economic expansion. "We have strong growth prospects ahead of us, which if channelled correctly can give growth rates well in excess of other European countries," he said. 

