.START 

Financial problems at Campeau Corp. prompted more factoring companies to tell manufacturers to stop shipping merchandise to Campeau's Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores units. 

In a related development, some off-price retailers said they have been approached by apparel makers trying to unload merchandise originally intended for sale to Federated and Allied. 

New York-based Congress Talcott Corp., a major factoring company that does business with many Seventh Avenue apparel companies, said Friday it had instructed vendors not to ship to stores owned by Federated and Allied.
Congress President Jerome Kenyon said Federated and Allied aren't behind in their bills, but he said Congress was "concerned that Campeau wouldn't be able to meet their interest payments." 

Campeau officials didn't return calls for comment. 

As reported, Federated and Allied are facing a liquidity crunch caused by high debt levels resulting from their acquisition by Campeau, a Toronto-based real-estate developer and retailer. 

Federated and Allied operate nine department-store chains, including Bloomingdale's, Stern's, Jordan Marsh, Abraham & Straus and Lazarus. 

Factoring companies buy retail receivables from apparel makers and, in many cases, act as their credit managers.
As such, they exert considerable influence in the way apparel companies conduct their business.
Last week, another big factoring company, Heller Financial Inc., also told its vendors to halt shipments to the Campeau-owned stores. 

Mr. Kenyon said Congress substantially cut its credit lines to Federated and Allied in mid-August because of concern about Campeau's financial situation. "We have had meetings with them trying to get better information, but we weren't satisfied," he said.
The credit lines were suspended last week. 

If Campeau receives the $250 million loan it is hoping to get from Olympia & York Developments Ltd., Mr. Kenyon said Congress would probably allow vendors to make October shipments to Federated and Allied.
But he said Campeau's credit lines won't be increased "until they can show us more" financial data. 

As concern about Campeau spread through New York's garment district, most apparel makers simply refused to discuss their business relationships with the Campeau stores.
But judging by the comments from a few apparel makers, many companies apparently have halted shipments to the Allied and Federated stores. 

MBI Merchandise Industries, a New York maker of photo albums, said it stopped shipping to Campeau clients on Friday after receiving a stop-shipment order from its factor, Barclays American Corp., according to an MBI vice president. "When I called to break the news to the Stern's buyer, he told me that he had received a lot of {cancellation} calls from other manufacturers," the MBI executive said. 

A spokesman for Charlotte, N.C.-based Barclays American declined to comment.
Stern's officials referred calls seeking comment to Campeau. 

It was also evident last Friday that some manufacturers weren't waiting to hear good news from Campeau and were seeking to sell goods to other retailers. 

Burlington Coat Factory, a big off-price apparel retailer based in Burlington, N.J., was "flooded with calls" within the last week from manufacturers looking to sell goods, said Monroe Millstein, Burlington chairman. "Our buyers have been besieged with offers for all types of clothing across the board," Mr. Millstein said. 

Off-price retailers specialize in the sale of brand-name and designer apparel at discount prices.
Apparel makers typically turn to them when they have excess inventory or merchandise they need to sell late in the season.
Most department stores have already ordered most of their fall and winter merchandise. 

