.START 

Rockwell International Corp. threatened to close the Rocky Flats nuclear-weapons factory if the company doesn't receive assurances that it won't be prosecuted for violating federal waste-disposal laws, according to officials familiar with the situation. 

Meanwhile, the Environmental Protection Agency and the state of Colorado have signed an agreement designed to bring the Energy Department facility into compliance with the waste-disposal regulations, according to an EPA spokeswoman in Denver.
The Energy Department, which has been part of the discussions, is expected to sign shortly. 

Rockwell didn't participate in the negotiations, however, and the pact doesn't give it immunity from prosecution. 

"For now, the plant remains open," a Rockwell spokesman said yesterday.
But in a terse statement issued late Friday, the El Segundo, Calif., aerospace company said it has told the Energy Department it would shut down the 6,550-acre site if it fails to reach an accord the company believes protects it and its employees "against civil and criminal actions for ongoing operations." 

This spring, employees of the Army's Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland were convicted for improperly handling chemical wastes. 

Rocky Flats, located 16 miles from Denver, is the only plant that makes the plutonium triggers for the U.S. nuclear arsenal. 

The basic problem at Rocky Flats is that there's no place to legally store the waste, and there's no disposal facility to which it can be shipped.
The waste is a mix of low-level radioactive and hazardous material governed by the Resources Conservation and Recovery Act.
It once was going to be burned in a special incinerator at Rocky Flats, but the apparatus caught on fire and hasn't been restarted. 

Rockwell, thus, seems to be in a bind: It can keep running the plant and break the law, or it can shutter it and probably come under fire for endangering national security. 

For years, the Energy Department wasn't so worried about complying with waste-disposal laws.
But since June, when federal agents raided Rocky Flats and alleged that Rockwell and the department had violated a range of pollution-control statutes, it has become more stringent. 

The agreement reached by the state and the EPA provides for the safe storage of the waste.
It also requires the Energy Department to give the state and the EPA a plan for reducing the volume of waste created at Rocky Flats and to find a safe, legal way to dispose of it over the long term.
The department could develop technology to dispose of the waste at Rocky Flats or modify another facility to be able to accept it. 

In addition, the department will prepare a study of how to deal with similar waste created at other Energy Department plants nationwide. 

Rockwell said it has met with representatives from three federal agencies -- the Energy Department, the EPA and the Justice Department -- and was "evaluating their response" on the immunity issue.
The company spokesman declined to comment further and couldn't say whether more meetings were scheduled with those agencies. 

