.START 

There's a new kind of corporate raider on the scene: the bankruptcy raider.
Typically he aims to help creditors -- not shareholders -- by threatening to disrupt a company's reorganization proceedings. 

It is happening now in the long-running bankruptcy-court battle over Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp., which has struggled since 1985 to devise a plan to pay more than $1 billion face amount of claims.
Reflecting the big stakes, the fight is getting dirty, with mudslinging and litigation. 

Recently, just when a new reorganization proposal for Wheeling was gaining support, a militant group of so-called vulture investors led by the New York brokerage firm Oppenheimer & Co. arose to try to wrench a bigger piece of the booty for themselves and other junior Wheeling creditors. 

Oppenheimer isn't the first to stage a bankruptcy raid.
A few months ago, some Todd Shipyards Corp. junior creditors wrested concessions in that company's ongoing reorganization.
Yet the Wheeling skirmish seems particularly intense, perhaps because so many aggressive investors own Wheeling claims.
As more debt-laden companies falter, bankruptcy specialists say, such holdups could become routine. 

The target drawing fire in this particular raid is money manager Ronald LaBow of Neuberger & Berman in New York.
He is a senior Wheeling creditor and author of the new reorganization plan. 

Oppenheimer won't comment on its insurrection, which is badly upsetting key factions in the Wheeling battle.
But at the very least, the Oppenheimer group, which owns more than 20% of unsecured Wheeling claims, could hold up the bankruptcy proceedings, making everybody wait longer for their payoff. 

"It's always better to have a consensual plan {for reorganization} because it's quicker," says Mr. LaBow.
His clients own 86% of Wheeling's bank claims and would make a killing if Mr. LaBow can push through his plan in federal bankruptcy court in Pittsburgh. 

Mr. LaBow thinks he could guide Wheeling out of bankruptcy court by January 1990, though key labor and legal roadblocks remain.
And he has the backing of some heavyweight Wheeling creditors who want payment as soon as possible. 

"This bankruptcy has gone on 4 1/2 years," complains Stanley West of Cleveland-Cliffs, a big Wheeling trade creditor.
Mr. West heads a committee of unsecured Wheeling creditors, which recently endorsed Mr. LaBow's plan.
With the steel business slowing after being on a roll, some creditors worry that Wheeling's growing cash pile might erode, leaving less value for everybody. 

Caught in the middle are Wheeling's common shareholders, including another big Wall Street player, Goldman, Sachs & Co., which bought 34% of Wheeling stock early this year.
In bankruptcy court, shareholders are on the bottom of the totem pole.
They face massive dilution of their stake in the company and generally lack much power to influence the battle. 

Yet the fight over Wheeling has rekindled equity investors' hopes.
Recently, Wheeling stock, which traded as low as 7 5/8 this year, has climbed in active trading, finishing at 15 1/4, up 1/4 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company has said it has nothing new to report and can't explain the activity. 

Currently only Wheeling is allowed to file a reorganization plan. "We want to keep our exclusivity," Wheeling says.
It now is revising its initial plan, drafted with Mr. LaBow's help and filed December 1988.
But Mr. LaBow, who wants greater control over the proceedings, has asked the court to let him file a plan instead. 

If Mr. LaBow could push through his plan, which resembles Wheeling's initial proposal, his investment clients might nearly treble the value of their $140 million investment, taking Wheeling debentures and half of the newly organized Wheeling's stock. 

Meanwhile, Oppenheimer and other unsecured Wheeling creditors might get 70 cents on the dollar for their claims, two-thirds in cash and one-third in new Wheeling stock.
Vulture investors generally paid 10 cents to 60 cents on the dollar for unsecured Wheeling claims.
Mr. Labow would offer to buy creditors' new Wheeling shares for cash, perhaps giving him control of the company. 

Under Mr. LaBow's plan, many new Wheeling shares would be issued, shrinking existing common stockholders' 100% stake to only 7.5%.
Thus Goldman's 34% stake in Wheeling, bought at $8, would shrink to about 2.5%.
In his plan, Mr. LaBow has valued existing Wheeling shares at less than 5.
While some think he might raise that valuation, Mr. LaBow says Wheeling can't pay creditors in full, so there won't be much left for shareholders. 

The steel union might get more breaks from Mr. LaBow than current shareholders would. "The union has made substantial contributions to the company in the past four years, ' Mr. LaBow says.
Without a new wage contract, Wheeling cannot get out of bankruptcy court.
Wage talks won't even start for a few weeks. 

Oppenheimer is said to want a higher payout from Mr. LaBow, and more stock.
It also has filed court papers supporting Wheeling's right to file its own amended plan.
And Oppenheimer has floated its own reorganization proposal that might buy out Mr. LaBow and give the Oppenheimer group much of Wheeling's new stock. 

"For the company and the workers, a more diverse ownership might be beneficial," says Sean Mathis, Wheeling's financial adviser. 

Goldman won't comment on its role.
But it is said to be offering to raise additional money for Wheeling's plan, in hopes of improving Wheeling stockholders' fate in a reorganization.
Goldman apparently owns restricted Wheeling shares that must be held for some time.
Bankruptcy players say Goldman also has sought a possible acquirer for Wheeling, but no buyer has yet emerged. 

Currently Mr. LaBow is trying to pacify Oppenheimer, bankruptcy players say.
But recently he sued to stop the brokerage firm from taking possession of, and voting, some claims it bought from original Wheeling creditors, alarming factions he needs as allies. 

"In general, creditors ought to be able to transfer claims," says Lawrence Handelsman, a lawyer for Wheeling's committee of unsecured creditors. 

Oppenheimer also is playing rough.
Recently in bankruptcy court in Pittsburgh, David Strumwasser, a lawyer for Oppenheimer, said he wanted to know who the investors are in the Neuberger & Berman partnerships that hold Wheeling bank claims. 

Mr. LaBow's limited partners are believed to include the family of Michael Milken, the former junk bond king who was indicted for securities fraud.
Mr. LaBow won't confirm or deny that, but says he alone makes investment decisions for the partnerships that hold Wheeling claims.
A spokesman for Mr. Milken declined to comment.
Dennis Cronin, a lawyer for Mr. LaBow, says he will soon give Oppenheimer a list of the limited partners. 

Mr. LaBow's relationship with Mr. Milken is periodically a subject of speculation in the market.
Since 1985, Mr. LaBow has been a director of Regency Equities in Omaha, Neb.
Regency's big shareholders include Mr. Milken and his brother Lowell. 

Ken Schneier of R.D. Smith, whose clients hold Wheeling claims, is keeping an open mind. "We will vote our claims in a way that suits our customers' interests," he says. "We hope for the best return." 

Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel 

(NYSE; Symbol: WHX) 

Business: Steel producer 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Sales: $1.10 billion 

Net Income: $258.5 million; $48.69 a share Second quarter, June 30, 1989: 

Per-share earnings: $10.76 vs. $11.69 

Average daily trading volume: 10,385 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 5.1 million 

