.START 

Canfor Corp. said it may spend "significantly more" than the 300 million Canadian dollars (US$253 million) it previously estimated it would invest to expand output at its Prince George, British Columbia, pulp and paper mills. 

"What we announced was an initial generalized estimate of what we'd have to spend for the minimum enlargement, if we do it in phases.
It wasn't a firm game plan," said Canfor Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Peter Bentley. 

Mr. Bentley said he couldn't provide specific spending figures until Canfor's board approves the plan early next year.
The C$300 million figure, which includes an estimated C$150 million of related environmental improvements, would allow Canfor to raise kraft-pulp output at its two Prince George mills by about 300 metric tons a day, to a total 1,900 metric tons.
Canfor ultimately plans to raise daily output to a total 2,600 metric tons.
A metric ton equals 2,204.62 pounds. 

Mr. Bentley said proceeds from the sale of Canfor's lumber operations in northern Alberta, for which the company recently retained Salomon Inc. 's Salomon Brothers Inc. unit to solicit bids, may be used to help finance spending at Prince George or other operations, or to reduce debt.
Canfor's long-term debt rose to C$146.5 million, or about 30% of capital, as of June 30 after its C$93.8 million purchase of Vancouver's Balfour Forest Products Inc. 

"It {the sale} just enhances our options on what we can do.
Not only in terms of timetable or scope at Prince George, but also in any opportunities we have to integrate {production of} pulp and higher-grade papers," he said. 

Mr. Bentley wouldn't discuss specifics, but said joint ventures "could be one way {for Canfor} to get further integrated into the paper business," while reducing its risk.
He said Canfor has no plans to boost its interest in newsprint production. 

Canfor's 50%-owned Howe Sound Pulp & Paper Ltd., a joint venture with Japan's Oji Paper Co., is currently spending about C$1 billion to build a newsprint mill and expand pulp output at its facilities in Port Mellon, British Columbia. 

