.START 

Oops.
There goes the air out of Woolworth again. 

The shares, which spurted on heavy volume Sept. 7 and 8, deflated 12% last week amidst general anguish for rumored takeover stocks. 

Even at Friday's close of 63, many analysts and money managers say, buyers essentially are speculating on a takeover of Woolworth, as the stock otherwise is fully valued.
Fundamentals justify the current price, they say, but not much more. 

Takeovers suddenly look tougher to carry out because "the bottom is falling out of the junk-bond market," one money manager says.
And a raider without junk-bond financing is like Zorro without his sword. 

Woolworth's shares have trended upward for the past year, helped partly by strength in its specialty retailing units.
Analysts are especially keen on its Foot Locker stores. "The athletic-shoe business has been very good to them," says a New York money manager. "But it's a $4 billion market now.
It's a maturing market.
Absent a takeover, the stock is expensive." 

"In the low 50s the stock was a screaming buy on fundamentals," says another money manager, who bought at that price but sold too soon -- for a mere 4-point profit.
She now considers the shares "fully priced." 

The stock is a "hold to a sell," says Edward Johnson, analyst at Prescott, Ball & Turben.
He expects Woolworth to earn about $5.60 a share in 1990.
Applying a multiple of 11 times earnings, he thinks the stock is worth about 61. 

Some analysts still like Woolworth on fundamentals.
Oppenheimer & Co. put the big retailer on its recommended list last month, as analyst Bruce Missett praised its acquisition of Champs, a sporting-goods and sports-apparel chain. 

Robert Raiff at C.J. Lawrence Morgan Grenfell last October called Woolworth "one of the few remaining great values." The stock then was at 52 to 57.
When it passed 70 last week, he called it "fairly valued." On the slip back to 63, he said, "I'm a buyer." He thinks the stock could sell for 75 next year on fundamentals, and close to 100 in a restructuring or takeover. 

Still, much of the buying these days comes from speculators.
Takeover rumors have flickered since May 1984.
The latest chitchat features the usual suspect, New York financier Meshulam Riklis, though other names pop up, too. 

Mr. Riklis's closely held Rapid American Corp. controls McCrory's, a discount chain that competes with Woolworth.
He is deemed a logical buyer for two reasons.
Rapid American held 3% of Woolworth back in 1983 (it apparently sold the holding in 1985).
Also, Mr. Riklis recently pocketed some $1.5 billion by selling two cosmetics companies, Faberge and Elizabeth Arden, to Unilever N.V. Mr. Riklis, who couldn't be reached, has declined to comment on similar rumors in the past. 

Interstate Properties, a closely held investment partnership in Teaneck, N.J., is also mentioned as a potential buyer.
Managing partner Russell White declines to comment. 

Other, vaguer, rumors deal with an unidentified foreign buyer or an American buyer that covets Woolworth's real estate. (Woolworth has large and valuable real-estate holdings in West Germany and Canada.) The takeover speculation has spilled over into the options market, with heavy buying of calls (options to purchase a certain amount of stock at a set price until a specified date). 

"They're flocking to these calls like bees go to honey," said Don Fishback, director of research for Investment Research Institute in Cincinnati.
But he thinks buying calls based on widely circulated rumors is usually unsuccessful.
Options buyers who got in a few days ago have already taken a bath.
One popular option (the November call to buy the stock at 60) reached a high of nearly 14, but fell back to 6 3/8 Friday. 

Several market-watchers doubt the rumors.
They note that volume in Woolworth common stock peaked Sept. 7 and 8 at more than a million shares a day, triple the normal level but probably not heavy or sustained enough to indicate a major accumulation of shares by Mr. Riklis. "I'm pretty sure someone has taken a stake," said an official of a stock-watch firm. (Such firms are paid to provide corporations with early warning when a raider is accumulating stock.) "But from what I can gather, it's less than 5%.
They could be in and out." 

The market as a whole looks a little woozy to some people, even though the Dow Jones Industrial Average was up Friday.
Technician and newsletter writer Joseph Granville says 359 stocks (15% of all New York Stock Exchange issues) are within a point of making new 12-month lows.
New lows outnumbered new highs Thursday (28-14) for the first time since March.
He continues to predict an "October massacre." 

Woolworth 

(NYSE; Symbol: Z) 

Business: Retailer 

Year ended Jan. 28, 1989: 

Revenue: $8.09 billion 

Net Income: $288 million; $4.47 a share 

Second quarter, July 29, 1989: 

Per-share earnings: 74 cents vs 68 cents 

Average daily trading volume: 

385,838 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 64 million 

