.START 

Rep. Lee Hamilton, the chairman of the Joint Economic Committee, wants to do a little remodeling of the Federal Reserve System.
His timing may seem strange, since the Fed now is generally well regarded.
Bert Lance, President Carter's budget chief, once said, "If it ain't broke, don't fix it." 

That theory of government, however, has often led to crash programs amid chaos.
Maybe now would be a good time to take a look at the Fed. 

Mr. Hamilton's proposals are something less than revolutionary.
But they could provide an occasion for a thorough examination of an important government institution, now marking its 75th year, that has often been shaped largely by happenstance. 

The proposal that may attract the most attention would put the Treasury secretary on the Reserve Board and thus on the policy-making Open Market Committee.
This would be nothing new; before passage of the 1935 Banking Act, both the Treasury secretary and the comptroller of the currency were ex-officio board members. 

Congress eliminated the ex-officio members as part of the desperate effort to fix a financial system that was, indeed, broke.
It's unclear just how much of a role the secretary had ever played at the Fed.
In arguing for removing the ex-officio members, Sen. Carter Glass said, "When I was secretary of the Treasury, I had considerable influence with the action of the board, and I have suspected that frequently since the secretary of the Treasury has had too much influence upon the board, and I do not think he ought to be there." 

The argument for having the secretary on the board is that it might diminish intragovernment warfare. "There's a lot to be said for it," says William Poole, a Brown University economist and former presidential economic adviser. "It would promote clear lines of responsibility." 

Mr. Poole also supports the Hamilton plan to require the Open Market Committee to announce immediately the decisions of its policy-making sessions, instead of about six weeks later. "Nearly all economists," says Mr. Poole, "would favor the freest possible flow of information." Under congressional pressure, the committee's decisions have been announced earlier and earlier, and the Fed has often expressed fear of market disruptions.
The trouble hasn't occurred, and few non-Fed economists see any chance that immediate disclosure would be damaging. 

Another Hamilton proposal is to allow each incoming president to pick his own Federal Reserve chairman.
Chairmen, like presidents, serve four-year terms but the terms in recent decades have not coincided.
Jerry L. Jordan, chief economist of First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles, says, "It would be a better idea to allow a year between the arrival of a new president and the choice of a chairman.
That might separate the action a little from the politicking that surrounds the inauguration." 

Yet another Hamilton provision would require publication of the Fed's budget.
Congress has always been a little nervous about the Federal Reserve's ability to create funds through its open market operations.
The late Rep. Wright Patman frequently hounded the regional Federal Reserve Banks for data, often on minor expenditures.
It's hard to see, however, how publishing budgets could do any damage. 

But published budgets alone wouldn't satisfy Mr. Hamilton.
He also wants the General Accounting Office to audit Fed procedures much more closely.
Mr. Jordan, however, suggests that the GAO already is a pretty busy outfit. "An agency already exists," he says, "that could do the audits." 

This agency is the Federal Advisory Council.
The council was established by the original Federal Reserve Act in 1913.
There was considerable controversy over which was to run the system -- the banks or the government -- and the council was set up to monitor the system.
Each district had a member, and the council was empowered to get any information it wanted. 

Until the 1930s the council was quite powerful, but it has been allowed to dwindle to a sort of public relations agency, meeting four times a year in Washington but doing very little.
Mr. Jordan suggests reviving the FAC to do any necessary auditing. 

There are a number of other issues that could profitably be examined in the current non-crisis atmosphere.
Benjamin Friedman, a Harvard economist, argues that appointments of Reserve Bank presidents, who make government policy as members of the Open Market Committee, should require Senate confirmation; at present, they are named by the banks' directors with the approval of the Reserve Board.
There are arguments against such a change; some analysts fear it would unduly politicize the Fed.
But it's an issue well worth study. 

Other issues: Rep. Stephen L. Neal has submitted a joint resolution that would instruct the Fed to stabilize prices -- and keep them stable.
Allan H. Meltzer, a Carnegie-Mellon University economist, proposes that the Federal Reserve be required to announce its plans for a coming year.
If it failed to achieve its aims, it would explain why.
The president could accept the explanation -- or accept the Fed officials' resignations. 

Mr. Hamilton may be starting something. 

