.START 

Investor Harold Simmons said he and NL Industries Inc. are willing to give Georgia Gulf Corp. some time to pursue alternatives to their proposed $55-a-share buy-out -- but only a short time. 

"We'll give them a few days to work something out," Mr. Simmons said in an interview last week.
If Georgia Gulf shows progress toward a transaction that would offer shareholders $55 a share, Mr. Simmons said, "We'll be pleased.
If they don't, we'll pursue our $55-a-share deal" or pursue a consent solicitation to replace Georgia Gulf's board. 

Still, Georgia Gulf's stock tumbled $5.125 Friday to close at $52.125 on volume of 1.4 million shares in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
The decline came after a Securities and Exchange Commission filing by Mr. Simmons and NL, a Houston chemicals concern, indicated they were backing down from their aggressive stance. 

Mr. Simmons said NL is delaying its consent solicitation for now because, "that's our last alternative.
Our first alternative is to let them do a restructuring." And if the transaction is above $55 a share, he said, "I would sell." 

The Simmons group's SEC filing disclosed that NL already sold 230,000 Georgia Gulf shares between Sept. 8 and Sept. 12 at prices between $58.50 and $59.50, reducing the group's stake in the Atlanta chemicals concern to 8.9% from 9.9%.
In the filing, the group said it sold because the shares were trading at a price higher than it thought could be realized through a sale or recapitalization of the company. 

Georgia Gulf's stock had been trading above $55 a share since Mr. Simmons and NL offered to help the company recapitalize or go private in some transaction that would pay shareholders $55 a share, or about $1.4 billion. 

According to the SEC filing, J. Landis Martin, NL president and chief executive officer, told Georgia Gulf last week that the Simmons group is as willing to support a Georgia Gulf transaction as it is to complete its own transaction. 

After the meeting, Georgia Gulf said it and its advisers will pursue other alternatives to a transaction with the Simmons group. "They basically said, 'We don't want to do a deal with you, '" Mr. Simmons said. 

In an interview yesterday, NL's Mr. Martin said that NL will tell Georgia Gulf's advisers that it still is interested in participating in one of the other alternatives.
He said NL probably also will ask for a close look at NL's books to see if NL could propose a transaction valued at more than $55 a share. 

In Atlanta, Georgia Gulf said it hadn't any comment on the SEC filing. 

