.START 

The narrowing in the nation's merchandise trade deficit in July to the smallest level since December 1984 reflects the slowing demand for imports as the growth of the U.S. economy tapers off. 

The Commerce Department put the July deficit at $7.58 billion, compared with $8.01 billion in June.
Imports dropped 2.5%.
Exports, which surged in June, fell 1.8% in July, a sign that the boom in U.S. exports may be coming to an end. 

The export boom has helped reduce the trade deficit substantially in the past year.
Further improvements will depend more and more on curbing the U.S. appetite for imports, economists say. 

"Exports are still going to grow, but increasingly the credit for shrinkage of the trade deficit is going to be given to imports," said Lawrence Krohn of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.
The government report shows significant softening of demand for imported industrial supplies and capital goods in July.
Mr. Krohn said this is a clear reflection of the slowing U.S. economy. 

Among other factors, the strength of the U.S. dollar is bound to make life tougher for U.S. exporters.
The dollar was strong on world currency markets Friday as traders responded to a decline in the trade deficit that was greater than many of them anticipated. 

The trade figures fluctuate from one month to the next, but the trend remains favorable. "The first seven months of 1989 clearly continue the progress shown in reducing the deficit since 1987," said Commerce Undersecretary Michael Darby. 

For the first seven months of the year, the U.S. ran a trade deficit of $61.72 billion compared with $68.62 billion in the 1988 period.
Exports have climbed 15.3% so far this year while imports have risen 8.4%.
All the figures are adjusted to remove usual seasonal patterns. 

The $7.58 billion July trade deficit was the smallest since a $6.8 billion deficit recorded in December 1984, the Commerce Department said. 

The Commerce Department said the U.S. imported $38.32 billion of goods in July, down from $39.29 billion the month before but substantially above the $34.07 billion reported for July 1988. 

Imports of industrial supplies dropped 2.7%.
Imports of capital goods, other than cars, were down 5.8%.
Imports of food and autos also fell, but imports of other consumer goods rose. 

The value of petroleum imports, which aren't adjusted for seasonal fluctuations, also rose in July even though the price of oil fell.
The U.S. imported $4.32 billion of oil in July, up from $4.2 billion the month before.
That represents imports of 252.5 million barrels, up from 237.9 million in June and 214.7 million in July 1988. 

Exports amounted to $30.74 billion in July, down from $31.29 billion in June, but well ahead of the $26.61 billion reported for July 1988.
Declining exports of food, consumer goods, autos and other goods overwhelmed an increase in exports of capital goods and industrial supplies. 

Economists were encouraged by the improvement in the trade balance in capital goods, a sign that U.S. manufacturers are regaining some of the competitiveness they lost in recent years.
Exports of capital goods -- machinery, computers, airplanes and the like -- rose in July as imports fell. 

In May, June and July, U.S. exports of capital goods exceeded imports by $2.9 billion compared with a surplus in the previous three months of $1.7 billion.
Exports of aircraft so far this year are running nearly 8% ahead of last year.
Exports of special industrialized machinery are up 19%. 

The Commerce Department noted, however, that exports of manufactured goods of all kinds, before seasonal adjustments, totaled $21.97 billion in July, about $1 billion below the average for the previous six months.
Economists have been warning that the recent strength of the dollar eventually will hurt demand for U.S. goods by making them more expensive to foreigners. 

The government said that the U.S. deficits with Japan, Western Europe, Taiwan, Korea, Mexico and the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries all widened in July.
The deficit with Canada narrowed.
The bilateral trade figures aren't seasonally adjusted. 

*Newly industrialized countries: Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea Source: Commerce Department 

