.START 

You asked for a soft landing.
You got it. 

If investors are finding the economic environment bewildering these days, they shouldn't complain.
Confusion is the consequence of the long-hoped-for soft landing, that catch-all phrase that connotes moderating economic growth, declining inflation and lower interest rates.
After all, a soft landing is neither fish nor fowl.
It isn't a powerful economy that drives corporate earnings (and eventually inflation) sharply higher, but neither is it a sickening plunge into recession. 

"We're all groping for the trend in the economy, and the data are contradictory," says Brian J. Fabbri, chief economist at Midland Montagu in New York. "If it weren't and the statistics were all bad, we'd be talking about a recession.
If the statistics were uniformly good, we'd be talking about an accelerating economy and no need for the Federal Reserve to ease" credit. 

But all this leaves investors confused and worried.
Because the economic picture is so puzzling, they don't know whether to buy or sell stocks, and which stocks they should own.
That's particularly important now because this is the stage at which the economy is delicately balanced and could move quickly either into a recession or acceleration. 

And that's the trouble with the "soft landing" analogy.
While an airplane taxis to the gate and shuts off its engines after landing, the economy just keeps rolling right along. 

"The logical flaw in the whole concept of a soft landing is that there isn't any end," says James Solloway, chief economist at Argus Research in New York. "You either get more softness, ending up in a recession, or you take off again.
You can't keep soft landing forever." 

The lack of a clear direction for the economy contributes to what some market experts call "data paralysis," the tendency of traders and investors to await whatever the next economic statistics are in the hope that a clear trend will develop.
Yet in the midst of a soft landing, the latest economic reports aren't very helpful. 

Take last week's batch of statistics.
No one claims that August retail sales, up 0.7%, were robust, but they weren't dismal either.
The producer-price index -- which measures wholesale price inflation -- shows inflation dropping, but the declines were from falling prices in the volatile areas of food and fuel.
The trade gap surprised most analysts by shrinking, rather than growing, and factory utilization and industrial production didn't change much from previous months' reports. 

So where does all that information leave forecasters?
Argus' Mr. Solloway is sticking to his guns and continuing to predict a recession, probably beginning before the end of the year.
Yet Joseph McAlinden, director of research at Dillon Read, says the data reinforce his bullish view of the economy and the stock market. 

Mr. Solloway's gloomy prediction of a recession stems from what he sees as a tight Federal Reserve credit policy aimed at checking inflation.
Relatively high interest rates are slowing retail sales, while manufacturing inventories are growing.
At some point, probably soon, that leads to manufacturing cutbacks, he says, and that's what a recession is all about. 

"It's a recession brought on by the simple fact that monetary policy is being kept tight to keep inflation in check," he says.
The one bright spot in his outlook? "It will be a mild recession, nothing like the ones we had in the mid-'70s and early '80s." 

Consistent with that forecast, Argus is recommending that investors place their bets on such traditional defensive stocks as food, drug and entertainment issues and avoid any stocks tied to the economic cycle, particularly autos.
The one exception: International Business Machines. "IBM offers some very good value," says A.C. Moore, director of research at Argus. "It isn't up as much as many cyclical stocks are, and there's every reason to believe that over the next several years demand will continue for the computer hardware and data processing equipment that IBM makes." 

Mr. McAlinden, looking at the same economic data, rejects the notion of a recession any time soon. "The overall picture is still somewhat murky, but it's converging toward a pattern of an economy that's not falling apart and that isn't overheating with inflation," he says. "That's all very bullish." 

If there's going to be any trouble at all, he adds, it's likely to be that the economy zooms upward, rather than into a recession. "Right now, I'm very bullish on the equity market, but after a few months I think the economy is going to turn out to be expanding too strongly," he says. "Ultimately, inflation will worsen, and the Fed will respond to that with a severe tightening.
But that might not play out until some time next year." 

Thus Mr. McAlinden isn't at all reluctant to recommend some cyclical stocks such as heavy machinery and factory equipment, albeit with a few caveats.
One is that investors should favor issues more closely tied to capital spending, rather than industrial materials like chemicals and paper.
Another is that they should look for secondary stocks, not the biggest and best-known names in an industry. 

"Where the fundamentals are good, I think secondary stocks will be the target of a lot of buying," he says. "I expect the Amex {American Stock Exchange} and over-the-counter markets to outperform the Dow Jones industrials." 

One note of caution from Mr. McAlinden: be wary of takeover stocks.
The problems that junk bond-financed companies are running into, most notably Campeau Corp. 's troubles, don't bode well for takeover speculation, he says. 

"If these problems are cropping up now with modest inflation, interest rates down and the economy expanding, what in God's name do you think will happen with extremely tight money and an economic downturn?" he asks. 

Friday's Market Activity 

Stock prices rose modestly as stock buying to settle futures and options positions offset more selling of takeover issues. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 9.69 points to 2674.58.
A "triple witching hour" -- the nearly simultaneous expiration of stock index futures, options on index futures and options on individual stocks-boosted trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange to 234.9 million shares, the largest in three months.
But declining issues on the Big Board were ahead of gainers 837 to 651.
For the week, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was off 34.96 points, or 1.3%. 

Among blue-chip stocks, General Electric climbed 1 3/8 to 57 1/4; General Motors rose 5/8 to 49 1/8; American Express added 1 to 36 7/8; Bethlehem Steel closed at 22 3/8, up 1; Westinghouse Electric gained 1 1/4 to 68 3/8 and United Technologies added 1 to 55 7/8. 

As traders and investors shied away from takeover issues amid turmoil in the junk-bond market, hotel and casino stocks dropped sharply.
Hilton Hotels lost 5 3/4 to 96 7/8 and traded as low as 96; Kyle Krueger, a senior vice president of Eagle Asset Management, thinks that the stock could lose 25% of its value without the prospect of a takeover.
Holiday fell 1 5/8 to 78 3/8, Circus Circus Enterprises lost 1 1/8 to 46 5/8, Golden Nugget slid 1 1/4 to 26 and Ramada slipped 3/8 to 

Georgia Gulf plummeted 5 1/8 to 52 1/8.
NL Industries, controlled by Dallas investor Harold C. Simmons, said it wouldn't pursue a proxy fight for control of the board because of Georgia Gulf's decision to consider a sale or restructuring.
NL rose 1/8 to 26. 

Other casualties on the takeover front included American Medical International, which went down 1 1/4 to 22 1/8; Honeywell, down 1 5/8 to 80 7/8; International Minerals & Chemical, down 2 1/2 to 50 1/4; Sea Containers, down 2 1/8 to 59 3/8; Ferro, down 3 to 31 1/2, and Armstrong World Industries, down 1 1/4 to 42 1/2. 

But MGM/UA Communications gained 1 7/8 to 22 1/2 after accepting a sweetened takeover bid of $25 a share from Australia's Qintex Group and ending discussions with News Corp. about a rival offer.
Qintex Entertainment, the U.S. unit of Qintex, rose 1 1/8 to 7 3/8 in over-the-counter trading; News Corp. added 5/8 to 24 5/8 on the Big Board. 

Di Giorgio, which put itself up for sale, went up 1 to 33 3/4.
The company said others besides investor Arthur Goldberg, who is bidding $32 a share, have expressed interest in buying all or part of its operations. 

AMR, which owns American Airlines, fell 1 3/4 to 75 7/8 as 2.2 million shares changed hands.
Chairman Robert Crandall told analysts he expects slower earnings growth in the third and fourth quarters, as well as next year. 

Other airline stocks also ran into selling, including UAL, which dropped 3/4 to 279 3/4 even though investor Marvin Davis said he would match the $300-a-share offer from a labor-management group if that bid isn't completed.
Davis has already offered $275 a share for the parent company of United Airlines. 

Elsewhere in the sector, Delta Air Lines fell 1 to 70 5/8, USAir Group dropped 1/4 to 46 3/8, Southwest Airlines lost 3/8 to 26 3/8, Alaska Air Group eased 1/2 to 25 1/2 and Midway Airlines slid 7/8 to 17 1/4. 

