.START 

Scott Whitlock, the ex-lawyer who manages Honda Motor Co. 's big assembly plant here, looked out across the throng of workers at the end of the assembly line last Thursday to celebrate the launch of the 1990 Accord. 

"This is the car that's going to support us and satisfy our customers for the next four years," Mr. Whitlock declared. "This is our future." 

Mr. Whitlock wasn't exaggerating.
The Accord accounts for nearly half of the company's annual U.S. sales.
Its success is a must if Honda is to make its U.S. subsidiary a fully self-reliant operation, in everything from design to engineering to manufacturing.
And this year's Accord, the trend-setting compact car of the 1980s, enters the midsized market. 

For the first time, Ford Motor Co. 's competitive-analysis studies pit the Accord against Ford's twin flagships, the Taurus and Sable.
The Japanese assault on the U.S. luxury-car market has grabbed the spotlight, but just beneath all that glitter, Honda is aiming its bread-and-butter Accord at the heart of Detroit's home market: midsized, midpriced, family cars. 

Honda not only plans a new Accord sedan, but next fall will introduce an Accord station wagon, designed in part to answer the prayers of dealers who have pleaded for a vehicle that can keep Honda families from defecting to minivans or Taurus wagons.
Other Japanese auto makers are taking aim at the same family market. 

Little wonder, then, that Honda's rivals, who have eaten the Accord's dust for a decade, are sniping that this time, the new Accord looks bland. "People say all Hondas look alike, and they kind of do," says Charles M. Jordan, General Motors Corp. 's vice president of design. "The design of the 1990 Accord disappoints me.
I expected more from Honda." 

Such words reflect the dogfight in the middle of the car market. "The Japanese now have a more or less full product line, and what's going to happen in the next five years is hand-to-hand combat in every market segment," says Bernard Campbell, an auto analyst with DRI/McGraw-Hill in Lexington, Mass. 

The Big Three not only will be fighting the Japanese assault from overseas, but from new factories in North America that allow them to avoid import restrictions and currency fluctuations. 

The 1990 Accord, which will be unveiled officially tomorrow in Nashville, Tenn., is the most prominent symbol of the new Japanese wave.
The engines and automatic transmissions all will be built in Ohio, making the Accord a "domestic" car by government and industry standards.
In fact, Honda marketing officials want to enter the Accord in Motor Trend magazine's 1990 Car of the Year competition as a domestic model. 

But it's more than U.S.-made engines and parts that make the 1990 Accord different from its predecessors.
Consider, for example, the distance between the new Accord's front and rear wheels.
It's 107.1 inches -- one inch longer than a Ford Taurus, and just half an inch shorter than a Chevrolet Lumina sedan.
With that wheel base, the new Accord offers as much leg room and head room, and nearly as much shoulder room, as those mainstream Detroit cars.
To put this growth in perspective, Honda's current compact Civic is bigger than the original Accord that made its debut in 1976. 

The Accord's all-new 2.2 liter, four-cylinder engine puts out as much as 130 horsepower -- just five horsepower less than the Lumina's 3.1 liter V-6 engine, and 10 less than a V-6-equipped Taurus that weighs 100 pounds more.
The reason: Instead of adding extra cylinders, Honda is giving the Accord four valves a cylinder instead of the typical two valves Detroit uses. 

Honda's top U.S. marketing official, Thomas Elliott, downplays the challenge his new car presents to Detroit. "Primarily, our buyer is an import nameplate buyer, even though the Accord is a domestic car," he says. 

But even if Honda's only concern was Japanese rivals, it would still be making the Accord bigger and more powerful. 

Toyota Motor Corp. 's Camry, designed to compete head-on with the Accord, already offers midsized-car buyers the option of buying an advanced, multivalve V-6 engine.
It's likely that when the Camry is redesigned for 1992, it also will join the Accord in offering midsized roominess. 

Nissan Motor Co. 's redesigned Maxima sedan, though more expensive at about $18,000 than the Accord is expected to be, challenges full-sized Big Three cars like the Buick LeSabre.
And Nissan's newly redesigned Accord-fighter, the Stanza, now boasts a 138-horsepower four-cylinder engine that's more powerful than the V-6 in Chevy's Lumina. 

Even the smaller Japanese auto companies, such as Subaru of America Inc. and Mitsubishi Motors Corp., are weighing in with cars that are plush, powerful and nearly as roomy as a midsized Oldsmobile. "They're coming into our market," says Michael Grimaldi, Oldsmobile's controller. "We're going to have to fight like hell." Honda officials won't release 1990 Accord prices until tomorrow.
But Mr. Elliott says that since the car is aimed at the "$12,000-to-$18,000 price range," he expects prices to rise some 4% to 5% from 1989 levels.
At that rate, the cheapest 1990 Accord DX model will have a base sticker price close to around $12,400, up from $11,770 in 1989. 

By comparison, the preliminary price for the cheapest 1990 Taurus is $12,594, up 6.9% from 1989.
The Taurus is getting a standard air bag; the Accord comes with an automatic safety belt instead.
The Lumina Euro sedan, equipped with an engine comparable in performance to the new Accord's, starts at $14,240, up 3.4% from the car's introductory price this spring. 

But sticker prices won't mean much in a market in which supply, in the form of North American car assembly capacity, is 10% to 20% greater than the expected 1990 demand of about 10 million cars.
The Big Three almost certainly will slap rebates on 1990 models.
Chevy is already offering a $750 rebate on the Lumina sedan. 

Until this year, the Accord's success and its image as a trend-setting automobile allowed Honda to boost its sales and market share without resorting to sales incentives.
But that abruptly changed last April.
To counter slumping sales, Honda was forced to offer its first-ever discounts on Accord, thinly disguised as $100 to $300 a car advertising subsidies paid to dealers.
Then, in July, Honda offered as much as $350 a car in incentives to dealers who met certain sales quotas. 

The money has allowed the Accord to maintain its record of seven straight years of sales growth since 1982.
Honda will probably sell more than 370,000 Accords this year, compared with 195,000 in 1982.
But incentives also have contributed to a rare earnings slide at Honda. 

Thus the acid test for the new Accord will be whether Honda can avoid offering any more discounts.
Honda officials insist that they won't have to do that.
But they aren't taking many chances. "We're increasing the advertising budget 25% for 1990, even though our sales projection is only up 5% to 6%," Mr. Elliott says. 

Such caution appears wise.
U.S. car sales, overall, are expected to decline next year.
Also, a few Honda dealers and onetime partisans in the car-buff press are grumbling that Honda is losing its trailblazing edge. "The (new Accord's functional and mechanical brilliance doesn't carry over to the styling," complains Motor Trend in an otherwise positive review.
Honda officials retort that the Accord's target buyers aren't looking for radical styling. 

Executives also hint that Honda's 1990 advertising will throw barbs at competitors who've tried to copy the Accord.
But until the sales returns come in, the folks here are wary of bragging. "We can't say, 'Oh, we're great, '" says Mr. Whitlock, as he strides around his plant monitoring the start of 1990 Accord production. "We've got to keep working on it." 

