.START 

Boeing Co., in an announcement that has the solar energy industry glowing, said it figured out how to trap the sun's rays and convert them to electricity at a level of efficiency never before achieved. 

"It's a very exciting technological milestone," said Edgar DeMeo, manager of the solar-power program at the Electric Power Research Institute, a utility industry trade group. "It's an indication of what might be possible in the future" commercially. 

Experts cautioned, however, that Boeing's advance -- a solar cell made of two semiconductors sandwiched together -- has yet to prove itself outside the laboratory.
And they raised questions about whether the cost of a system originally intended for use on space-based satellites would ever be low enough for more earthly applications. 

"Boeing has taken a giant leap, but the cost is critical," said Charles Gay, president of Atlantic Richfield Co. 's Arco Solar unit, the world leader in the fledgling $100 million solar-cell market. 

Still, Boeing hasn't hesitated to dream.
Lewis Fraas, a research scientist at the Seattle-based aerospace company, maintained that the Boeing cell will eventually produce electricity for as little as 10 cents per kilowatt hour, making it competitive with conventionally derived power. "I see it as a source for utilities in the Southwest," Mr. Fraas said. 

He said one key to lowering the cost of the Boeing cell, which churns out electricity as efficiently as many coal, oil and nuclear operations, will be to mass-produce its special parts.
He predicted that the cell could find iself in space within three years and be employed terrestrially within a decade. 

To be precise, the Boeing cell managed an efficiency rating of 37%.
That's the ratio of electricity generated to the solar energy received on the cell's surface. 

The previous record, 31%, was set last year at the Sandia National Laboratory in Albuquerque, N.M., and officials there didn't expect their mark to fall so quickly. "We likened it to breaking the four-minute mile in running," said Don Schueler, Sandia's manager of solar programs.
Boeing officials have compared the making of their cell to running a three-minute mile. 

After all, it was a tough, 2 1/2-year task that depended on persistence, creativity and -- most of all perhaps -- serendipity. "We made some mistakes as we went along," Mr. Fraas said, "but eventually we picked the right materials." They are: gallium arsenide and gallium antimonide. 

The visible part of sunshine passes onto a transparent layer made out of the first semiconductor where it's absorbed and converted into electricity.
The trick, though, is that infrared light passes through to the second layer, where it's also converted to electricity.
In most solar cells, made from silicon, the infrared energy gets lost. 

Mr. Fraas said the Boeing scientists knew they could achieve a 28% efficiency with the layer of gallium arsenide and theoretically could get an additional 9% efficiency if only they could come up with a way to trap the lost infrared light.
Nonetheless, he said, "We were surprised when the numbers added up.
We impressed ourselves." 

The solar-cell industry is still tiny, supplying just a fraction of the world's energy needs, mostly in remote locations where plugging into a commercial power grid is impractical.
But the market, in which global competition is escalating, has tremendous potential for growth.
Linda Ladas, director of programs at the Solar Energy Industries Association, a trade group representing 200 companies, said that in the Third World particularly, more and more countries are turning to solar energy as a staple of electric power. 

