.START 

Brand names are hard to beat.
But that doesn't stop some upstarts from trying.
Federal Express took on the venerable UPS with a vengeance.
Pan Am boldly challenged the Eastern Shuttle.
Colgate is going up against Crest toothpaste.
And eventually some U.S. manufacturer is going to challenge the Sony Trinitron legend with claims of a sharper picture tube. 

What are some of the secrets of tackling a product that has strong brand loyalty -- or recapturing it if your customers are being stolen away?
One landmark case has distilled the tempest in a cordial glass as the world's two leading makers of the liqueur sambuca contend for the U.S. market.
In a surprise attack, Molinari -- the leader in Italy but little known here -- startled predominant Sambuca Romana by doubling U.S. sales with an approach that ended up looking like a political campaign.
As a first step, posters were placed in New York City subways and, though not targeting a minority, all were in Italian. 

An attention-grabbing marketing campaign was just part of the picture.
When it comes to breaking entrenched brand loyalty, a total marketing-communications approach is required. 

With this in mind, Molinari's New York agency, MG & Messina Advertising, positioned Molinari to take advantage of a 200% increase in all Italian product sales in the U.S. (from $5.8 billion in 1983 to $11.7 billion in 1987).
Buyers of high-quality Italian items were becoming sophisticated enough to choose, for example, between brands of olive oil.
MG & Messina's public-relations consultant Steve Agins recalls that Molinari sought to ride the tide by creating a "best brand" image.
Mr. Agins adds: "It's crucial that an image is backed by quality convincingly demonstrated." To this end Molinari claimed that only its sambuca was designated "Extra" by an Italian judge for its "superior ingredients." 

But what has solidified Molinari's position is its competitor's failure to respond and blunt the challenge.
Instead, Romana continued advertising the myth of improving one's luck by placing coffee beans in a glass of sambuca (something that did not distinguish Romana from its competitor). 

Agile Molinari swiftly struck again with aggressive headlines: "Molinari doesn't need a myth to be appreciated"; "Instead of quality, they offer coffee beans"; and, "If you can appreciate the difference between a myth and a tradition. . . ." 

Despite mounting evidence of Molinari's success (although it doesn't offer specifics on the number of cases sold), Romana doesn't appear eager to counterattack. "We have no plans to change anything," says Anthony Foglio, vice president and general manager of Morgan Furze Ltd., Romana's importers. "We built the category and will continue to be the leader." 

In contrast, Federal Express's managers recommend the opposite approach.
Federal Express's marketing vice president, Mike Glenn, says: "We built the overnight category, but we are absolutely not going to rest on laurels.
We act on the assumption that competitors are going to be successful in everything." 

Since its start-up in 1973, Federal Express has recognized that success is built upon the same rule as in the sambuca case: Image comes first. 

This same thinking applies to marketshare won by exploiting a new technology.
Federal Express improved overnight service with an innovation that permitted instant package-tracing.
Instead of relegating the system only to internal use, they made the tracking information immediately available to customers.
This was largely responsible for Federal Express's rapid rise (today a 30%-plus share, with sales of $4.6 billion, compared with powerhouse UPS's 15%).
Mr. Glenn says, "Status of package proved as important as a delivery itself, because it gives customers a feeling of control." 

PR-wise managers fed positive information about Federal Express's package tracing to the media, which praised Federal Express's abilities, thereby further solidifying customer loyalty.
Meanwhile UPS, the industry leader in private package delivery, elected to maintain its long-successful, low-profile image.
Federal Express thus grew virtually unchallenged for more than a decade. 

UPS management now recognizes the importance of a greater emphasis on public relations to mount a counteroffensive.
UPS marketing manager Joe Pyne says: "UPS is 80 years old.
But yesterday's brand loyalty is not enough." After listening more closely to customers to discover how to improve its service, UPS's goal is to become the category's technology leader.
In other words, it is borrowing from its competitor. 

In a bellwether for major market-share battles to come, Colgate-Palmolive is challenging Procter & Gamble -- the company that wrote the book on capturing brand loyalty -- as it moves within striking distance of P&G's number-one U.S. position in the billion-dollar toothpaste business.
In three years Colgate has come from 50% behind to within 12%, or six share points, of P&G's Crest. 

Colgate management is highly media responsive.
But falling into the same trap we have seen elsewhere, P&G management remains reclusive.
According to P&G spokesman Bill Dobson, the company strives to remain constant with policies effective since 1961. 

Doug Meyer, Colgate's U.S. oral-care division general manager, says Crest's market share based on brand loyalty won't survive.
And, in multipronged attacks -- which portray Colgate as a "Wise Choice" and level salvos of complaints against Crest that were filed with the American Dental Association and the Food and Drug Administration -- Colgate is eroding P&G claims.
Most recently it forced suspension of a major campaign touting the fluoride superiority of Crest.
And Colgate says it is equal in endorsements, so P&G won't have the slogan "the dentists' choice" much longer. 

The Crest-Colgate battle emphasizes the elements that are particularly important in a tight race for brand loyalty: 1) swift management response both to media and to the marketplace; 2) ability to create a perception of quality; 3) maximized spending.
This new concept of "Megamarketing," applied to a quality product at a fair price, makes capturing brand loyalty not a mystery, but a challenge. 

Mr. Harrington is head of a Wilton, Conn., consulting firm. 

