.START 

Citing his right against self-incrimination, a former top official of the Department of Housing and Urban Development refused to answer questions before a House subcommittee probing influence-peddling at the housing agency. 

Lance Wilson, who was executive assistant to former HUD Secretary Samuel Pierce during the early 1980s, accused the panel of prejudging him.
Mr. Pierce made the same accusation Tuesday when he refused to testify before the subcommittee and invoked his constitutional right against self-incrimination. 

Despite Mr. Wilson's refusal to answer questions, the panel managed to get new details about his business dealings after he left HUD. Without the knowledge or approval of his current employer, PaineWebber Group Inc., the subcommittee was told, Mr. Wilson earned hefty fees as an outside consultant on HUD projects.
He also helped win lucrative HUD business for PaineWebber. 

"Mr.
Wilson appears to have been PaineWebber's ambassador to HUD," said Tom Lantos (D., Calif.), chairman of the House Subcommittee on Employment and Housing. 

Donald Marron, PaineWebber chairman, and James Treadway, an executive vice president, testified that Mr. Wilson had denied doing outside consulting work while he served as a $325,000-a-year vice president at PaineWebber during an internal investigation conducted by the Wall Street firm.
That investigation disclosed no improprieties on Mr. Wilson's part, according to the two PaineWebber executives.
Mr. Wilson has been on administrative leave with pay since late August. 

However, Alexander Naclerio, a former HUD official who now is a builder and housing consultant, testified that he paid Mr. Wilson $15,000 for consulting work on two HUD projects while Mr. Wilson was on PaineWebber's payroll.
According to Mr. Naclerio, on one project Mr. Wilson was paid $10,000 simply for making a phone call to Hunter Cushing, a HUD official who Mr. Naclerio said initially opposed the project for political reasons.
On another project, Mr. Wilson received $5,000 for contacting HUD about a Puerto Rican housing project backed by Delio Rojo, a major contributor to George Bush's 1980 presidential campaign. 

Mr. Marron and Mr. Treadway were also confronted with documents indicating that Mr. Wilson had authorized an $80 million underwriting for a HUD project sponsored by a Texas developer with whom Mr. Wilson had a business partnership. 

Conceding that the company's internal investigation had been incomplete, the two PaineWebber executives said Mr. Wilson's consulting activities and his authorization of the underwriting appeared to violate the firm's internal guidelines on business conduct.
However, it was unclear what, if any, actions PaineWebber will take against Mr. Wilson. 

Mr. Treadway said the company's own investigation had found that some of the more than $10,000 Mr. Wilson billed to PaineWebber as expenses for entertaining HUD officials appeared to be personal.
The company hasn't yet asked Mr. Wilson to reimburse it. 

PaineWebber's treatment of Mr. Wilson since his name surfaced in the HUD scandal has been cautious. "We didn't want to be arbitrary and dismiss him and then get hit with a lawsuit," Mr. Treadway explained. 

The differential between Wall Street and Washington salaries provided one of the few light moments yesterday.
Jaws dropped when Mr. Treadway told the lawmakers, who earn $89,500, that Mr. Wilson's $325,000 salary last year ranked him only 560th at PaineWebber. "You'll have lots of applications before these hearings are over," Rep. Lantos predicted. 

