.START 

Construction contracting slipped 3% in August to an annualized rate of $252 billion, continuing the slight moves registered each month since May, forecaster F.W. Dodge Group said. 

Much of the weakness in August was related to contracting for publicly funded works and utilities, off 10% from July's level.
Housing and nonresidential building, the other major categories of contracting, were little changed. 

A measure of new contracting, the Dodge Index, fell to 160 in August from the plateau of 165 during the previous three months.
The index has averaged 164 for the year's first eight months.
It uses a base of 100 in 1982. 

"Housing offers the best, and maybe the only chance for the stalled construction industry to avoid a decline this year," said George A. Christie, vice president and chief economist of Dodge, the McGraw-Hill Inc. unit that tracks construction contracting. "Although August data failed to bring the awaited recovery of home building in response to lower interest rates, improving sales of newly completed homes suggest that a rebound of building isn't far off." 

In total, newly started residential building, at an annualized $118.6 billion in August, was unchanged from July.
Construction of multifamily units was down in August, but was offset by a gain in contracting for hotels, while one-family building remained steady. 

In August, nonresidential-contracting activity slowed 2% to an annualized $91 billion.
The category was dragged by slackened office and factory building, which in turn pulled the commercial-industrial component down 9%.
However, contracting for institutions, such as schools and hospitals, gained 8%, offsetting that setback. 

As in previous months, governmental budgetary restraint was responsible for reducing new construction of highways, bridges and other infrastructures in August.
Nonbuilding projects, or public works and utilities, fell 10% in the month to $42.4 billion, the lowest annualized level for the past six months.
Mr. Christie said, "For whatever reason, there was a noticeable absence of the large projects which typically dominate this type of construction." 

The unadjusted total of all newly started construction was $175.3 billion after the year's first eight months, compared with $176.9 billion last year, a 1% decrease.
With a 3% gain, the North-Central region was the only part of the country to show an increase for the year to date.
The Northeast and the West were even with a year earlier and the South was off 4%. 

annualized, seasonally adjusted basis. 

