.START 

Designers Debate 

Merits of Mergers 

ARE ACQUISITIONS of design firms for better or for worse? 

This week's sale of Landor Associates, a top corporate-identity firm, to ad agency Young & Rubicam for about $40 million rekindles the debate over whether mergers and acquisitions are hurting the cause of good design.
Three other design companies have recently been acquired. 

Martin Beck, chief executive of Fitch Richardson-Smith, says mergers "will be excellent for design" because they are forcing designers to get more involved in the planning and marketing of products, not just the creative execution.
Last year, Fitch & Co. paid $18 million to buy Richardson-Smith, which like Landor works on logos, packaging and other designs. 

Ken Love, a partner in Anspach Grossman Portugal, acquired last year for $36 million by WPP Group, says the sale "hasn't hurt our design capabilities" and may have helped them. 

But Rita-Sue Siegel, a design recruiter, warns that once acquired by publicly held companies, design companies feel pressure to "trade in the designer who takes his time and comes up with something brilliant, for someone who can sell." 

And Peter Lawrence, chairman of the Corporate Design Foundation, an education and research group, says people in newly public design firms are talking about a newly felt "pressure to grow." 

Turn Left at the Wolf, 

Right at the Blue Jay 

AT A NEW 900-ACRE office, hotel and retail development outside Dallas, giant metal animals act as both art and landmarks. 

Skidmore, Owings & Merrill was hired to come up with signs and graphics for the Solana complex, a development by Maguire Thomas Partners and the real estate arm of International Business Machines.
Because the complex was striving to be architecturally innovative, Skidmore Owings felt creative pressure. 

Heading the team, Debra Nichols designed three 10-foot-high animals -- a horse, a steer and a wolf -- to mark major intersections.
Three five-foot-wide birds -- a roadrunner, an owl and a blue jay -- were made to indicate secondary intersections. 

The animals, inspired by Huichol Indian art of the Southwest, are made of oxidized bronze and aluminum painted with bright colors such as hot pink, yellow and turquoise. 

The animals are proving to be good guideposts.
During a visit to the project, Ms. Nichols heard someone who works there tell a truck driver to "turn left at the steer." The driver nodded in recognition. 

The entire Solana sign system, including inside and outside directions and identifiers, received one of three top awards in this year's competition by the Society of Environmental Graphic Designers. 

New Wave of Watches 

Tells Tide and Time 

THE TIME HAS COME for tide watches. 

Alan Saunders, a Califon, N.J., engineer and shallow-water sailor, was bothered that his tide charts were "never there when I needed them." So he designed a computerized, digital wristwatch that tells how high the tide is now and how high it's going to be at any date and time during the coming year. 

"Tidewatch" comes with three years of tide setting data for over 240 locations on the East and West coasts of the U.S.
While not as accurate as a tide chart, the watch is handier to use on deck. 

A more expensive "Tidal Chronometer" was designed by attorney Ira Krieger of Miami, who had trouble getting his boat under low bridges.
The Swissmade quartz watch tells the tide, phase of the moon, time and date.
Mr. Krieger plans to introduce a solid gold model, "an image product," next year. 

Hattori Seiko Co. sells two versions of an electronic tidal wristwatch, one for eastern and one for western Japan.
An alarm goes off when the tide is supposed to be best for catching fish.
Seiko apparently has no plans to adapt its "Fishing Master" to the U.S. 

Odds and Ends 

CHEWING YOUR pencil gets more satisfying.
New York designers Constantin Boym and Laurene Leon make edible pencils out of graphite, biscotti and "a clay-like organic substance" and win first prize in a writing instrument contest. . . . Hot water circulates through the back of a fog-free shaving mirror for the shower.
By raising the glass to air temperature, the mirror, invented by Tom Christianson of Napa, Calif., eliminates condensation. 

