.START 

Spain Fund tumbled 23% in turbulent trading, dragging down the shares of other so-called country funds.
But investors looking to profit from the price drop are running into an unusual roadblock: There's no stock available to borrow. 

Spain Fund plunged $9 a share yesterday to $29.75 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, the largest decline of any stock on any exchange. 

The decline, which followed a 45% runup Tuesday, sparked selling of other publicly traded stock funds that invest in a single country, including Germany Fund, India Growth Fund, Malaysia Fund, Thai Fund and Asia Pacific Fund.
Japanese investors are sparking much of the activity in single-country stock funds, traders say. 

Spain Fund is still up more than 200% so far this year.
And yesterday's close leaves the $140 million-asset fund trading at a fat 103% premium, or a little over twice the value of the Spanish stocks in its portfolio.
This is why many investors are betting that the fund's shares will fall further. 

These investors want to exploit the price drop by selling Spain Fund short -- that is, selling borrowed shares and replacing them later with shares they expect to be able to purchase at a lower price.
The problem is that they can't find shares to short-sell. 

"We've been trying to borrow shares all day," says Michael Murphy, editor of Overpriced Stock Service, a short-selling newsletter. "But the trouble is, every share that can be shorted has already been borrowed." 

One reason: Japanese and other Asian investors hold about half the Spain Fund's 10 million shares outstanding, Japanese brokers estimate.
Daily trading volume lately has often totaled more than 10% of the fund's shares outstanding.
Much of the turnover has come from Japanese investors selling to one another and from U.S. investors buying back shares they had sold short. 

Short-sellers in Spain Fund already have been burned badly.
The shares' surge of 86% in one week, before yesterday's session, triggered a wave of buying by investors and speculators caught in a "short squeeze." Having sold the shares short, they had to cut their losses by purchasing shares to replace those borrowed earlier, and their purchases fanned further price increases in the stock. 

Before a short sale, an investor's broker must make a good-faith attempt to borrow the stock in question, according to New York Stock Exchange rules.
Still, brokers said, borrowed shares aren't always delivered by the lender. 

For instance, a short-seller might think he had a commitment from a prospective lender of shares, then find out after selling them that the commitment had fallen through. 

"Guys sold stock they didn't hold, couldn't make delivery and were forced to go into the market to buy it," said an executive at one Japanese firm.
But "they can't borrow it, because there's none to be had." 

Although Japanese brokers hold millions of shares for their customers, they are reluctant to lend the stock.
That's because for fully paid stock holdings, the brokers must obtain permission from the individual customers, an arduous task, said an official at one brokerage firm. 

Brokers can lend shares that were bought on margin, or credit, and aren't fully paid for.
But if a broker did lend a volatile stock such as Spain Fund and the customer decided to sell it, the broker might not be able to deliver the shares. "So the firm {would be} stuck," said the broker. "You don't know when the customer is going to sell it." 

In Spain Fund, he said, "there's a total lack of liquidity-short-selling with no coverage." 

The single-country funds, which have proliferated in the past few years, are of the closed-end type.
That means they issue a fixed number of shares that trade publicly.
But many of the funds, after long periods of trading at a discount to the value of their holdings, recently have surged to fat premiums. 

"The entire single-country fund component of the industry is being re-rated to much higher valuations," said Thomas J. Herzfeld, who runs a Miami investment management firm that bears his name. 

But buying any fund for more than its portfolio value can be tricky.
Nearly everything has to go right for investors to make money; even if the underlying markets rise, the fund's own stock price can fall. 

Instead of the country funds, Mr. Herzfeld has been buying shares of closed-end funds trading at discounts -- such as Clemente Global Growth and Worldwide Value Fund -- that buy a variety of foreign stocks. 

Many investors say it's worth paying some premium for professional management of stocks in foreign countries.
The outlook for many of these country funds' underlying markets is bright.
But their lightning-quick surge has troubled many analysts, who warn that the ride could soon hit some big bumps.
The swing in the funds' valuations makes them particularly vulnerable to negative news, analysts say. 

"Their premiums have added a layer of risk and removed a layer of protection" for investors, says Michael Porter, an analyst for Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. 

