.START 

International Business Machines Corp. said earnings for the third quarter and the year will fall well below securities analysts' expectations. 

The news sent IBM's stock tumbling $6 to $111.50, taking many other computer stocks down with it. 

Many analysts, in fact, said they thought IBM didn't go far enough in lowering expectations.
They said they thought the problems could be deeper in the fourth quarter than IBM indicated and might continue at least into early next year. 

IBM, Armonk, N.Y., blamed much of the problem on delay in the introduction of a high-end disk drive, which IBM said had hurt revenue much more than it expected when it acknowledged the delay earlier this quarter.
IBM also cited a shift toward leases, rather than purchases, by customers, which locks in a revenue stream in the long term but cuts into short-term results.
In addition, IBM blamed the strong dollar, which reduces the value of the earnings and revenue from IBM's huge overseas operations when they are translated into dollars. 

The computer giant said it expected analysts to cut their third-quarter estimates to $1.40-$1.80 a share, from $2.10-$2.30 a share.
That means a substantial earnings decline from the year-earlier $1.25 billion, or $2.10 a share -- which was inflated slightly by a 15-cent-a-share gain on the sale of stock in MCI Communications Corp. 

For the year, IBM said it expected estimates to drop to $9.50-$10 a share from $10 to $10.50 a share.
That would mean roughly flat results compared with 1988 net income of $5.81 billion, or $9.80 a share.
That would make 1989 the fourth year of disappointing earnings out of the past five.
And it would underline the turnaround in expectations that has occurred since the first of the year, when estimates ranged as high as $12 a share. 

Many analysts, in fact, were skeptical about the numbers for the year because the range IBM suggested was down less than the range for the third quarter.
That would indicate that IBM expects to make up ground in the fourth quarter, yet analysts don't believe the problems will go away that fast. "I was expecting the hit (from the disk-drive delay) to come in the fourth quarter," said Steve Cohen, an analyst with SoundView Financial Group Inc. "If they have to take that kind of hit in the third quarter. . . ." He didn't finish the sentence. 

Dan Benton, an analyst at Goldman, Sachs & Co., said he expected to cut his estimates to $9 a share for the year, well below the IBM range. 

The wild card in all this is the disk-drive line, whose problems could be cleared up soon or could persist for months.
The drives being tested on customer sites reportedly work fine, but IBM has apparently had trouble manufacturing them in any kind of quantity.
And the technology is so complex -- even computer sophisticates sometimes refer to it as black magic -- that delays in the past have sometimes proved painfully lengthy.
IBM, which gets some $6 billion of its $60 billion of revenue from such drives, is expected to decide soon on how to proceed. 

IBM needs to get the drives out soon because competitors have caught up with IBM's current line, and IBM must once again leapfrog them if it is to escape the price war that has developed.
IBM had initially told analysts that it could do fine with existing products, but analysts said IBM has had to discount heavily to make sales.
In addition, many customers are taking short-term leases on drives, rather than buy a product that will be surpassed in coming months. 

Analysts said the broader move toward leasing seems to stem from an IBM decision to offer attractive terms to sew up business. 

"I view the leasing as another form of discounting," Mr. Cohen said. "IBM is basically using capital as a competitive weapon.
I don't see any competitors backing away, so the price war continues." 

IBM's leasing business, which has nearly doubled this year, could indeed lock in revenue long term.
But Dan Mandresh of Merrill Lynch said it will probably knock $1 billion from IBM's revenue this year because many customers would otherwise have bought. 

The currency translation problem could well abate next year, because the comparison will be less difficult.
At the same time, the problem should be greater in the fourth quarter than in the third, because the dollar weakened in the 1988 fourth quarter. 

IBM also blamed the earnings weakness on the transitions going on with some other product lines, such as in mainframes, where IBM had to absorb the cost of fixing a chip problem.
And as with the currency issue, these problems could wane. 

IBM said in a statement that demand for its products and services continues to be strong world-wide and that it expects growth in all major geographic areas. 

Certainly, there don't seem to be any major weaknesses in the IBM product line, with the exception of workstations, a problem that IBM is expected to correct early next year. 

But Mr. Mandresh of Merrill Lynch said, "I think investors are frustrated . . . and angry." 

Yesterday's closing stock price leaves it close to its low of $110 during the stock market crash two years ago and far below its highs in the 170s a few years back. 

