.START 

Robert Redford may be a heartthrob in Hollywood, but in this town he gives his neighbors heartburn. 

"He's a jerk," says Penny Larson, a Heber City hardware-store clerk. 

"The people in general are disgusted with him," says Ray Ferrell, a power-company executive. 

"Probably the most hated man in this county," says Sonni Schwinn, a reporter for the weekly Wasatch (County) Wave. 

What does the actor himself say? "They'd like to lynch me," he admits as he munches a turkey sandwich on a patio at his Sundance Ski Resort a few miles south of town. 

The animosity centers on his long opposition to improving a treacherous 27-mile strip of U.S. Route 189 winding south through Provo Canyon, past Sundance and on to Provo, where most Heber City residents work, shop and worship. 

Built atop an old logging road, the narrow, two-lane highway clings to the canyon's steep silver-blue walls as it weaves above the swift Provo River.
In winter, ice makes its dozens of blind curves especially dangerous.
Heber City resident Ila Hulse's mother was among the 38 people killed on the highway since 1972. "I think all of Heber blames Redford," she says. 

For nearly 20 years, the Utah Department of Transportation has been trying to cut a wider, straighter four-lane highway through the canyon.
For almost that long, the environmentalist-actor has tried to stop the bulldozers from chomping up any of the landscape, which includes a world-class trout stream and rock formations that are photographed for textbooks. 

Amid the bitter local criticism, Mr. Redford two years ago backed down and got behind a less intrusive highway plan.
Construction could start as early as next year. 

But many locals haven't forgiven him.
In Utah, sagebrush conservatives belittle his liberal politics, developers grouse about his environmental stance, and descendants of the Mormon pioneers are suspicious of an outsider with so much money and clout.
When a Soviet-American environmental conference that Mr. Redford arranged at Sundance drew headlines around the world last month, it spawned only grumbling among some of his neighbors. 

The state originally proposed building a broader highway in the late 1960s, and Heber City residents were ecstatic.
However, some Provo residents near Brigham Young University protested that it would dump more big trucks into their neighborhoods, and environmentalists complained about damage to the canyon.
Mr. Redford, who became the project's best-known opponent, helped organize some Provo students for a protest march to the governor's office. 

The highway plan was delayed because of budget problems and because the state had to do studies to answer environmental issues raised by Mr. Redford. "He was just very loud in saying that this road shouldn't be improved," says Redford aide Sammye Meadows.
But after public hearings indicated that most local residents wanted some sort of improvement, Mr. Redford began working on a compromise plan. "It was a bitter pill to swallow," says Ms. Meadows. "But that's what the public wanted.
We decided that if we continued to push we would likely lose everything." 

Besides helping organize a committee that included environmentalists, local politicians and state highway officials, Mr. Redford made some television commercials telling people they could have a new highway without ruining the canyon.
The result is a new plan, apparently destined for adoption, that provides for a four-lane highway generally following the canyon's contours and avoiding the river. 

Though Mr. Redford now is being lauded by some officials who once opposed him, he is still seen as "the outside guy with money," says Sam Rushforth, a Brigham Young botanist. "Whenever there is an environmental issue, people say it's Redford causing trouble.
He gets beat up for a lot of stuff that isn't his." 

Many residents refuse to forgive his battle in the early 1970s against Southern California Edison Co. 's plan for a huge coal-fired power plant on the Kaiparowits plateau in southern Utah, a rugged area that is considered as different from Provo and Salt Lake City as upstate New York is from the Big Apple.
Besides creating hundreds of construction jobs, the utility said, the plant would be a boon to Utah coal miners. 

Mr. Redford galvanized the opposition.
Interviewed on CBS's "60 Minutes," he complained about the environmental impact on the Grand Canyon and Lake Powell.
After the project was canceled, residents in the small southern Utah town of Kanab burned him in effigy. "He and other extreme environmentalists want to prevent any economic development in southern Utah," complains Calvin Black, a county commissioner from the area. "They always want to impose their values on where they don't live." 

Such environmentalist-developer struggles are roiling much of the West, of course, with the issues ranging from protection of woodpecker habitats in Texas to clear-cutting of forests in Washington state.
Symbolizing the struggle are people like Mr. Redford.
A California native, he first motorcycled through Utah's Wasatch Mountains as a college student in the 1950s.
After marrying a Provo native in 1961, he bought two acres on Mount Timpanogos and built a small home.
As his acting career and financial resources grew, he built a bigger house and bought more land.
Eventually, he bought the local ski resort, now known as Sundance. 

By clearing land to build cottages, restaurants and meeting halls, he himself became a developer, albeit one whose buildings blended into the landscape and who replaced the trees that he cut down.
He also established a respected film institute where young actors, dancers, playwrights and film composers could mix with seasoned professionals. 

He has helped an equally rare breed in Utah, contributing to the political campaigns of liberal and moderate Democrats. "As much as you admire him as a movie star, you still can't forget that Utah doesn't back liberals," says one Utah congressional aide.
But when Republican Gov. Norm Bargerter, whom Mr. Redford had opposed, held a 1987 conference of Western governors, he took them to Sundance to hobnob with the star. 

Mr. Redford meanwhile has carried on some quiet diplomacy.
In 1983, he formed the Sundance-based Institute of Resource Management, which tries to resolve thorny environmental issues through negotiation.
The institute quietly persuaded the heads of several environmental groups and major oil companies to negotiate an agreement on drilling in the Bering Sea off Alaska in 1986, though the pact was later scuttled by the Interior Department. 

For last month's conference, Mr. Redford and the institute invited luminaries such as scientist Carl Sagan, NBC anchorman Tom Brokaw and New Jersey Sen. Bill Bradley to Sundance to confer with a delegation of Soviet politicians and scientists about threats to the global climate.
The session produced a communique to President Bush and Soviet President Gorbachev on the danger of global warming. 

But readers called the Provo Daily Herald to question why the paper was covering anything associated with Mr. Redford.
One wanted to know how he could talk about saving forests when he had cut down trees to build a resort. 

"Every time I speak up, there's a counterforce that builds up," Mr. Redford says with a grimace.
He has tried to tamp down that "counterforce" by staying out of the spotlight on most environmental issues. 

He nevertheless is quietly keeping up the sort of pressure that has made him a pariah among some of his neighbors.
For years, Salt Lake City has said its growth will require water from the nearby Jordonelle Reservoir project.
Now, with dam construction under way, Mr. Redford is raising questions about the impact on the Provo River. 

The Sundance group has also joined other environmentalists in complaining about air pollution from Geneva Steel of Utah, one of the area's largest employers.
On that issue, at least, Mr. Redford is making certain that neighbors can't complain that he doesn't practice what he preaches: The wood-burning fireplaces in Sundance cottages are being fitted for fuel-efficient enclosures. 

