.START 

The Republicans can barely contain themselves as they rush to label the Democrats, again, as the party of taxes.
The Democrats are thrilled at the opportunity to describe their rivals, again, as the party of the rich. 

The struggle over reducing the tax on capital gains gives both parties a chance to strike where their rivals are most vulnerable. 

The Democrats have been flooding Republican districts with press releases asking whether GOP lawmakers such as Rep. Howard Coble of North Carolina -- one of those the Democrats have targeted on this issue -- want "a savings vehicle that helps middle-income people with retirement, college expenses and homeownership" or do they "want to give a tax break to the richest people in America?" 

The Republicans, meanwhile, have been beaming television advertisements into Democratic districts -- including that of House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt of Missouri, they point out with delight -- arguing that the current U.S. capital-gains tax rate "hurts small businesses trying to expand, families investing to send kids to college, senior citizens preparing for retirement." 

The vote in the House chamber, expected today, is only the first major economic skirmish in the partisan battles of the Bush years.
But it may well define the politics of the next several years and is a struggle that, as Morris Fiorina, a Harvard political scientist puts it, "gives each party a chance to confirm its main symbols." 

Most political experts believe that the Democrats will have the upper hand if they explain their position deftly, but the Republicans seem to have seized the initiative and put the Democrats on the defensive. "The usual situation is that we come up with a policy that allows the Republicans to define us -- which they did within about an hour and a half," says William Hamilton, a Democratic pollster. 

Now Democratic leaders are wagering that they can portray themselves as defenders of the middle class by opposing President Bush's plan to cut the maximum tax rate on capital gains, now 33%, to 19.6% until 1992 and thereafter to 28%, with the gain indexed to inflation.
The Democrats are countering the president with a plan that would raise the top income-tax rate for the wealthiest Americans but would allow middle-class taxpayers to write off half a contribution to an individual retirement account, which in turn would not be taxed until it is withdrawn for retirement, as a down payment on a first home or to pay for college tuition. 

"The Democrats have picked a fight with George Bush on an issue where they can reinforce their traditional concerns about equity but at the same time show some clear sense of concern about economic policy, efficiency, growth and investment," says Thomas Mann, director of governmental studies at the Brookings Institution. "They don't have to win this to reap some benefit from it." 

Indeed, the latest Wall Street Journal/NBC News Poll shows that voters with incomes between $20,000 and $50,000 overwhelmingly prefer the Democratic plan for individual retirement accounts to the Bush plan to reduce the tax on capital gains. 

"This is a good issue for the Democrats because it allows them to play New Deal populists," says Michael Lyons, a Utah State University political scientist. "Bush has frustrated them, in part by doing so little, in part by preserving his popularity.
He's been a difficult target and they're so eager for a partisan confrontation to draw the line with him that they've seized on this." 

They've worked with the AFL-CIO on a radio ad aired during rush hour in Washington.
They've taped Rep. Gephardt in front of the Capitol and sent his image by satellite to local television stations that don't have resident correspondents in Washington.
They've contributed op-ed pieces to newspapers across the country. 

But the risk for the Democrats is that GOP spokesmen such as John Buckley of the National Republican Congressional Committee will seize on the tax element of the Democratic plan. "We know John Buckley's licking his chops at the prospect of selling this as a Democratic tax increase," says Michael McCurry, spokesman for the Democratic National Committee. 

"You know something, he's right," rejoins Mr. Buckley. "I fully intend to portray Democrats as criminals who can't resist returning to the scene of the crime." 

Mr. Buckley's operation has prepared radio interviews for stations across the country and is primed to send press releases into districts of Democrats that GOP strategists consider vulnerable in next year's midterm congressional elections. "We'll put it into as stark political terms as they will," he says. "However they try to demonize Republicans, we can equally demonize them." 

The GOP strategy is to broaden the debate beyond capital gains and to portray the issue as one of U.S. competitiveness and fairness to middle-class voters who want to sell an asset to underwrite college tuition rather than as a sop to the wealthy. "There are an awful lot of middle-class families where both partners work, earn $60,000 and resent being lumped in with Donald Trump and Leona Helmsley," Mr. Buckley says. "That's why the Democrats keep losing presidential elections." 

The GOP strategy is being strengthened by the Democratic defectors who first embarrassed Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.) in a House Ways and Means Committee vote and now threaten to undercut House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) in his first major confrontation with the White House.
Mr. Buckley is even contemplating sending a press release to Arkansas praising Rep. Beryl Anthony (D., Ark.), chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, for breaking with the rest of the party leadership and supporting the Bush position. 

"The overriding message that comes through all these maneuverings is that the Democrats can't do anything without trying to raise taxes," says Stuart Butler, director of domestic policy for the Heritage Foundation. "The internal dissent only reinforces that image.
Some Democrats are obviously frustrated at always ending up on the losing end of these sort of debates." 

But some Republicans worry that the Democrats have seized on an issue -- symbolic perhaps, but potentially formidable nonetheless -- that may produce dividends later. 

"In the long haul, it has to help the Democrats," says Kevin Phillips, a Republican political theorist. "By the time the 1990 election rolls around, the Democrats will have been able to develop these issues in a way that can help them.
This is the beginning of the war, and these things are going to be repeated and repeated.
They're just launching them now, and the payoff is going to come later." 

or expanding tax benefits for individual retirement accounts? registered voters conducted Sept. 16-19 by the polling organization of Peter Hart and Robert Teeter. 

