.START 

President Bush called on the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to work rapidly with Poland to help it develop "a bold plan for economic recovery." 

In a speech to the annual meetings of the two international organizations, the president also proclaimed the benefits of greater economic freedom and sought to defend his administration's strategy for dealing with the international debt problem. 

The president stressed the need for action to help emerging democracies in Eastern Europe. "There may be no greater opportunity before us all today than the challenge of Poland and, more broadly, Eastern Europe," the president said. 

Discussing his recent trip to Poland and Hungary, the president said, "We were impressed by the almost universal acceptance of the free market as the best hope -- indeed the only hope -- for reversing the economic fortunes of these proud countries." 

Poland's deputy prime minister and finance minister, Leszek Balcerowicz, who is attending this year's IMF and World Bank meetings, said he presented an outline of his country's economic program in talks with Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.
He said that Poland was seeking trade credits and guarantees totaling between $490 million and $500 million from its major trading partners in the West to help pay for essential imports during the fourth quarter of this year, when the first stage of economic changes would take place. 

That stage would include "unpopular measures" such as the cutting of government subsidies and moving toward more of a market system, he said. "This is the time for us to institute major reforms," Mr. Balcerowicz said, who added that his country "would welcome offers of food aid during this stage." 

The second stage of changes, Mr. Balcerowicz said, would include measures to deal with inflation and to make the Polish currency fully convertible. "We're counting on standby credits from the IMF and World Bank," to help with this stage, the Polish minister said, but he declined to specify how much credit might be needed.
Mr. Balcerowicz also described the European Community Commission's proposal of a $660 million economic aid package for Poland and Hungary for next year as "an encouraging sign." 

The Polish minister made it clear that Poles understand the urgency of their situation. "We have to move very quickly," he acknowledged. "If we miss the opportunity there are very great consequences for us." 

President Bush has pledged to give Poland $100 million in food aid from the U.S.
In a White House discussion yesterday with a small group of reporters, Mr. Bush knocked down suggestions the U.S. might be prepared to offer more unilateral aid to Poland now, indicating that such moves will come only after economic changes are in place. 

"I want to work with them in every way we can," Mr. Bush said. "But I think it's important that we see what their plan is of economic reform . . . Let's see what it is that is required in terms of reform and then we'll try to do everything we can." 

The Poles will need all the help they can get. "The transformation of the Polish economy must be carried out in extremely adverse circumstances," Mr. Balcerowicz said.
The level of industrial production is declining for the first time since 1982, and average living standards are below those of 10 years ago, he said. 

The country, he added, is trying to fight these problems with a tight monetary policy, structural economic changes and foreign assistance.
He said the Polish government is strictly controlling credit expansion, allowing interest rates to float, reducing the government's budget deficit and moving to a realistic, unified exchange rate. 

Other ministers attending the IMF and World Bank meetings were supportive of the Poles' efforts.
But along with the U.S., they want to see Poland agree to a specific IMF program before they commit large sums of money. 

Poland's attempts to move toward a free-market economy are "a major historical challenge for all of us," said Ryutaro Hashimoto, Japan's finance minister.
But Mr. Hashimoto said he hadn't discussed the specifics of Japanese aid for Poland in his meeting with Mr. Balcerowicz. 

British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson told reporters that "the main effort has to wait until after the fund {IMF} program." He stressed the need for the western nations to concentrate their attention on Poland and Hungary. 

News agencies reported that Juergen Warnke, West Germany's development aid minister, told reporters here that Poland and the IMF could conclude a three-year, standby agreement as early as November that would give the country $700 million a year in assistance.
In his address, Mr. Bush emphasized the advantages of economic freedom for the whole world. "In Latin America, Africa and Mexico, courageous leaders are turning away from state control of their economies," he said. 

Concerning his administration's debt strategy, Mr. Bush said that Treasury Secretary Brady "has helped direct the focus on debt-reduction as a complement to continued new lending." That approach, which has already been somewhat refocused, "is flexible enough to address the unique needs of each country," he said. 

Mexico, in particular, won Mr. Bush's praise.
Thanks to the new strategy and the vital support it has won from the IMF and the World Bank, that country is making "enormous progress in reducing its debt burden," the president said. 

Gerald F. Seib contributed to this article. 

