.START 

Major U.S. and Japanese concerns, including Nippon Life Insurance Co., Mitsubishi Estate Inc. and JMB Realty Co., have voiced interest in acquiring a stake in Rockefeller Group Inc., according to individuals familiar with the proposed Rockefeller sale. 

John C. Cushman III, the flamboyant Los Angeles real-estate developer and broker, said he, too, would like to be part of a group investing in the Rockefeller Group, a private holding company owned by Rockefeller family trusts.
Mr. Cushman, who has extensive connections with Japanese real-estate investors, said he is trying to put together a transaction with a domestic company and a foreign investment group, which he wouldn't name. 

Earlier this month, Rockefeller Group said it will pursue a recapitalization plan.
Sources say the company's decision to offer between about 48% and 80% of the company to outside investors is intended to raise an estimated $1 billion to $1.3 billion for the family. 

The company's real-estate holdings include the landmark Rockefeller Center in New York, which it also manages.
In addition, it operates a real-estate development company, an entertainment unit, a telecommunications business and a financial-services division.
It holds about 80% of Cushman & Wakefield, a national real-estate services concern based in New York. 

Mr. Cushman, the California broker, is a descendent of founders of Cushman & Wakefield Inc., where he worked for about 15 years.
He left the New York brokerage concern in the late 1970s after unsuccessful attempts to take it over. "I've known the Rockefeller family for years and have great respect for them.
They are aware of my interest," he said. 

Richard A. Voell, president of Rockefeller Group, said, "We've received scores of calls from investors in Japan, the United States and Europe." He said the response came following a report in The Wall Street Journal earlier this month describing the company's plans to raise cash.
He wouldn't comment on names of interested parties. 

Mr. Voell and his financial advisers stressed that when a "fact book" on the transaction is completed -- sometime in the next several weeks -- it will be offered to only a limited, pre-selected group of potential investors. 

Rockefeller's board has retained the investment banking firm of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. to consider alternatives for providing a debt or equity infusion into the company.
Morgan Stanley & Co. is the investment banker for the Rockefeller family trustees. 

Ray Mikulich, Shearson managing director, said he wouldn't confirm or deny interest by such companies as Nippon Life, of Tokyo, one of the world's largest institutional investors; Mitsubishi Estate, a major Tokyo developer and international property owner; and JMB, a diversified U.S. real-estate concern based in Chicago. 

Mr. Mikulich said he has received inquiries from individuals and corporations seeking a stake in the entire company as well as just certain assets.
He added that while Shearson is scrutinizing many alternatives, the Rockefeller Group's primary objective is to offer a stake in the entire company. 

