.START 

The Senate Appropriations Committee approved a nearly $17.4 billion bill for the departments of State, Justice and Commerce.
The measure provides an 18% increase for the Securities and Exchange Commission and seeks to end trade benefits for Syria. 

The expanded SEC budget would be financed by an estimated $26 million increase in filing fees in the new fiscal year, beginning Sunday.
Elsewhere, the appropriations bill incorporates changes in current law having a budgetary impact far beyond fiscal 1990. 

Promised reparations for Japanese-Americans held in internment camps in World War II would be elevated to the status of a formal entitlement in fiscal 1991 -- raising the prospect of annual payments in the range of $300 million to $500 million until the estimated $1.3 billion liability is met. 

Separately, in coordination with anti-drug legislation pending in Congress, the measure would relax requirements on states to put up matching funds for federal law enforcement grants.
The required state share is now scheduled to double in fiscal 1990, and the Senate bill would postpone this increase for two years in an effort to expedite the flow of federal aid to local governments. 

The increased filing fees at the SEC reflect the competition for any revenues to offset costs, and the budget pressure has set the government at war with itself.
The Senate measure anticipates $30 million in receipts, for example, by authorizing the Federal Bureau of Investigation to begin charging for fingerprint services in civil cases -- a change that is certain to add to the costs of the Pentagon in processing security clearances and personnel. 

The $17.4 billion total for the bill doesn't include an estimated $1.9 billion more for the same Justice Department and law enforcement accounts incorporated in the anti-drug package approved by the Senate yesterday.
Within the Commerce Department, the committee rejected all of a proposed $182 million cut by the Bush administration from Economic Development Administration programs, and the Supreme Court budget is altered to include as much as $15,000 for an oil portrait of former Chief Justice Warren Burger. 

In funding the State, Justice and Commerce departments, the bill is an attractive vehicle for trade provisions.
The Syria amendment adopted yesterday would bar the Mideast nation from receiving benefits any longer under the Generalized System of Preferences intended to assist developing countries. 

These benefits -- duty-free treatment of certain goods -- are valued at nearly $14 million a year currently, according to some estimates, yet critics argue that the Assad government shouldn't qualify because of its links to international terrorism.
The chief sponsor of the amendment, Sen. Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii) is a close ally of Israel, but he made his case yesterday on the ground that the State Department itself has cited Syria in connection with past terrorism. 

Separately, a House-Senate conference began deliberations on a nearly $11 billion natural resources bill incorporating major timber and oil provisions as well as sweeping new requirements to force the disclosure of payments and the identity of consultants and lobbyists hired to pursue federal funds.
Discussions yesterday indicate negotiators are almost certain of adopting major portions of the disclosure legislation.
But the conference remains divided by a dispute arising from two projects funded by the National Endowment for the Arts. 

A compromise plan allocating $100,000 to fund a commission to study and help tighten NEA procedures may emerge.
But negotiators are bedeviled by the subject and by conservative pressure to impose some decency standard on future grants.
Many find the discussion far removed from their world, and even as they resist censorship, they have difficulty discussing the exhibits criticized as sacrilegious or sexually explicit. 

"I'm a prude," said liberal Rep. Sidney Yates (D., Ill.), the 80-year-old chairman of the House conferees. "These are not my photographs." 

"Sid, I didn't recognize you in any of them," answered Sen. James McClure (R., Idaho). 

