.START 

One of the first acts of Group of Seven finance ministers and central-bank governors when they gathered in Washington last weekend for the IMF-World Bank annual meeting was to conduct an assault on the U.S. dollar.
With the dollar pushed down by a large intervention, stocks and bonds went south as well on Monday.
Markets now seem to be recovering but a question remains about what purpose the Seven hoped to achieve. 

Their own communique, issued on Saturday, essentially begs the question. "The ministers and governors considered the rise in recent months of the dollar inconsistent with longer-run economic fundamentals.
They agreed that a rise of the dollar above current levels or an excessive decline could adversely affect prospects for the world economy.
In this context, they agreed to cooperate closely in exchange markets." 

But what are these "longer-run economic fundamentals"?
Economic fundamentals have been looking rather good to us lately despite -- or most likely because of -- the dollar's recovery.
Certainly prevention of a new international outbreak of inflation should be at the top of anyone's economic agenda and the inflation danger signals the U.S. was getting in the spring are no longer flashing.
If economic growth is a Group of Seven concern, they might note that the U.S. economy has become more vigorous now that the threat of inflation has diminished.
There now are reasons to believe that no "soft landing" or any kind of landing at all from seven years of economic advance will be necessary soon. 

As to international economics, it is hard to find damage from a stronger dollar.
When weak, the dollar traditionally has been a spreader of inflationary virus, because it is the most-used trading and central-bank reserve currency.
Signs of renewed U.S. economic growth should be reassuring, not troubling, for the assembled ministers.
The $5 trillion U.S. economy has been the engine of economic progress in the industrialized world over the past seven years.
We favor G7 efforts at exchange-rate coordination.
To the extent that realistic parities can be maintained, traders become less risk averse and the flow of trade improves to everyone's benefit.
There is less economic waste in the form of hedging. 

But in order to achieve credibility it is important to stabilize rates at sensible levels.
They should be set, to the extent possible, to achieve what economists call purchasing power parity (PPP), meaning that exchanging a given amount of currency for another neither loses nor gains buying power for the person making the exchange.
On this basis, the dollar was not and is not overvalued. 

Stanford's Ron McKinnon, who calculates PPP on the basis of producer prices world-wide, estimates that the dollar would achieve PPP with the German mark at between 1.9 and 2.1 marks.
Yesterday, it was trading at around 1.88 marks.
He estimates PPP with the Japanese yen at 155 to 175 yen.
The dollar was at 140 yesterday, well below that range, as it was before the big intervention against it by the Fed and Japanese central bank. 

So what is going on?
A lot of things.
The Bush administration has been under political pressure to conduct another dollar devaluation, so a bit of grandstanding was in order.
Some G7 ministers are hung up on the notion that the sun rises and sets on the basis of trade balances and that, most evidence to the contrary, currency manipulations can reduce imbalances.
Finally, the G7 ministers wanted to display some vigor, what with increasing public doubts about the IMF's world role. 

They got the markets' attention, certainly.
But events of about two years ago suggested to us that it is not necessarily such a good thing when finance ministers set about to get the markets' attention. 

