.START 

Travelers Corp. agreed to sell Keystone Group Inc., one of the country's oldest mutual fund management companies, to a group of Keystone managers and investment funds affiliated with TA Associates. 

In selling Keystone 10 years after acquiring it, the Hartford, Conn., company acknowledged that the mutual funds business hasn't had much synergy with its core insurance business.
And it isn't the first insurance company to have second thoughts about owning a funds group. 

"Insurance companies originally thought they would do cross-selling" of funds and other products, said Perrin Long, of Lipper Analytical Securities Corp. "It really hasn't worked out." 

Aetna Life & Casualty Insurance Co., which acquired Federated Investors Group in 1982, sold the $37.1 billion funds group in August for about $406 million in cash and stock.
In addition, Aetna kept $110 million in cash and receivables. 

The selling price for Keystone, which has $11 billion under management, wasn't disclosed.
One insurance industry executive familiar with the recent market for fund groups said the price probably was between $110 million and $220 million.
Travelers, Keystone and TA declined to comment on estimates. 

C. Kevin Landry, managing partner of TA Associates, a Boston venture capital concern, said TA initially will hold a majority stake in Keystone.
Keystone's management, by meeting its stated business plan, will be able to increase its stake to 50% "over time," Mr. Landry said.
And the Keystone officers will have the right to buy out TA's interest "more than five years down the road." 

George Bissell, Keystone's chairman and chief executive, said seven managers are participating in the buy-out.
He said he intends to make all of the Boston company's more than 100 officers eligible to obtain equity stakes eventually, as part of the process of buying up TA's stake. 

Keystone, founded in 1932, distributes its funds through broker-dealers, as well as through Travelers, and industry sources say Travelers has accounted for a relatively small portion of sales. 

Keystone has been one of the weaker-performing of the major fund groups in recent years, by most independent rankings.
Kanon Bloch Karre, a mutual-fund brokerage and research firm in Boston, ranks Keystone in the bottom 30% of 92 major fund families, based on performance over the past 13 years. 

Mr. Bissell takes issue with such ranking methods.
Some of Keystone's funds don't fall within fund-objective categories, and ranking them against other funds in those categories gives an unfair performance assessment, he argues.
But he concedes that some of the group's stock funds have performed poorly during some periods in the past 10 years. "We still carry that (track record) along, even though we think we've fixed the problem," he says. 

