.START 

Central banks continued to bludgeon the dollar lower, driving bond prices down as well.
But stock prices finished higher after waffling through most of the day. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 9.12 to 2673.06 in moderate trading.
The dollar fell sharply as central banks around the world sold the currency for the third consecutive day.
Its weakness continued to drag down the bond market, where the price of the Treasury's 30-year issue ended 1/8 of a point lower, or down $1.25 for each $1,000 face amount. 

The aggressive intervention against the dollar seems to have convinced many currency traders that the central banks are serious about halting its rise.
The currency is up 14% this year against the yen and 7% against the mark. "It's become a question of credibility for the central banks," said Earl I. Johnson, a vice president at Harris Trust & Savings Bank in Chicago. 

But traders are beginning to question how much longer the banks can keep up their intervention.
If the aim is merely to cap the dollar's rise by keeping traders off balance, occasional forays such as the current one may be sufficient.
But if the banks want to push the dollar lower and keep it there, several traders suggest that intervention or the threat of it isn't enough.
They're expecting the West German Bundesbank to push interest rates higher soon, making mark-denominated investments more attractive.
Conversely, bond investors are worrying about how much further the dollar may fall and detract from the allure of dollar securities. 

The stock market, riddled with investor uncertainty about the outlook for the economy and for stock prices, moved in and out of negative territory all day.
A blue-chip rally late in the session carried prices to near session highs, although declining issues on the New York Stock Exchange were ahead of gainers. 

With no economic news to provide direction, investors had to wrestle with the disclosure that International Business Machines' third-quarter earnings will be substantially below most estimates.
IBM's stock tumbled $6 to $111.50 a share.
But stock prices in general shook off the news after a brief retreat. 

IBM's disclosure suggested, however, that stock investors may be in for some nasty surprises as third-quarter earnings reports begin to flow over the next several weeks. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices rose in moderate trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 158.4 million shares.
Declining issues on the Big Board were ahead of gainers, 826-626. 

The dollar plunged against most other major currencies.
In late New York trading, it was quoted at 1.8794 marks and 140.15 yen, compared with 1.8938 marks and 142.40 yen late Tuesday. 

Long-term bond prices slipped.
The yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year issue rose to 8.24%. 

