.START 

A new study found that a commonly used drug for treating high blood pressure increases some risk factors associated with heart attacks and diabetes. 

The surprising finding from a group of Swedish researchers said that a diuretic drug called hydrochlorothiazide reduced the body's ability to handle blood sugars, a cause of diabetes, and also increased blood levels of cholesterol and triglycerides, fats associated with coronary artery disease. 

Hydrochlorothiazides are sold by numerous drug makers world-wide.
The top-selling product containing the drug in the U.S. is SmithKline Beecham PLC's Dyazide. 

The study, published in today's New England Journal of Medicine, said a different blood pressure drug, Capoten, doesn't cause the same problems.
The finding is certain to stir up aggressive marketing battles between Capoten's maker, Squibb Corp., and makers of diuretics. 

Capoten and a similar drug, Vasotec, sold by Merck & Co., have been gaining wide use in recent years, often as substitutes for diuretics in treating mild to moderate hypertension.
World-wide sales of Capoten and Vasotec, which are much more expensive than diuretics, are expected to be about $2 billion this year. 

Specifically, the new study found that patients receiving the diuretic had an 11% decrease in a test that measured the body's handling of glucose, a blood sugar, while those given Capoten increased handling of glucose by 11%.
The diuretic increased triglycerides by 15% and cholesterol by 6%.
Capoten had no effect on the body fats. 

Several researchers previously had suggested that people with high blood pressure are especially vulnerable to diabetes, and other studies have found that some diuretic drugs can modestly increase blood levels of certain fats.
But the new report, by doctors at Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, is the most detailed comparison of two of the more commonly used therapies for high blood pressure. 

The researchers cautioned, however, that their study provided no specific evidence that use of either type of drug increased or decreased the incidence of diabetes or heart attacks. "It is possible, but not proved in this study, that these changes may contribute to the risk for diabetes and coronary heart disease," the researchers wrote in their report. 

In Philadelphia, SmithKline said that its Dyazide product also contains potassium, which may counter effects seen in the study.
The company also said that while some research has uncovered short-term changes like those reported by the Swedish researchers, affects on cholesterol weren't upheld in longer studies.
The Swedish report looked at changes over two separate four-month periods. 

Squibb, however, is already making use of the report.
Last weekend, the Princeton, N.J., company brought the report's authors, Thomas Pollare and Hans Lithell, to New York to meet with 25 top U.S. cardiologists.
They will also be featured at a press conference in New York today, which will be videotaped.
The tape and the study will be made available to doctors.
Squibb's Swedish unit provided about $90,000, or 10%, of the study's funding. 

Squibb shares jumped $2.50 to $122.25 and SmithKline shares fell 87.5 cents to close at $45.125 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.
Details of studies in the New England Journal sometimes reach investors prior to publication. 

Meanwhile, the Swedish researchers said they have received funding, by some other drug makers, to conduct similar studies comparing the effects of other competitive anti-hypertensive drugs on the same risk factors. 

