.START 

Regarding Paul Gigot's Aug. 25 Potomac Watch column on high-definition TV (HDTV): Japanese chips are critical components of American weapons.
Japan now reports and U.S. experts confirm that Japan is about five years ahead of the U.S. in semiconductor technology.
In a new book, "The Japan That Could Say 'No, ' " two Japanese leaders speculate about the change in the world military balance if Japan were to stop selling chips to the U.S. and sell them to the U.S.S.R.
As invigoration of the American chip industry depends upon a U.S. market for its chips, HDTV is critical to the defense of the country. 

It is strange to see those who call themselves "conservatives" subvert their country's interests in the name of a free-market ideology that few countries practice.
The denial of reality is a costly disease. 

George C. Lodge 

Professor 

Harvard Business School 

Boston 

There are many views on the importance to the U.S. of HDTV and high-definition technology.
One is that it is simply a way to get better TV pictures.
The other extreme is that it represents a whole slew of related semiconductor, computer and display technologies that will be the basis of the coming information age. 

The latter is certainly what the Japanese and Europeans believe.
They've already sunk hundreds of millions of dollars into research and early product development.
The Japanese in particular believe high-definition is the keystone to their competitiveness in the high-technology stakes. 

Mr. Gigot uses George Gilder as an expert source on the subject.
But Mr. Gilder belongs to a very small minority.
Even those who think of high-definition only as a TV technology consider it far from dead.
In quoting Mr. Gilder, however, Mr. Gigot betrays his simplistic approach to the issue: He is a free-marketer, for whom the traditional American value of independence and entrepreneurism conquer all.
They did in the past, but are they sufficient now and for the future?
American drive captured the world's high-tech markets 30 years ago, but the rest of the world hasn't stood still.
The Japanese certainly learned their lesson, and unless the U.S. learns to compete on a global basis, it will run second to Japan as a technology power in the next century. 

Brian Robinson 

Washington Bureau Chief 

Electronic Engineering Times 

Washington 

Mr. Gigot aptly criticizes those who would lobby for an industrial policy to foster an HDTV broadcast standard.
An HDTV industrial policy inevitably would bring us second-rate technology.
But it is more than bad policy.
It is fruitless. 

Contrary to conventional wisdom, HDTV cannot be launched economically via existing commercial broadcast in the U.S. for several reasons.
There is no additional spectrum available to allocate for the 50%-100% increase in bandwidth necessary for HDTV as an augmented broadcast format.
No legislative, regulatory or judicial relief is likely to be available for simulcasting on additional channels by current commercial broadcasters. 

Even if that wholly unrealistic relief should come to pass, we face the resulting "chicken-and-egg" failure.
In other words, there will be no consumer market to buy $50 billion of new TV sets and no commercial market to finance $25 billion in transmission for broadcasting. 

We should realize that aggregates of various unfettered markets can drive a pervasive new high-resolution technology by combining the following niches -- direct broadcast satellite (DBS) and community antenna television (CATV); videodiscs and cassettes; a variety of compact disc video formats; microcomputers and video games, fiber-optic phones, data networks and videotex. 

That realization can shape a truly creative American resolution to the challenges of our rapidly changing media environment, brought on in part by the failing struggles of our network television. 

Glenn Ralston 

Indianapolis 

