.START 

The Senate overwhelmingly approved a compromise $3.18 billion anti-drug and anti-crime initiative, while cutting domestic and defense spending accounts 0.43% to pay for it. 

Senators voted 97-2 to attach the package to a measure appropriating $26.4 billion for the Transportation Department and highway and airport trust funds for the year beginning Sunday. 

Conservative GOP Sens.
Jake Garn of Utah and Steve Symms of Idaho cast the only negative votes; Sen. James Sasser (D., Tenn.) missed the vote. 

The underlying bill was passed 99-0.
A House-Senate conference committee is to reconcile the bill with a competing House version, which doesn't contain a similar anti-drug package.
Key lawmakers in the House have indicated both a willingness to accept the Senate's spending level for anti-drug programs and an uneasiness with its funding mechanism. 

The package, worked out with senators and the Bush administration in more than a week of talks, would set anti-drug spending authority in fiscal 1990 at $8.8 billion, $900 million above President Bush's proposal and $3.1 billion more than in the current fiscal year.
Compared with Mr. Bush's plan, the compromise would place more emphasis on the drug treatment, education and prevention programs favored by the Democrats. 

The measure approved yesterday, which also contains funds for Mr. Bush's anti-crime package, includes $1 billion for federal prison construction, another $1 billion for various federal treatment, education and prevention programs, $479.6 million for federal law-enforcement and drug-interdiction agencies and $120.3 million for the federal judiciary. 

It doesn't include increased anti-drug spending already incorporated in the Senate's other fiscal 1990 spending bills.
Of the remainder of nearly $2.1 billion for drug programs, $1.3 billion would be offset by cuts in new defense budget authority, or about $797 million in direct spending.
The rest of the budget, largely domestic accounts, would be cut by $700 million to $800 million in budget authority, or about $440 million in outlays. 

Budget authority measures the level of money appropriated by Congress to fund federal programs, and outlays represent the direct spending that results as these accounts are drawn down. 

Under the agreement, all domestic accounts would be cut across the board by 0.3%.
An additional 0.13% in savings would be determined by the 13 Senate Appropriations subcommittees.
If any of those panels doesn't meet its reduction target, its budget allocation would be cut across the board. 

In defense, all of the 0.43% reduction would be determined by the chairmen and ranking GOP members of the Senate Appropriations subcommittee on defense and Armed Services Committee.
The administration had sought the arrangement to protect personnel, readiness and continuing procurement accounts. 

House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) has called the Senate package "promising," but House Appropriations subcommittee chairmen have expressed reservations about the across-the-board spending cut and would rather have the flexibility to come up with their own cuts. 

In approving the appropriations bill, the Senate approved on a voice vote an amendment sponsored by Sens.
John Danforth (R., Mo.) and Ernest Hollings (D., S.C.) requiring random drug and alcohol testing of more than three million transportation workers, including pilots, truck drivers and railroad workers.
Recent House-passed legislation covers only railroad workers.
The Transportation Department is gradually enacting rules requiring drug testing of transportation workers, but faces legal challenges from labor unions. 

The Senate floor action came as Peru's ambassador to the U.S. suggested to a Senate panel that the U.S. spend $234 million annually to buy and destroy Peru's huge crop of coca, the basic ingredient for cocaine. 

Cesar Atala Nazal, speaking to the Senate Government Affairs subcommittee on investigations, said that would be the first step in preventing cultivation of the plant.
Mr. Atala said many of the 10,000 Peruvian farmers thought to be growing coca would welcome a U.S. buy-out as a chance to cease dealings with drug traffickers.
But the ambassador said the plan would only work if the U.S. also helped farmers substitute legal crops once the coca fields were destroyed. 

Lawmakers were skeptical that the plan would eliminate coca growing in Peru or in the other main growing country, Bolivia.
Sen. Carl Levin (D., Mich.) suggested that even if current coca growers participated in such a program, other farmers would move into the market to get a guaranteed profit.
Other senators said that Colombian traffickers would simply outbid the U.S. for the crop. 

Mr. Atala also joined ambassadors from Bolivia and Colombia in rejecting the notion of creating a multinational paramilitary strike force to attack drug traffickers.
Such a force, which some American officials have discussed, could be used by anti-government insurgents "as an excuse to promote violence which at this time doesn't exist," Bolivian ambassador Carlos Delius told the panel. 

Paul M. Barrett contributed to this article. 

