.START 

Coffee, tea or Pepsi? 

Next month, Pepsi-Cola Co. will begin test-marketing in the Midwest Pepsi A.M., an extra-caffeine version of its flagship soft drink. 

The market test will be a change from archrival Coca-Cola Co. 's less-aggressive approach to the morning market.
For the past three years, Coke has been running advertisements -- only on radio and only in selected cities -- in a bid to boost morning consumption.
But it has refused to position its soda as a direct competitor to coffee.
And Pepsi, itself, has tried similar low-key promotional tie-ins with Dunkin' Donuts Inc. and Wendy's International Inc. 

"There's been resistance to taking things too quickly," says Tom Pirko, president of Bevmark Inc., a Los Angeles beverage consulting firm. "No one wants to take on the mothers of America standing united to be sure their kids drink juice and milk every morning." 

But in the most direct assault on coffee yet, Pepsi will advertise Pepsi A.M. on television as a "cold, refreshing alternative to coffee," says a spokesman.
And for those coffee drinkers looking for their morning dose of caffeine, Pepsi A.M. will offer more of the stimulant than in regular Pepsi.
The amount will be about one-quarter the caffeine level of coffee, the spokesman adds.
He declined to say where in the Midwest Pepsi A.M. would be test-marketed or to provide further details of the market test. 

Both Coke and PepsiCo Inc. 's Pepsi are attracted to the sunny growth potential of the morning market.
Coca-Cola soft drinks consumed in the morning, for example, now account for 13% of the company's total sales, up from 9% a dozen years ago.
Coffee consumption, meanwhile, has steadily declined since its peak year of 1962. 

"The coffee part of the phrase 'coffee break' is clearly heading for extinction," says Jesse Meyers, publisher of Beverage Digest, a trade newsletter.
Although soft drinks aren't yet appearing with many plates of bacon and eggs around the country, soda companies have made some inroads into the morning market.
That's partly because of the less-effective marketing techniques of tea and coffee makers, some in the beverage industry say.
In addition, soda companies have taken advantage of a shift in society's tastes to cold and sweet drinks from hot and bitter beverages. 

Moreover, if Pepsi A.M. takes off and promotes a new category for growth, it could benefit the entire soft-drink industry, whose sales growth has been a bit sluggish.
In the past when the volume of cola sales has slowed, the industry has rejuvenated itself with new product lines, such as diet and caffeine-free sodas. 

Coca-Cola's "Coke in the Morning" campaign was started by a bottler in Atlanta, but has since spread to bottlers whose operations represent about 40% of the soda giant's domestic market. "The A.M. part of the day is the least developed in terms of soft-drink consumption," says a Coca-Cola spokesman, adding: "We're keeping all our options open." 

Pepsi isn't the first company to boost caffeine content in an effort to generate sales.
Jolt Co. introduced a cola several years ago with double the caffeine of regular sodas -- a level, it isn't shy about noting, that is just under the maximum allowed by the Food and Drug Administration. 

Jolt Cola made a big splash when it was launched, but it still has failed to generate a market share of even 1% of total soft-drink sales.
Jolt also addressed its soft drink to a morning audience using the pitch, "Jolt.
Your Wake-Up Call." 

C.J. Rapp, founder of Jolt, says he believes the introduction of Pepsi A.M. "certainly tells us we were right all along." But a Pepsi spokesman responds that Pepsi A.M. "is not Jolt.
That was a novelty." 

"Jolt turned out to be a little trendy," says Michael Bellas, president of Beverage Marketing Corp. "Whether {higher-caffeine sodas} will hit a viable nerve is still up for debate." 

