.START 

If you're looking for that special card to say you're sorry, forget Hallmark.
Fly American Airlines. 

Maureen Macfadden did.
The Rochester, N.Y., consumer sales representative was jolted around earlier this month when the American Airlines jet that she was on landed at O'Hare International Airport with its front landing gear collapsed.
Passengers hadn't been warned of the rough landing and few were prepared.
Ms. Macfadden's briefcase shot forward as the plane careened 6,600 feet down the runway.
When it stopped, the travelers -- relieved that they had survived -- cheered. 

Suddenly, a flight attendant screamed.
Another shouted, "Get off the plane]" The businessman sitting in a window seat beside Ms. Macfadden trampled over her to get out.
She herself rushed toward an emergency chute in the evacuation, which turned out to be precautionary. 

Then came a different kind of shocker.
As the dazed passengers filed off a shuttle bus that ferried them to the terminal, they were greeted by agents passing out white cards embossed with this sentiment: "Dear Passenger: No matter how hard we try, there are inevitable occasions when there is a problem.
Please accept our apology for the inconvenience." 

"It was like a joke," Ms. Macfadden scoffs. "Yeah, you almost killed me, and you're saying, 'Sorry, for the inconvenience. ' Right." 

Adds passenger Gerard Behague, a professor of music at the University of Texas in Austin: "I overheard some people saying exactly the same thing I was thinking: What a strange form.
I felt, 'Oh my gosh, they anticipated that an accident would happen.
They have an apology ready. '" 

Sure enough, the "oops" card is part of American's airport emergency kits, and has been for several years. "We think it's good customer service policy," says a spokesman.
The flip side of the card has blanks for passenger name, seat number, address and other statistics, so travelers can, say, register for lost luggage.
Adds the spokesman: "Would they have preferred that we had handed them blank sheets of paper?" The card doesn't cover acts of God: American won't pass it out for flights delayed by weather problems.
But no problem on this flight -- it arrived five minutes early. 

