.START 

Forty years of cheap Soviet energy, Warsaw Pact security and imported Russian culture have hardly made Imre and Imrene happy to be citizens of the East bloc. 

For the husband-and-wife managers of a tiny Budapest laundry, "East bloc" means Soviet-made laundry equipment that barely works, currency that can't buy better replacements and an income that hardly feeds the family. 

The way out? "Hungary has to rejoin the West," says Imre, a soft-spoken, 49-year-old father of two who asked that his family name not be published. "We are not part of the East," protests Imrene as she attacks wrinkles on a woman's winter coat. "The sooner we rejoin the West, the better off we all will be." 

This burning desire to unite with Western Europe seems to engulf all of Hungary these days.
From the chamber of commerce and the government to shoppers in working-class markets, much talk is about reviving prewar ties to Vienna, Rome, Bonn, Paris, London and Brussels.
Though Hungary faces staggering obstacles in its efforts to shed its East bloc shackles, many business and political leaders have resolved that it must be done. 

"We are beginning a new phase of East-West relations," says Peter Medgyessy, Hungary's vice prime minister.
The reform-minded Communist government of which he is a part hopes the party can win a significant block of seats in parliament in free elections expected next spring. 

All this is hardly surprising.
Once a leading European cultural and political center, Hungary since World War II has been repressed politically, deprived technologically and gutted economically.
Its 10 million people are burdened with an $18 billion debt, stuck with a defunct infrastructure and a technologically untrained work force. 

In Budapest offices, secretaries often work in groups to make a single call on one of the country's huge, pea-green telephone "machines," which have plenty of levers and flashing lights but a poor record of finding a free line.
The average citizen stuggles to get by on a monthly income of less than $150. 

"We look across the border and see that everything is better," says Maria NagyAntal, a 21-year-old student, as she strolls across a tree-lined university courtyard. "People have smiles on their faces, their clothes are nicer and the shops are full of wonderful things." 

Though Hungary isn't likely to leave the Warsaw Pact anytime soon, some Communist bosses say it may someday declare official neutrality and pursue a path like that of Austria.
That could be even more likely after the coming elections, though some experts say it could be delayed by a relatively strong showing at the polls by the Communists.
Current estimates show the Communists holding as much as 30% of the vote. 

If Hungary's mating dance with the West fails, some experts fear the country could be plunged into social unrest.
The government has warned that without Western help, worsening economic troubles could force the country to delay democratic reforms, such as the elections.
Other political experts fear that widespread strikes or demonstrations could result in a military crackdown. 

Yet this courtship makes some Westerners nervous.
European Community officials fear that Hungary may depart the East so boldly that it will start pushing for EC membership -- a stated goal of some Hungarian opposition politicians.
With controversial applications from Turkey and Austria already in hand, EC leaders find themselves in the curious role of trying to cool Hungarian advances. 

This yearning for Western Europe is hardly new, but it has strengthened in this era of perestroika and glasnost.
This summer the Hungarians began ripping down the barbed-wire fence along their border with Austria.
Within weeks, thousands of East Germans poured through the opening.
And rather than stop the flow, as East Germany demanded, Hungary defiantly kept its borders open. 

"We think it is natural to open the gates," says Agnes Toth, a spokeswoman in the government press office. "It's not because we like or hate a particular system.
It's because we feel part of a particular cultural inheritance." That inheritance is neither Eastern nor Slavic, she says, but Western. 

Indeed, when Hungarian children study their country's history, they read about the same 18th-century rulers as do children in Belgium and the Netherlands, which once belonged to the Hapsburg Empire.
These cultural ties are being reinforced by a new wave of Western consumer goods -- videotape recorders and color television sets bought by Hungarian tourists on now-legal trips to Austria. 

But Hungary still needs sweeping structural change before its burgeoning demand for consumer goods can be met, even though it is already the East's most liberal state.
It still lacks factories to make the consumer goods people want or the hard currency to buy them. 

Increased Western trade would help, but so far the EC and the U.S. have been slow to relax trade barriers.
They still brand Hungary a "state-trading nation," subject to numerous disadvantages.
The Hungarians say this helps keep them from selling valuable items -- machines, medical equipment and other goods -- that would let them import consumer and other goods from the West. 

Hungary's Western trade already exceeds its trade with the East.
Some 55% of the total is with hard-currency countries, including $2.6 billion of imports from the EC and $2.5 billion of exports to it. 

"For us," says Peter Lorincze, secretary-general of the Hungarian Chamber of Commerce, "ties with Western Europe are a must." 

