.START 

Potentially fertile women may be excluded from jobs where their unborn children could face fetal or birth defects, according to a 7-to-4 opinion of the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals here. 

In the case, United Auto Workers v.
Johnson Controls Inc., UAW locals and individual employees challenged a Johnson Controls "fetal-protection policy" that barred women up to the age of 70 from working in the company's battery division, where they might face hazardous lead exposure.
The court upheld a district court judge in Milwaukee who had decided the initial 1984 suit for Johnson Controls on a motion for summary judgment without a trial. 

The case marks the third time a federal appeals court has upheld fetal-protection rules in the face of employee challenges under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act.
However, this was the first time the court's opinion drew dissents, and they came from unexpected quarters. 

Judges Frank H. Easterbrook and Richard A. Posner, considered leading conservative Reagan appointees, wrote lengthy dissents from the court's opinion, with Judge Easterbrook calling for the district court decision favoring Johnson Controls to be overturned.
Jude Easterbrook's opinion was joined by Judge Joel M. Flaum.
Judge Richard B. Cudahy, the court's most prominent liberal, also dissented. 

Saying this "is likely the most important sex-discrimination case in any court since 1964, when Congress enacted Title VII," Judge Easterbrook chastised the "stereotypical" treatment of women by Johnson Controls and said "20 million industrial jobs could be closed to women" if the logic of the opinion is carried to its end. 

"The law would allow employers to consign more women to 'women's work' while reserving better-paying but more-hazardous jobs for men," Judge Easterbrook wrote. 

Writing for the majority, Judge John L. Coffey found that the Johnson Controls policy was a "legitimate" step toward preventing the "substantial" health risk of in utero lead exposure.
As such, the court accepted the company's argument that threats of potential tort actions required the policy as a business necessity. 

"This case invites an open season on women employees," said Joan E. Bertin, associate director of the women's rights project of the American Civil Liberties Union, which filed an amicus brief on behalf of the plaintiffs. "It marks a return to the days of paternalism, where the state told women how to run their lives.
Only now, it's employers taking over that role with the sanction of the federal courts." 

According to Ms. Bertin, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration in 1978 specifically found after 11 weeks of hearings that there was no basis in fact for the exclusion of women from situations of lead exposure.
OSHA subsequently issued lead-exposure standards neutral as to sex that were upheld by the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals. 

The case marks a trend where companies have moved to restrict women from hazardous occupations in unionized higher-paying blue-collar jobs, according to Mary E. Becker, a law professor at the University of Chicago who has published a study on fetal-vulnerability policies. "Low-paying jobs in which women are routinely exposed to hazardous conditions remain unrestricted," Ms. Becker said. 

Johnson Controls faces a separate lawsuit in California state court over its refusal to consider job applications from women to the battery division in light of its fetal-protection policy. 

