.START 

A study by U.S. scientists identified two possible new sources of global "greenhouse" warming: acid rain and increased use of artificial fertilizers. 

The study suggests the two seemingly unrelated factors may be contributing to a global build-up of methane.
Airborne concentrations of methane, from such varied sources as rotting vegetation and leaking gas pipelines, have been rising at about 1.1% a year.
Along with other "greenhouse gases," carbon dioxide and chlorofluorocarbons, atmospheric methane may trap the sun's heat and warm the earth. 

The research report, to be published today in the British scientific journal Nature, sheds new light on possible causes of this methane buildup.
Both acid rain and many fertilizers contain nitrogen compounds.
When the scientists dosed forest land in Harvard, Mass., with a common nitrogen fertilizer, ammonium nitrate, they found the soil absorbed about 33% less methane from the air than did unfertilized ground.
Normally, bacteria in soil help cleanse the air of excess methane.
By hampering such bacteria, the scientists suggest, the nitrogen in fertilizers and acid rain may affect global methane levels. 

The study, by researchers at the nonprofit Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole, Mass. and the University of New Hampshire in Durham, N.H., will doubtless heighten environmental concerns about acid rain -- and about the $16 billion world nitrogen-fertilizer industry.
In recent years, nitrogen-based fertilizers have increased world crop yields.
Northern European farmers are the world's biggest fertilizer fans, with application rates more than twice typical U.S. or Soviet levels.
One already-identified price of this high-intensity farming is water pollution, as rain washes the fertilizers off the land and into rivers, sometimes endangering fish. 

Scientists yesterday differed on just how much fertilizers and acid rain may contribute to global warming.
The U.S. group's preliminary estimate is that soil bacteria in northern forests normally absorb about 12.4 million metric tons of methane a year, or 3% of the world's annual methane production, said the group's leader, Paul Steudler of the Marine Biological Laboratory.
Bacteria in other soil types, including farmland, increase that percentage -- but the group's studies are continuing on that point. 

Nevertheless, the estimate suggests "the proportion {of methane} actually destroyed in this way is small," said David Jenkinson, a scientist-consultant to the British government's Agricultural Research Council laboratory, in Rothamsted, England.
As a result, he added, "I wouldn't take it too seriously." 

But Mr. Steudler said the effect, though small in absolute terms, may nevertheless be a significant source of the annual 1.1% rise in global methane concentration.
When dealing with such small, global percentage changes, he said, seemingly minor fluctuations in methane production or absorption can become important. 

