.START 

Democratic Congressman Bruce Morrison is calling for a grand-jury investigation of HUD during the years Sam Pierce was Secretary.
That's a good idea.
Better a grand-jury investigation, which at least operates under an established and identifiable rule of law, than the kangaroo-committee hearings into HUD that Rep. Tom Lantos and his peers are staging.
Both Mr. Pierce and his former aide, Lance Wilson, are currently being held up to scorn for taking the Fifth Amendment before the Lantos committee.
It looks to us as if these two men are standing up to another bullying committee -- and for the right reasons.
Both Messrs.
Pierce and Wilson charge that the committee's statements so far make it clear that it has prejudged them.
Mr. Wilson adds that the committee is setting him up as "a prime candidate for a criminal investigation." 

On Tuesday Mr. Lantos and his colleagues ripped into Sam Pierce for citing a House rule that lets subpoenaed witnesses bar cameras from their hearings.
An incensed Chairman Lantos argued that the rule was adopted during "the notorious McCarthy hearings." Today, said Mr. Lantos, the rule isn't "required as a protection to any witness." What Mr. Lantos left out was that the McCarthy-era rule was created after civil libertarians complained that publicity-seeking Congressmen were using the televised hearings to beat up on witnesses. 

Incredibly, a familiar McCarthyite phrase rang out at the hearing to muzzle Mr. Pierce's lawyer. "Point of order," said Rep. Christopher Shays, a Weickerian Republican from Connecticut. "There are two people sitting at the desk who haven't yet been invited; they're not yet part of this process." 

Chairman Lantos agreed and told attorney Paul Perito not to speak.
Mr. Perito: "Mr.
Chairman, respectfully --" 

Mr. Lantos: "You have not been called upon to make a comment, Mr. Perito.
If this chair recognizes you, you will make a statement, not until then." 

Mr. Perito: "I will accede to the chair's request." 

Mr. Lantos: "It's not a request, Mr. Perito.
In essence, gentlemen, at this hearing you are in fact a potted plant." So much for the Miranda rule. 

From what has come out of the hearing so far, the conclusion of a full-page treatment of the issue and 34 named principals in the New York Times last month still appears to hold: "The activities revealed so far do not appear to be illegal, investigators say, but questions have been raised about the size of some fees and the propriety of the lobbying involved." Presumably a grand jury would officially establish what has been generally conceded.
Then perhaps Mr. Pierce and the others would feel free to talk plainly about HUD.
The odor of red meat would drift out of the hearings, taking with it most of the klieg lights and panting coverage, but what would remain -- pure politics -- would still be very much worth the public's attention. 

The public might discover what the members of Mr. Lantos's committee and his witnesses already know -- that HUD since its birth in 1965 has been a playpen for developers and politicians.
Instead of market-driven development, HUD's projects are inherently political.
When subsidized projects go up, some politician takes credit for the achievement and some developer ends up making political contributions (also legal). 

In the Reagan years, the "crime" was that the developers' political overhead went into consultants' fees and not into a Congressman's PAC. Bluntly, Mr. Lantos wants HUD's money to go to his colleagues and their projects.
Maybe HUD really is incomparably sleazy; if so, maybe someone should start talking about shutting the place down. 

For now, we have the current standoff, in which two Ivy League lawyers named Pierce and Wilson have decided that to survive they have to stand up to Congress by invoking a McCarthy-era rule written to protect citizens from Congress's kangaroo committees. 

