.START 

A House subcommittee said in a letter to the Epilepsy Foundation of America that it has "no confidence" that generic anti-epileptic drugs are safe. 

The subcommittee said its investigation "leaves us with no confidence" that the Food and Drug Administration "has the ability, or that a significant portion of the generic drug industry has the integrity, to assure that the manufacture of extremely sensitive medications" is safe. 

Rep. John Dingell (D., Mich.), chairman of the subcommittee, also asked the FDA in a letter to review "all drugs used to treat epilepsy and any other narrow therapeutic range medication" made by generic drug companies that are considered equivalent to brand name drugs. 

Specifically, the Dingell subcommittee cited a 1988 recall of carbamazepine, an anti-epileptic drug made by Pharmaceutical Basics Inc., Denver, Colo., a unit of Akzo N.V.
The subcommittee also said it has "preliminary information" that two other generic drug makers "may have made misrepresentations" to obtain FDA clearance for diazepam, the generic version of Valium, also used for epilepsy. 

Pharmaceutical Basics said in a statement that its recall of carbamazepine was due to problems with the drug properly dissolving.
The company said that isn't "an unusual problem for this particular drug regardless of the manufacturer." It added that it has increased controls to its manufacturing process to assure the safety and efficacy of the product. 

The FDA said it is in the process of reviewing the country's top 30 selling drugs, including some anti-seizure medications, and that it hasn't turned up any serious problems.
One of the most common problems, an agency spokesman said, is that drugs don't dissolve properly.
The Dingell subcommittee contended carbamazepine problems were the result of the firm switching "from a more expensive to a cheaper raw material supplier." But Pharmaceutical Basics said any implication "that our choice of either of our suppliers of this raw material was based on cost consideration rather than quality and continuity of supply is wrong." 

Several people had seizures because the drug passed through their bodies without dissolving, and at least one person died, according to the FDA recall report.
Hospital records indicated that the tablets were "sub-therapeutic," the report said. 

However, Pharmaceutical Basics contended, "any implication that the problems we had with this drug . . . caused mortality is wrong." The company said side effects, including death, result from both generic and brand name drugs. 

