.START 

ROUGH AND TUMBLE magazine selling gets tougher and more expensive. 

Magazines generate about $3 billion a year at 200,000 supermarkets and newsstands, but space is at a premium.
About 30 titles dominate single-copy sales, all from major publishers.
But West Germany's Bauer Publishing manages to make a splash anyway with First for Women magazine, selling about four million copies a month after less than a year.
Bauer pays retailers $27 for each checkout-stand display position, plus a $9 quarterly "pocket" fee.
Most competitors pay around $5.
Another wrinkle: offer the first issue for 25 cents and let the retailer keep it.
The push generates prominent newsstand spots. 

Other publishers are wary of such spending but take note anyway.
Rupert Murdoch's magazine unit will launch Soap Opera Weekly this fall using some of Bauer's tricks, says Joseph Elm, vice president of single-copy sales.
Murdoch will pay $10 for checkout position, and a $5 quarterly fee, high compared with the $3.25 the National Enquirer pays. 

Murdoch launched fashion magazine Mirabella, normally $3, at $1 a copy and sold out the issue's 600,000 run. 

CHINA TOURISM poses moral, practical choices for the travel industry. 

Beijing's crackdown turns off American tourists, but agents debate whether boycotts and such are appropriate or effective. "We aren't supposed to be commentators on politics," says Susan Kaplan of the American Society of Travel Agents' consumer affairs committee.
Others see too much equivocating. "We shouldn't be providing hard currency" to Beijing in light of the Tiananmen massacre, says Malcolm McDonald, a Belmont, Calif., booker of cruises. 

Tourist travel is virtually written off for 1989.
The Commerce Department says U.S. tourists spent nearly $500 million in China travel (excluding airfare) in 1988.
But tour prices are being discounted as much as 33%.
To recover, some joint promotional efforts with the Chinese government are planned. "We came to the conclusion that we can't wait for miracles {in China}, or else we'll lose 1990," says Morris Schuster, head of the China Tourism Action Committee of tour operators, airlines and hotels. 

BIOTECHNOLOGY PRODUCT sales continue to soar, but capital remains elusive. 

The average revenue of biotech firms rose 33% to $8.2 million in 1988 from 1987, an Ernst & Young survey indicates.
Almost two-thirds of all revenue came from new products such as clot dissolving TPA, synthetic antibodies and interferon, for cancer.
Product sales are "a sharp contrast to the days when biotechnology companies lived off meager contract research and interest income," says Ernst's Steven Burrill. 

Still, only a handful of biotech companies, such as Applied Biosystems Inc., Centocor Corp., and Genentech Inc., are profitable.
Others will need large infusions of capital -- an average of $55 million each the next decade -- to become significant players.
With the stock market cautious, biotech firms will turn to corporate partners, the study says. 

Most will remain small, "research boutiques," says Prudential-Bache analyst Stuart Weisbord. 

WHEN IN ROME?
The most important foreign language for a successful business career in the next 20 years is Spanish, say 44% of executives polled by temporary-help firm Accountemps.
Japanese followed at 33%.
Others trailed: French, 8%; Chinese, 6%; German, 5%; and Russian, 1%. 

ALL THE NEWS that fits the stall.
Some cows bed down on shredded newspapers, thanks to the drought-inspired brainstorm of two University of Missouri dairymen.
The paper costs about half as much as hay. 

DIAL-A-PIANO-LESSON: Duane Shinn offers weekly taped tutelage free to callers as a promotion for his $19.95 instructional tapes.
The Medford, Ore., pianist also provides free lesson transcripts. 

EXPENSIVE EYEWEAR: The industry pushes spectacular spectacles. 

With unit sales flat in the $9 billion market, eyeglasses makers turn to fashion to boost profits.
Consumers are more willing to buy multiple pairs of glasses, says Andrew Karp, associate editor for trade book Vision Monday. "It's become the latest accessory, like a scarf or belt," adds Whitey Petersen, a vice president at Optique Du Monde Ltd., distributor of Ralph Lauren and Jack Nicklaus eyewear. "A woman may own 15 to 20 pairs of glasses to match different outfits." Some are selling spectacles to shoppers who don't need them but want a certain look. 

This week's industry trade show featured plastic sunglasses with pulsating disco lights from Sport Optics International, San Diego ($10), and Cartier Inc. 's platinum, gold, onyx and diamond frames ($82,000).
Europa Eyewear Corp. sells 22-karat gold frames for around $250, "good for clinching that Wall Street deal." Customers want "different glasses for boating than for skiing," says a marketer for Allegra Inc. 's Ziari line of sunglasses. 

Glasses makers figure the market will soar as baby boomers reach their 40s and face the inevitable: bifocals. 

BRIEFS: The American Institute of Architects sends teams to areas hit by Hurricane Hugo to make damage assessments, offer salvage and demolition advice. . . . Ingersoll Publications Co. 's new St. Louis Sun newspaper calls its vending boxes "Facts Machines." . . . Mitsubishi Trust & Banking Corp. donates $1.5 million to establish a professorship of Japanese financial markets and economy at Columbia Business School. 

