.START 

When employees tried to organize a union three years ago, Persona Inc. called in the cavalry -- in the form of a consultant. 

The consultant helped orchestrate the fight from beginning to end, says Dennis D. Holien, president of the Watertown, S.D., manufacturing company.
To prepare for special meetings with employees, "we actually wrote scripts," Mr. Holien recalls. 

The advice, which came from Henry N. Teipel of St. Paul, Minn., cost $4,000.
But it saved "a tremendous amount of money," Mr. Holien says, by keeping the battle short and the union out.
Mr. Holien, whose company has grown to 450 employees from just four workers nine years ago, contends the secret of Persona's success "is our growing knowledge base," the result of consultants. 

Not every proprietor finds consultants this helpful.
But small businesses are increasingly turning to outside advisers to help spur sales, cut costs, train employees, keep unions at bay or even reduce stress.
While some critics say small businesses don't have funds to spare for consultants, proponents say that limited resources are precisely the reason to make sure everything's being used wisely. 

Mark Brudzinski, one of two brothers who runs Northwest Castings Inc. in St. Paul, says the company shunned consultants when his father ran it.
But in the past two years, Northwest has used two consultants for Japanese-style quality-control training and other purposes. "We can't hire experts in every field to work full time at our company," he says. "The only way to keep abreast is to hire consultants." 

Many consultants think small companies aren't worth the trouble. "You can usually get a larger assignment out of a large company," says consultant William B. Gerraughty, of North Andover, Mass.
For many consultants, "the fees and lengths of engagement just aren't compatible with trying to make money," adds James H. Kennedy, the publisher of Consultants News. 

But greater competition among consultants -- whose ranks are growing -- has forced many to seek out small clients, says David Lord, managing editor of Consultants News, a Fitzwilliam, N.H., trade journal. 

"Our business has been growing very rapidly because (small) companies have an increased need for help," says Gershen Konikow, president of Konikow Associates Inc. a consulting concern in Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
He says he has nearly 200 clients, all small and medium-sized companies, about twice as many as three years ago. 

Many small-business owners still find the consultants' fees too high and their recommendations too complicated or too expensive to implement.
Mr. Kennedy notes that many consultants charge $1,000, $1,500 or even $2,000 a day. "You add some travel expense to that, and the small client's going to run away," he says. 

Mr. Teipel, whose fee soon will rise to $1,000 a day, from $850, concedes that many small companies "think that $1,000 a day is robbery." But he claims that a five-day engagement for $5,000 can easily yield advice worth $150,000 or more in costs saved or sales gained.
Mr. Teipel says he bills about 200 days a year, mostly with companies employing fewer than 

Aside from cost, consultants often are unwelcome in the circles of some family companies simply because they are outsiders.
But resistance is crumbling. 

Fred Gutwein & Sons Inc., a corn-seed producer in Francesville, Ind., retained its first consultant two years ago, says president Fred Gutwein, a grandson of the founder. "It was a little awkward," he recalls. "Nobody else had ever been to our board meetings, just the immediate family." But the family liked the injection of fresh ideas so much that it now has three outsiders at the meetings -- the consultant, an accountant, and a marketing professor.
One fruit of the outside advice, Mr. Gutwein says, has been a stronger program to recruit district sales managers. 

To accommodate cash-short clients, some consultants forgo direct fees.
Instead, they earn commissions on services -- such as insurance -- that the clients buy as a result of recommendations. 

Some say such arrangements raise questions about possible conflicts of interest: Is the consultant really working for the small client or for, say, big insurance companies?
But Mr. Konikow contends that such consultants typically provide clients with numerous options.
By contrast, he says, small companies without consultants usually rely on a single broker who may work with only one insurer. 

For close-knit companies, consultants also can bring objectivity.
Cleveland consultant Leon A. Danco says he has helped some business owners fire close relatives.
As an outsider advising such clients, "I'm not emotionally involved," he says. "I'm compassionate, I'm empathetic, but I'm not all shook up." 

