.START 

Some people with the immune-system cancer known as B-cell lymphoma have been found to have tumor "markers" that react to antibodies custom-made for other patients.
The discovery raises hopes that doctors may develop an armory of ready-made biological weapons against the disease. 

B-cell lymphoma is an often-fatal tumor of lymph tissue that affects about 100,000 Americans.
In lymphoma, malignant B cells are frozen at an immature stage and can't produce antibodies against disease.
The incidence of such cancer is growing, in part because of its occurrence among patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or AIDS. 

Malignant B-cells carry certain proteins, called "idiotypes," on their surface that are the key to an individual's tumor type, much as a fingerprint identifies a person.
Researchers have used such markers as targets for custom-made monoclonal antibodies to bind and block tumor growth.
But such custom "anti-idiotypes" can take a year to develop.
Thus they have been unavailable to people with advanced lymphoma and limited life expectancy. 

But researchers at Stanford University and Idec Pharmaceuticals Corp. of La Jolla, Calif., this week reported a finding that could make such tools accessible to a broader group.
In the test tube, up to one-third of lymphoma patients' tumors reacted with customized antibodies developed for other people.
Such shared tumor markers were previously found to exist among patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia. 

"What we don't know yet is whether {such antibodies} will have a beneficial effect on patients" other than those for whom they were created, said Ronald Levy, a professor of medicine at Stanford and senior author of a paper on the study appearing in today's edition of the New England Journal of Medicine.
Dr. Levy is an Idec consultant and shareholder. 

Dr. Levy said questions remain about why such tumor proteins, once thought unique, cross-react with antibodies created to block other people's tumors.
But it raises the hope that companies might develop whole libraries of antibodies, with much broader clinical and commercial importance, Idec said. 

"I'm really excited about it because up until now we've only been able to {treat} on people who have time to wait," Dr. Levy said in an interview. "But if these pre-existing antibodies work, we could open it up to many more patients." 

Other cancer experts cautioned that such benefits have yet to be proven in the clinic, but they said the Stanford-Idec team had taken a real step toward making the benefits of research more practical. 

