.START 

Television viewers in Manhattan earlier this month might have thought they were seeing double. 

There was John Roland at his usual perch anchoring the "10 O'Clock News" on New York's WNYW-TV, a station owned by News Corp. 's Fox Broadcasting unit.
But upon switching to Turner Broadcasting System Inc. 's Headline News on cable, viewers would have seen him on videotape anchoring a five-minute summary of regional news. 

As Mr. Roland's double duty shows, two longtime nemeses, cable systems and over-the-air broadcasters, are turning increasingly to cooperation.
The two sides have been at odds for years over a broad range of competitive and regulatory issues, but they are finding that some broadcast-and-cable alliances, especially in news operations, make sense. 

"If broadcasters can't beat cable operators, which they cannot, the alternative is to join with them in joint ventures and revenue-sharing schemes," says Larry Gerbrandt, a vice president and senior analyst at Paul Kagan Associates Inc., a media research firm. 

Some broadcasters and analysts are uneasy about the alliances. "We're entering the era of the blur," says Alan Gottesman, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc. in New York.
As to whether a broadcast station might lose some viewers to a cable channel that is running programming supplied by that same broadcast station, Mr. Gottesman says, "There is always that chance, but it's also like betting on two horses in the same race." 

Many news officials say the possible gains outweigh the potential drawbacks. "It's a risk worth taking," says Joe Duke, news director at WWL, CBS's New Orleans affiliate, which is about to start a one-year trial of a news channel on a local cable system. "People are going over to cable anyway," he says, "so why not see our product there as well?" 

Partnerships are forming in news rather than entertainment because a news story is easier for two programmers to share than a hit show and because news departments tend to be more aggressive in cutting costs.
Networks and independent stations, whose costs for covering news continue to escalate despite staffing cutbacks, can share those expenses with cable operators. 

For cable operators, which reach about 51 million homes, or about 56% of all television households, the partnerships provide "the programming knowledge that broadcasters have," Mr. Gerbrandt says. "Cable operators are still uncomfortable with the notion of being programmers." Many cable owners also use the news broadcasts to help fill excess channel capacity. 

One partnership aims to use cable to reach large local-news markets neglected by broadcast stations.
The venture was formed last year by NBC Cable, a subsidiary of General Electric Co., and Cablevision Systems Corp., a large cable operator based in Woodbury, N.Y.
It already operates News 12 Long Island, a round-the-clock local news channel that reaches 575,000 homes. 

News 12's annual operating budget is about $9 million, paltry when compared with network-owned stations in New York, which have news budgets approaching $40 million.
But News 12, started by Cablevision in 1986, attracts viewers: About 60% of the potential audience tunes in at least once a day, says Norman Fine, news director. 

"Long Island was a perfect market for a local news service because it is underserved by New York television stations," says Tom Wolzein, senior vice president for regional news at NBC Cable. "We're wrestling with the question of whether there are other places in the U.S. where there is a concentration of cable subscribers who are underserved by the local news currently available to them." The partnership is now looking at Orange County, Calif., and suburbs of Chicago and Philadelphia, among other markets. 

NBC currently provides only funding to the joint venture in return for a share of profits, though officials of both companies have indicated that NBC News or local NBC affiliates might share their resources with regional cable networks. 

CBS Inc. and Capital Cities/ABC Inc. also are considering cable news alliances.
Earlier this month, at the Radio-Television News Directors Association convention in Kansas City, Mo., officials from ABC News and CBS News said they were looking into establishing local and regional cable newscasts in cooperation with network affiliates.
Both networks emphasize that their talks are in the exploratory stages and won't give details. "I've only spoken with two affiliates," says John Frazee, CBS's vice president of news services. "I haven't even spoken to management about this yet." 

Headline News, a unit of Turner Broadcasting System Inc., and Fox's WNYW in New York hope their 13-week experimental alliance will give each a promotional boost.
Mr. Roland's news segments, which run every half-hour on the Turner channel from 5:55 p.m. to 5:55 a.m. for Manhattan Cable subscribers, give WNYW exposure among Headline News viewers.
The cable channel, in turn, can attract New York viewers by advertising the local tie-in in area publications. 

"We expect about 35 stations nationwide to take part in this experiment by the end of the year," says Jon Petrovich, executive vice president at Headline News.
So far, he adds, 20 have signed up. 

WNYW's station manager, Peter Temple, says, "We look at it as a promotional opportunity and a service to viewers who want a quick shot of local news at a part of the day when no one is providing it." 

Some local stations are taking the concept even further.
WCVB, a Boston station that has won many awards for its news operation, is exploring the possibility of a 24-hour local cable operation, though officials won't give details.
In a one-year experiment scheduled to start Monday, WWL in New Orleans will have a news channel on a local cable system owned by Cox Enterprises Inc. 's Cox Cable Communications subsidiary.
The channel will run WWL's four daily newscasts live, at the same time that the station broadcasts them; between the live news shows, the cable channel will repeat WWL's latest newscast. 

"In this day and age, viewers zap through channels so much," says Mr. Duke, WWL's news director. "We want to pop up in the zapping process twice.
Having our newscasts on cable also allows us to expose our product to viewers around the clock." Mr. Duke says WWL's owner, Loyola University, and Cox will share costs and profits for the cable news operation. 

Viacom Network Enterprises, a subsidiary of Viacom International Inc., and Conus Communications, a unit of Hubbard Broadcasting Inc., plan to start a 24-hour news service in November that could eventually team cable systems with local broadcast stations across the U.S. Viacom and Conus, which operates a service that pools local news footage from about 100 TV stations nationwide, will try to sell its satellite feed to home satellite-dish owners, starting in November.
The companies say they also expect local cable systems to start buying the feed, which they could simply run as a round-the-clock channel or package into periodic newscasts. 

"It's a format that could easily repeat itself with updates every half-hour," says Ron Bernard, president of Viacom Network Enterprises. "It's going to be like all-news radio." 

*Scheduled to start Monday 

**Scheduled to start in November 

Source: Company data 

