.START 

In the poor African nation of Malawi, a fish farm produces a meager harvest -- the project's financier, a U.N. agency, put the hatchery next to a bird sanctuary. 

-- In Somalia, thousands of children in refugee camps become more susceptible to deadly epidemics than if they had not been "helped" at all -- a U.S. charity canceled its innoculation campaign after the first round of booster shots and a budget snafu. 

-- In Mozambique, farmers who scratched out a living despite the 1988 drought are put out of business -- European Community food aid flooded local markets in provinces where it was not needed. 

Graham Hancock's "Lords of Poverty: The Power, Prestige and Corruption of the International Aid Business" (Atlantic Monthly Press, 226 pages, $17.95) provides a stinging retort to the perennial claim of the development set that such glitches are an inevitable part of doing God's work in the Third World.
Beyond the boondoggles, the book also is about the self-serving paternalism with which the international aid establishment regards the world's less developed peoples. 

Former East Africa correspondent for The Economist, Mr. Hancock tells of food-aid debacles, infighting among U.N. agencies, bilateral aid programs driven by export-promotion aims, private charities that send as little as 10% of raised funds to the Third World, and "structural adjustments" promoted by the World Bank that only grind the poor further down into dusty subsistence. 

Beginning with its sarcastic dedication to the senior World Bank staffers "who illegally acquired and read my original synopsis in the early days of this project," Mr. Hancock's book is, even if minimally structured, an engrossing litany from the seamy underside of the aid business. 

At the U.N. a host of agencies receive criticism, but special attention is given to the mini-empire of Edouard Saouma, the director general of the Food and Agriculture Organization, who operates what amounts to a $40 million annual slush fund for capital goods that he personally doles out to friendly countries, the author writes.
Mr. Saouma, who likes to be addressed as Your Excellency, once held up Ethiopian food aid for 20 days during the 1984 famine because he disliked an Ethiopian delegate.
At least the members of Development Inc., as Mr. Hancock calls the aid establishment, are pretty adept at feeding themselves.
The 10,000 delegates attending some 700 social events during the annual 1986 meeting of the World Bank and IMF rang up a tab of $10 million, he writes. 

Dining in style clearly is part of the aid package.
A few days ago, while World Bank and IMF officials supposedly advanced the cause of the world's downtrodden at this year's meeting in Washington, D.C., 400 spouses reached for artichoke bottoms stuffed with crabmeat, cherry tomatoes filled with salmon mousse, gazpacho, grilled salmon and chocolate pate. 

In his pages on the World Bank, Mr. Hancock takes particular aim at its newest fad: loans for market-oriented reforms.
These structural-adjustment loans send corrupt presidents and ministers of finance laughing all the way to the (World) bank.
No sacrifices, he writes, are demanded of them personally, while the poor are asked to tighten their belts.
Why, asks Mr. Hancock, is it essential for Zaire to dismiss 7,000 teachers for "budgetary reasons" when President Mobutu Seso Seko owns 51 Mercedes Benzes and 11 chateaux in Belgium and France? 

And yet, Mr. Hancock's observations don't go nearly far enough.
He is right that Third World regimes have been laying off nearly all adjustments on the poor.
But Mr. Hancock stops there, implicitly suggesting that the Third World's ailing statist economies could continue to provide current levels of social programs and subsidies were it not for structural-adjustment loans. 

He fails to acknowledge that Third World governments have improvidently exceeded their means in financing social programs and consumer subsidies for (mostly urban) poor, as well as sinecures for elites.
To see any improvement in the economies of the Third World, much more needs to be done than simply withdrawing say, food subsidies.
But Mr. Hancock writes little of such needed adjustments as freeing prices paid to farmers or privatizing hemorrhaging state-owned companies. 

Instead he insists that "the forces at work are largely external in nature and poor countries have little or no control over them." That's nonsense.
Even Third World thinkers now are admitting that post-colonialism brought new brands of exploitation at the hands of venal leaders. 

Mr. Hancock unnecessarily diminishes his compelling expose by insisting on extolling the social and economic success story of "un-aided" post-1979 Nicaragua.
Conveniently forgotten are the hefty subsidies from the Soviet Union and a gaping deficit financed almost entirely by printing money, causing a 1988 inflation rate of around 14,000%.
The consensus is that Nicaragua is a mess. 

But aside from these few analytical omissions and wanderings, Mr. Hancock's major conclusions square soundly with his evidence: "Aid has created a moral tone in international affairs that denies the hard task of wealth creation and that substitutes easy handouts for the rigors of self-help.
Throughout the Third World it has allowed the dead grip of imposed officialdom to suppress popular choice and individual freedom." 

Ms. Tammen is a policy analyst at the Competitive Enterprise Institute. 

