.START 

The financial problems of the Federal Housing Administration are nearly five times greater than previously estimated by the Reagan administration, according to the General Accounting Office, which put the blame largely on mismanagement. 

In testimony before a Senate subcommittee yesterday, Charles Bowsher, comptroller general and head of the GAO, repeatedly pointed to administrative problems by the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 

HUD, which runs FHA, said the agency sustained a fiscal 1988 loss of $858 million.
The HUD figure, Mr. Bowsher said, "is far less serious than the $4.2 billion loss as determined by the independent audit." The audit, which was done by the GAO and Price Waterhouse, was the first audit of the FHA in 15 years. 

"In terms of its direct effect on FHA's financial condition, the most critical weakness was in HUD's monitoring of functions involving large amounts of money delegated to third parties," Mr. Bowsher said. 

An example of this, he told the subcommittee on housing and urban affairs, was Marilyn Harrell, a Prince Georges County, Maryland, independent closing agent, who was dubbed "Robin HUD" after she admitted taking $5 million from the sales of HUD properties.
She said she gave the money to the poor. 

The GAO report is additional evidence of mismanagement at HUD during Samuel Pierce's two terms as secretary.
For the past five months, accusations of political favoritism and lax internal controls have been made in government reports and congressional hearings on the federal housing scandal. 

The FHA problems "are the same fundamental accounting and financial management problems that GAO and the {HUD} inspector general have been reporting on since the early 1980s," Mr. Bowsher said. 

Sen. Alan Cranston (D., Calif.), chairman of the subcommittee, said, "Those eight years of mismanagement, neglect, abuse and hostility produced a bitter harvest that we now are beginning to reap." He added that "inadequacies of FHA's accounting system" prevented the GAO from completing an audit since 1974.
The GAO abandoned attempts to audit the agency in 1981 and 1984. 

Mr. Bowsher said the FHA financial books "were so bad" it was "virtually impossible" to conduct an audit before improvements were made to the agency's accounting system following a 1984 management study. 

Thomas Demery, FHA commissioner from October 1986 to March 1989, acknowledged in an interview about having some management difficulties, but he placed most of the blame on economic forces over which the administration had no control. "It was not management or lack thereof," he said, "but premiums went way down while claims and losses went way up" primarily because of a declining economy in the oil-producing states of the Southwest. 

Mr. Bowsher said his staff is getting cooperation from the current HUD secretary, Jack Kemp, and Austin Fitts, FHA commissioner.
Ms. Fitts told the committee the "losses have been extremely heavy," but added the problems are manageable and fixable. 

Ms. Fitts cited a number of changes Mr. Kemp is making to improve the FHA, and said department officials are considering the GAO's recommendations to create the positions of chief financial officer within HUD and comptroller within FHA to carry out a corrective plan. 

Ms. Fitts said that while there is no evidence of a deliberate cover-up of FHA's financial condition by previous HUD officials, there is a "culture" at the agency that brings "a reluctance to face losses . . . because nobody wants to deliver the bad news." 

The GAO did endorse a heavily debated proposal to raise the ceiling on FHA loans.
Such a move, which has been opposed by some groups as harmful to the provision of low-income housing, would lower FHA claim rates and boost FHA revenue, according to Mr. Bowsher. 

