.START 

NetFrame Systems Inc. introduced three computers aimed at helping businesses satisfy their growing desire to assemble personal computers in networks. 

"They are first in a new niche that could potentially be very significant," said Douglas A. Cayne, an analyst at the Gartner Group, a market-research firm in Stamford, Conn. 

NetFrame's computers, which range in price from $22,500 to more than $45,000, enable users of personal computers to share files and data and send messages to one another.
Somewhat more expensive minicomputer or server systems sold by companies such as Hewlett-Packard Co. and Sun Microsystems Inc. perform similar tasks, but these machines aren't designed to work easily with the kinds of software required by personal computers. 

Mr. Cayne said NetFrame has "hit on the missing link" in blending minicomputer power with personal-computer software. 

Nevertheless, the company faces a crowded market.
Besides competition from minicomputer makers, the company will square off with makers of high-powered personal computers.
Many businesses today outfit such machines with communications software to run their networks. 

However, analysts said NetFrame's approach to networking appears superior because it uses some of the techniques for sending information around networks that far more expensive and powerful mainframe computers use. 

"The result is a very viable technical solution that's going to avoid data blocks," said Stella Kelly, an analyst at Infocorp., a Santa Clara market researcher. 

NetFrame has received investments from Apple Computer Inc., Xerox Corp. and Olivetti, the Italian computer maker. 

Enzo Torresi, NetFrame's chief executive officer and a co-founder of Businessland Inc., said the company has raised a total of $17 million in private investments, including $12 million in February. 

The company's machines, which will be available beginning in November, use Intel Corp. 's 80386 and new 80486 microprocessors. 

Businessland Inc., which has offices in 50 major U.S. metropolitan areas, will sell the computers. 

