.START 

Henley Group Inc. said it plans to spin off its land holdings to shareholders, leaving the company with diverse interests in laboratory supply operations and industrial products. 

The distribution of about one-quarter of the company's net worth calls for payout of one share of the newly formed Henley Properties Inc. for each share of Henley Group. 

The proposed spinoff, slated for December, is the latest of several by four-year-old Henley Group, whose chairman and chief executive officer, Michael D. Dingman, has said the company is in "a perpetual state of liquidation." Late last year, Henley spun off its garbage-to-energy business in a new company called Wheelabrator Group Inc. 

Traders greeted the latest spinoff announcement with enthusiasm.
Henley class A shares surged $3.50 a share to close at $66.25 yesterday in national over-the-counter trading. 

The new unit will include the properties of Henley Group's Signal Landmark Holdings Inc. unit, comprising mostly undeveloped acreage in California and Hawaii.
Also included in the package will be Henley Group's headquarters building in La Jolla, Calif. and a 50% interest in a New Hampshire oceanfront development. 

According to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Henley Group has carried the real estate on its books at a value of $358.7 million, net of related debt.
At June 30, Henley Group had a book value of $1.46 billion, net of $2.18 billion in liabilities. 

Analysts said they found it hard to forecast the price at which Henley Properties stock might trade.
However, Laurence Lytton, an analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., said on the basis of a "back-of-the-envelope" estimate, the shares of the new unit may trade at about $10.
Yesterday's $3.50 increase in Henley Group suggests an initial market perception well short of that. 

Still, watchers of Henley Group said the spinoff will likely boost market recognition of assets that they said currently are overlooked in Henley's price. "People are going to have to focus now on the values of these properties," said R. Jackson Blackstock, an analyst at First Boston Corp. 

In part, valuation of the new Henley Properties is clouded by the portfolio's emphasis on undeveloped land.
The potential crown jewel is 1,600 acres of oceanfront near Huntington Beach, Calif.
The property, called Bolsa Chica, has been held up for nearly 25 years by local political resistance.
Recently, however, opponents signed an agreement with the company that appears to clear the way for development. 

For tax reasons, Henley's distribution is technically a reverse spinoff.
Shareholders will receive the bulk of the company as a dividend and Henley Properties will comprise the existing Henley.
The transaction will be tax-free to most holders, Henley's SEC filing suggests. 

Left in Henley Group will be its Fisher Scientific Group Inc. unit, which makes and sells a wide range of laboratory equipment and instruments.
Also included will be the company's PA Holdings Corp., which manufactures products ranging from industrial brake material to runways for airports. 

Henley Group and Henley Properties will remain tied, sharing for the most part a common management.
Henley Group will retain the right to buy at book value up to a 15% stake in Henley Properties. 

Henley Properties also will issue a $90 million debenture to Henley Group.
The eight-year bond will bear annual interest of 10.5% that may be paid in cash or in the form of more debentures.
A Henley official said this payment-in-kind option was created to permit flexibility for Henley Properties' cash flow. 

The direction of Henley Properties development appears open, according to the SEC filing, which leaves the prospect that the new company may develop its raw land holdings, sell them, or buy more. 

However, Mr. Dingman has in the past proved adroit at mergers and acquisitions, suggesting the possibility that Henley Properties might merge with a more established developer able to make use of the extensive land holdings. 

