.START 

I take up my pen, just to give you an imperfect account of the most dreadful hurricane that memory or any records whatever can trace, Good God] It seemed as if a total dissolution of nature was taking place.
The roaring of the sea and wind -- fiery meteors flying about in the air -- the prodigious glare of almost perpetual lightning -- the crash of the falling houses -- the ear-piercing shrieks of the distressed, were sufficient to strike astonishment into Angels. 

Actually, the pen writing those lines was that of Alexander Hamilton.
At the age of 15 the future Secretary of the Treasury was living on St. Croix when the fearsome hurricane of 1772 struck the island.
Hamilton dashed off his description and submitted it to The Royal Danish-American Gazette, the chief English-language newspaper of the islands, held at that time by Denmark.
It was the turning point of Hamilton's life.
The hurricane struck on Aug. 31.
Hamilton's account appeared on Oct. 3.
Influential islanders discovered the article's author and forthwith dispatched him to the mainland to improve his education and carve a career. 

When the late summer winds began to knock the shutters, young Hamilton, stuck in Mr. Cruger's counting house, heard opportunity knock, too, with a chance to better his lot.
He was not the only one in St. Croix's history to see the bright side of a dark hour.
Earlier, in 1733, St. Croix was afflicted, in order, by drought, hurricane, a plague of insects, another hurricane, starvation and then, imposed upon St. Croix's African slaves, the infamous Gardelin code, named for the Danish governor and described by William Boyer, author of "America's Virgin Islands: A History of Human Rights and Wrongs" (Carolina Academic Press, 1983) as perhaps "unparalleled in world history as one of the most barbarous and oppressive measures ever imposed on a people." 

The Gardelin code stipulated mutilation and torture for almost any manifestation of discontent by the island's slaves who finally rose in rebellion and for six months held the island against assaults by the Danes, as well as British and French troops summoned by the panic-stricken Norsemen to their aid. 

There may have been some young emulator of Hamilton scribbling notes when hurricane Hugo hit the islands of the eastern Caribbean, including St. Croix, on the evening of Sept. 17.
If so, no newspaper chose to give immediate publication to his report.
Amid headline stories two days later about the destruction in Puerto Rico and fears for what the hurricane boded for the mainland, almost nothing was written about the fate of St. Croix beyond a brief note that from 30% to 70% of the island's homes had been destroyed, along with most power and communications equipment, and that looting had occurred. 

Four days after the hurricane came headlines about the ordering of troops to the Virgin Islands after looting had broken out.
For CBS Evening News, Juan Vasquez reported that "the residents of St. Croix are overjoyed to see the soldiers (1,100 military police dispatched by President Bush) from the mainland." 

The word "residents" is loaded and Mr. Vasquez's wrap-up lines were also unintentionally revealing: "For . . . tourists the nightmare is ending.
For the residents, the question is whether to start rebuilding shattered St. Croix or leave with them." St. Croix is at least 75% black, and the looting seems to have been a very understandable attempt by the black poor to get a more equitable distribution of the island's resources. 

For most of the black native inhabitants of St. Croix the word "nightmare" has rather longer-term reverberations.
But even the short-term mainland response was dismal.
While the French and the British were rushing emergency supplies to nearby Guadeloupe and Montserrat, the best that the Federal Emergency Management Agency could do was send a C-141 transport with radio equipment and a bunch of bureaucrats in search of the facts.
What Crucians needed was food and, according to Atherton Martin of the policy group The Development Gap, electricity to work their water-tank pumps.
Belatedly, all they got was troops. 

Statistics are extremely hard to come by, but people knowledgeable about the islands all agree that the post-hurricane popular defiance of law on St. Croix was not unexpected.
Prof.
Boyer says that "given the crime and disaffection of natives who are against people outside taking over their island, I'm not surprised by the instability caused by the hurricane." Larry Birns, director of the Washington-based Council on Hemispheric Affairs calls St. Croix "a classic example of the immiserated conditions of a Third World country." 

Though the car license plates say "American Paradise," St. Croix's schools, roads and hospitals are all in poor shape.
A 1976 statement by St. Croix's health employees said conditions were poor enough to "cause the strongest to cry in anguish," and in 1979 both general hospitals in the Virgins had their accreditation withdrawn.
According to the American Hospital Association's latest data, this accreditation has not yet been re-instated.
Unemployment and underemployment hovered around 30% before the hurricane, according to Mr. Birns.
The native blacks mostly get a crack at only the lowest-paying jobs.
Businesses and better jobs go mostly to mainland whites, particularly from the South, and to other blacks and Hispanics from elsewhere in the Caribbean.
Until 1966, a publicly funded body called the Virgin Islands Corporation supervised development with the objective of providing employment to native Crucians, but in the mid-1960s this rather successful body yielded to private development, notably Harvey Alumina and Hess Oil.
Although Hess and Harvey received numerous tax rebates and tax holidays of one sort and another, employment opportunities for locals remained very limited, Prof.
Boyer found. 

Perhaps St. Croix's big mistake in recent years was not to have had a revolution, even if one destroyed by a larger power, as did the island of Grenada, several hundred miles farther south.
Immediately after President Reagan's conquest of Grenada, says Mr. Birns, the U.S. government spent more on Grenadian roads than it has "cumulatively in the entire history of the U.S. administration in St. Croix." 

The nearest St. Croix got in modern times to revolution was the killing of seven whites and one black in 1972 on the Fountain Valley golf course, owned by David and Laurance Rockefeller as part of a 1964 Rockefeller purchase of 4,400 acres for a tourist resort.
This investment fueled a speculative boom, which, by the end of the 1960s, saw almost all the beaches of St. Thomas and St. Croix gone to "development." Five black youths were eventually convicted for those killings, which remain as vivid in the minds of the white "residents" as, no doubt, the 1733 slave rebellion did for earlier settlers. 

St. Croix's original Indian inhabitants were exterminated by the Spanish.
The slaves and their descendants have been variously maltreated by Danes, Britons, French and North Americans, and are now a minority in the islands.
Only for the desperate can hurricanes be opportunities. 

Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation and LA Weekly. 

