.START 

PepsiCo Inc. 's international soft-drink division, in a major realignment, said it is creating six new geographic business units, each with self-sufficient operations and broad local authority. 

The new organization, covering 150 nations in which Pepsi-Cola International operates, will report to Christopher A. Sinclair, who was named president of Pepsi-Cola International.
Mr. Sinclair was formerly president of Pepsi-Cola USA's Central division. 

Roger Enrico, who had been serving temporarily as president of Pepsi-Cola International, will remain as president and chief executive officer of PepsiCo World-Wide Beverages. 

Pepsi-Cola International said the changes are designed to help increase sales overseas by moving operations and executives closer to the point of sale, particularly in Europe and Asia. 

Wall Street reacted favorably to the news.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, PepsiCo closed at $57.625 a share, up $1.625. 

Industry analysts generally praised the move, saying it would allow the international unit to be more responsive to the demands of soft-drink markets in different areas of the world. "The opportunities abroad are much greater than they are here domestically," said Martin Romm, an analyst with First Boston Corp. "I think what you're seeing is the structure being built to get more active in that area." 

Creation of the units follows the decision last year by Pepsi-Cola USA to start four autonomous domestic divisions, each with its own field-based president and integrated staff.
Frito-Lay Inc., PepsiCo's snack-food division, undertook a similar reorganization in June. 

Pepsi-Cola International's hand may have been forced, according to one analyst, by Coca-Cola Co. 's aggressive pursuit of joint ventures with overseas bottling companies.
Coca-Cola, which dominates many foreign soft-drink markets, can be expected to continue those investments, said George Thompson at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., using some of the money it receives from the proposed sale of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. to Sony Corp. Atlanta-based Coca-Cola owns 49% of Columbia Pictures. 

Headquarters for Pepsi-Cola International's new operations will be London; Rio de Janeiro; Nicosia, Cyprus; Singapore; Hong Kong and Toronto.
Presidents of the new areas, respectively, will be Frederick Meils, formerly executive vice president, Pepsi-Cola International; Luis Suarez, formerly region vice president, Brazil; David Jones, formerly region vice president, Middle East; Richard Blossom, formerly a senior manager, Pepsi USA and Pepsi-Cola International; Les Ham, formerly zone vice president, Far East and India; and Wayne Mailloux, formerly region vice president, Canada. 

PepsiCo is based in Purchase, N.Y. 

