.START 

Back in the OPEC nightmare 1970s, oil-poor Brazil embraced the Third World's boldest solution to the energy crisis: sugar-cane alcohol, known as ethanol, to supplement and even replace gasoline. 

Encouraged by expert advice and loans from abroad -- and by generous subsidies from their own government -- Brazilians responded with the fervor of a national crusade.
Cane fields proliferated, eventually covering a land surface the size of Denmark.
Billions of gallons of ethanol spewed from hastily built distilleries.
The automotive industry retooled to assemble cars that could use the new fuel. 

Today, most of Brazil's 13 million motor vehicles run on ethanol, either pure or mixed with gasoline.
Nobody here fears the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries any longer.
And smog in major cities is more bearable. 

For advocates of cleaner alternatives to gasoline and lesser dependence on imported oil, the news from Brazil sounds almost too good to be true.
In fact, it borders on disaster. 

All the spending and good intentions "have left us with the worst of all possible situations," sighs Eli Pelin, a leading energy economist at Sao Paulo University. "There is no plausible economic explanation for the alcohol program." 

Or at least none based on conventional notions of supply and demand.
Consumers are purchasing ethanol that costs twice as much to produce as gasoline -- adding fuel to a 1,000% annual inflation rate.
Ironically, Brazil has discovered enough oil reserves to achieve self-sufficiency by the year 2000.
It already produces more gasoline -- as a byproduct of diesel refining -- than it needs domestically.
So the excess is sold abroad, at lower prices than offered to Brazilian car-owners. 

Evidence of ethanol's less-obvious costs can be gleaned on a visit to the fertile hinterlands of Sao Paulo state.
The gently sloping hills and flat valleys here can grow coffee, soybeans, citrus and grains.
These are just the sort of cash crops that would earn additional billions of dollars annually in exports for Brazil, and help alleviate its $120 billion foreign debt, the largest in the Third World.
Instead, much of the state's agricultural land has been turned over to sugar plantations that produce almost 70% of the nation's ethanol. 

Even the environmental aspects arouse controversy.
To protect workers from the sugarcane's sharp leaves, all fields are set afire before harvest.
The scorched area every year exceeds the acreage burned in the Amazon, and, some ecologists say, may contribute to the global warming known as the "greenhouse effect." 

But the lure of sugar alcohol proved irresistible for well-heeled planters like Pedro Biagi, whose family owns several thousand acres in Serrana, about 170 miles north of Sao Paulo.
When the government-subsidized ethanol program began in 1975, he was among the first to join. "We were already distilling some alcohol because sugar prices weren't good," he says. "So it was worth taking a chance." 

To encourage ethanol production, big farmers were given government loans at interest rates below inflation to cover more than 80% of investments in distilleries on their properties.
Petrobras, the state oil monopoly, assumed merchandising costs.
And most years, the government fixed the price of sugar bought by the alcohol producers above world market levels. 

Today, the Biagi farm grows nothing but sugar cane, and has taken on the appearance of an industrial complex.
Sweet-scented plumes rise from the burning fields.
A steady caravan of trucks carries the charred stalks to Mr. Biagi's huge, $120 million factory.
There, the juice is squeezed out of the cane by massive rollers, fermented in metal vats and distilled into enough ethanol to fill the tanks of 40,000 automobiles a day. 

Initially, sugar alcohol was intended only as a gasoline additive.
Brazilian cars were run on a "cocktail" of 80% gasoline and 20% ethanol, thus saving the country about a fifth on its petroleum import bill.
But the second OPEC shock in 1979 rocketed world petroleum prices above $30 a barrel, and vastly expanded the ethanol program.
Backed by a World Bank loan of $300 million, Brazil aimed at the total replacement of gasoline by ethanol. 

Convincing drivers to buy the vehicles was the difficult part.
The cars have trouble starting in cold weather and consume about 15% more fuel per mile than a gasoline vehicle.
But consumers came around when the government promised to maintain an artificially low retail price for ethanol -- currently about $1.27 a gallon, compared with $1.70 for gasoline -- that compensated for those drawbacks.
Today, more than four million Brazilians own automobiles fueled entirely by ethanol. 

All this would be great news if oil were still selling at $40 a barrel.
But with current prices half that, the ethanol program generates a $2.7 billion annual deficit, says a World Bank study.
Even Werther Annicchino, president of Copersucar, the largest alcohol-producing conglomerate, concedes that if the market were allowed to determine prices, "ethanol couldn't compete with gasoline." 

Some of ethanol's supporters acknowledge that the wisest course might be to freeze production capacity at four billion gallons a year, continue research to cut ethanol's manufacturing costs, and pray it becomes more competitive with gasoline. "If oil prices jump again as is likely in the next decade, we'll look like geniuses," says Antonio Delfim Netto, a former planning minister, who presided over the program's expansion in the early 1980s. 

The other hope is that ethanol will catch on as a gasoline additive elsewhere in the world, especially the U.S., providing Brazil with a profitable export. "I think automobile companies are reaching the limit on emission controls," says George Pischinger, manager of planning at Autolatina, the holding company for the South American subsidiaries of Volkswagen AG of West Germany and Ford Motor Co. of the U.S. "It's more realistic to expect less polluting fuels.
And I doubt the U.S. or Europe can produce ethanol more cheaply than Brazil." 

In the meantime, Brazil's alcohol distillers are concerned about holding on to the domestic market. "Every day I hear a different argument against ethanol," says Mr. Biagi. "It's bound to discourage consumers." 

That's already happening.
Sales of alcohol-powered cars are down sharply.
Last year, 90% of automobiles coming off Brazilian assembly lines were equipped to run entirely on ethanol.
But responding to more recent consumer demand, that has slipped to about two-thirds. "My impression is that about half the consumers would buy gasoline cars if they could," says Mr. Pischinger. "We just haven't been able to manufacture them fast enough." 

Murilo Amorim, a Sao Paulo bank executive, demonstrates some of the queasiness of car owners.
For the last two years, he has owned an ethanol-powered Ford and has no complaints about its performance.
But Mr. Amorim started having second thoughts in May when planning errors by the government caused a temporary ethanol shortage at the pumps in Sao Paulo and other major cities. 

"I read all those articles about how ethanol will never compete with gasoline, and I figured sooner or later this country will go back to oil fuels," he says.
His next car will be gasoline-powered, he adds. "I just hope I find somebody to buy my old Ford." 

