.START 

The 1989 Albert Lasker Medical Research Awards went to the creator of the French "abortion pill," a poet of human biology and four scientists who deciphered how cells respond to the body's subtle signals. 

The prestigious awards, presented in New York, are widely believed to be an indicator of future Nobel Prize awards and thus are watched with great interest in the medical and scientific communities.
The award in each category carries a $15,000 prize. 

The Lasker award for clinical medical research went to Etienne-Emile Baulieu, professor of biochemistry at the University of Paris School of Medicine, for his work on the role of steroid hormones in the brain and in sexual function. 

Dr. Baulieu's work erupted into global controversy with his development of RU 486, a drug that stops pregnancy by preventing a fertilized egg from being implanted in the womb.
Anti-abortion activists raged against its use, causing a temporary halt in clinical trials in Europe. 

Sidestepping that debate, the Lasker Foundation simply noted that RU 486 is a "safe, effective" means of preventing pregnancy and avoiding surgical abortion as well as a model for investigating other hormonal conditions. 

Lewis Thomas, physician, author and scholar-in-residence at Cornell University Medical College, New York, was awarded the Albert Lasker Public Service Award "for opening the wonders of 20th-century medical research and practice to the average person." 

Dr. Thomas was honored for poetic writings about medical science in such books as "Lives of a Cell," which won a National Book Award. 

The award for basic medical research was given to four pioneers of "signal transduction," the process whereby the body sends signals to trillions of cells that prompt them to function.
These systemic messengers govern basic functions such as regulation of the heartbeat, blood pressure, cell growth and brain activity. 

The basic science winners are Michael J. Berridge, deputy chief scientific officer, department of zoology, Cambridge University, England; Alfred G. Gilman, professor of pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas; Edwin G. Krebs, professor of pharmacology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle; and Yasutomi Nishizuka, chairman, department of biology, Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan. 

