.START 

Through the ages, certain names have become inextricably linked with geographical locations: Roald Amundsen and the South Pole, for instance, or Pete Rose and Cincinnati. 

In the New Age, there may be a new pairing: Peter Buffett and Milwaukee. 

Mr. Buffett, the 31-year-old son of billionaire investor Warren Buffett, is channeling his energy into transforming the Midwestern city known for breweries and bratwurst into a mecca for the New Age. 

New Age is a vague term that has come to be associated with a variety of spiritual, astrological and even psychological endeavors. "It has some pretty funny connotations," admits Mr. Buffett, a New Age musician and former San Francisco ad man. 

But for Mr. Buffett, who has written music for milk commercials and ads for US Sprint, New Age is "a philosophy of being concerned for something other than yourself." 

So how does one go about turning Milwaukee into the New Age capital? 

For starters, Mr. Buffett and his wife, Mary, who is also a musician, are merging their ad agency with the Milwaukee company that recorded his two albums. 

Next, the couple bought a house.
They spent nearly $1.2 million last month on a nine-bedroom Italian Renaissance-style mansion in Whitefish Bay, a Milwaukee suburb. 

The house could become a landmark of the New Age.
The Buffetts plan to play host to musical performances and benefits for causes such as protecting the environment and combating homelessness.
The house wasn't bought "strictly for my own sense of importance," he says. 

Mr. Buffett says he settled on Milwaukee not just because the record company was located there: "The quality of life was the single biggest factor," he says. 

With all this activity, it's no wonder city officials seem so happy to have the Buffetts in town. "New Age music is wonderful]" says Kristine Martinsek, the city's director of marketing and civic development.
And, like the Buffetts, Milwaukee's mayor is also a strong advocate of a clean environment, Ms. Martinsek adds. 

Making Milwaukee a New Age model may sound like a lot of work.
But, Mr. Buffett says, it "seemed like the way to make a mark that's broader than just an advertising business in San Francisco." 

