.START 

The Soviet Union has removed an obstacle in the way of achieving a superpower agreement to reduce long-range nuclear missiles.
But Moscow's proposal will make it politically tougher for the U.S. to deploy a space-based defense system. 

In a weekend meeting here between Secretary of State James Baker and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, the Soviets proposed that they would no longer link progress toward achieving a strategic-arms reduction treaty to progress in separate talks involving space-based weapons.
However, Mr. Shevardnadze said that even if an arms-reduction pact is signed, the Soviets would withdraw from it if the U.S., in Moscow's view, violated restrictions on space-weapons development. 

The Soviet Union, fearing U.S. technological prowess, has opposed the development of space-based defensive weapons since former President Reagan proposed his controversial "Star Wars" system more than six years ago. 

The two nations also said there would be a summit between President Bush and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev in the late spring or early summer, and reached agreement or made substantial progress on other issues, ranging from verification of underground nuclear testing to moving toward eliminating chemical weapons. 

Mr. Baker said President Bush will offer a new initiative on a chemical-weapons ban when he addresses the United Nations today. 

In proposing the delinking of talks on long-range missile and space-defense weapons, the Soviets may be making a shrewd reading of the U.S. political scene.
Mr. Bush has been less enthusiastic than his predecessor about deploying a full-fledged Star Wars system.
Congress has resisted Star Wars, technology hasn't developed to the point where deployment soon is feasible and U.S. budget austerity rules out a massive effort. 

Under such conditions, Moscow may be betting that if the two sides can agree to a long-range missile pact, the threat of losing it would generate sufficient pressure in the U.S. to limit Star Wars development and even spur a space-systems accord. 

National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft, on NBC News's "Meet the Press," said a long-range nuclear-weapons agreement could be struck in time for the summit and that the time frame was set with that possibility in mind. 

On another issue, Mr. Baker said he was assured the Soviet Union isn't planning a crackdown on unrest in the Baltic States, which are pushing for greater freedom.
The Soviet official "specifically rejected the use of force as not being a feasible alternative, and he says that's a view that is shared by the Soviet leadership," Mr. Baker said yesterday on CBS News's "Face the Nation." 

