.START 

Consumer-electronics companies will sell a record $4.5 billion of color televisions, camcorders and videocassette recorders in the U.S. in the fourth quarter, up 9% from a year earlier, predicted Martin Holleran, president of Thomson Consumer Electronics' U.S. sales and marketing division. 

At a news conference yesterday, Mr. Holleran cautioned that few consumer-electronics companies would realize profits from those sales because the industry "remains constricted by excessive competition." 

Mr. Holleran estimated that 22 million color-television sets will be sold in 1989.
Since 96% of all U.S. households now own a color television set, he says, that means 24% of U.S. homes will have more than one color set.
Thomson, an Indianapolis-based subsidiary of Thomson S.A. of Paris, sells consumer electronics in the U.S. under the RCA and GE brands, which it acquired when it bought General Electric Co. 's consumer-electronics business last year. 

Mr. Holleran said industry color-television sales were up 12% through August, which he attributed, in part, to stable prices.
He said camcorder sales should reach 2.3 million units for 1989, up 13% from last year but below some analysts' projections.
Only VCR growth, he said, is likely to decline.
Continuing a strong trend, large-screen color television -- sets with screens bigger than 25 inches -- was the sales leader in the first half, running about 23% ahead of 1988 sales.
Large-screen sets with stereo sound have established an even higher growth rate, Mr. Holleran said; during the month of June alone large-screen stereo TV sales were 50% higher than a year earlier, he said. 

Looking toward 1990, Mr. Holleran predicted that the strong sales growth in large-screen and stereo-sound television sets would help the industry's bottom line because these sets, which feature the latest in technological gadgetry, have higher profit margins. 

Unit sales for VCR's -- now in the nine million to 10 million range -- will likely hold steady for the next few years, Mr. Holleran estimated, because videocassette recorders have become a "relatively mature product." However, he predicted that more of those sales could fall in the high end of the market. "As the demand for stereo television grows," Mr. Holleran said, "so will the demand for stereo VCRs." 

Regarding Thomson's RCA brand of products, Mr. Holleran said "we held our own" in market share for color television and camcorders and gained three points in VCR share during the first half.
The company this month launched a new advertising and merchandising campaign targeting traditional RCA customers as well as the "younger, growing video generation," he said. 

