.START 

Teleport Communications Group plans to expand its fiber-optic operations, building networks in San Francisco, Los Angeles and Houston. 

The closely held company, which has Merrill Lynch & Co. as its main investor, also said Illinois regulators have designated Teleport a public common carrier.
Teleport currently is negotiating to install a network in Chicago. 

The networks transmit voice, data and video messages across fiber-optic cables that usually are stretched under city streets.
At customer locations, multiplexers are installed to convert the electronic impulses from, say, a computer or facsimile machine into light images that can travel on the cables. 

Teleport expects to begin initial service on the three new networks by year end.
Each system requires "several million dollars" of startup investment and then additional outlays for expansion, says Robert C. Atkinson, Teleport's senior vice president for regulatory and external affairs. 

Financial-service and other companies that rely heavily on data transmission "must have diverse sources of telecommunications services," says Mr. Atkinson.
Networks such as Teleport's provide an alternative to those run by, for example, the regional Bell phone companies. 

Teleport already has a 180-mile network covering Manhattan, Queens, Staten Island and Brooklyn in New York City, plus parts of northern New Jersey.
It also operates an eight-mile network in Boston, which it expects to expand to 12 miles by year-end. 

Western Union Corp. has a 3% stake in the New York network and Fidelity Investments has 40% of the Boston operation.
Merrill Lynch accounts for the rest of the investment in those two cities and all of the funding for the three new networks. 

Teleport has named James Werdell vice president and regional general manager for the San Francisco and Los Angeles units.
Mr. Werdell formerly was general manager for San Francisco's Department of Telecommunications.
The company hasn't yet named a chief for the Houston network. 

