.START 

Compumat Inc. expects to report that net income rose between 1.7% and 12% in its third quarter ended Aug. 31, despite a 68% surge in sales, said Stuart E. Schwartz, executive vice president and chief financial officer. 

In an interview, Mr. Schwartz said the computer reseller expects third-quarter net income will be in the range of $190,000 to $210,000, or nine to 11 cents a share, on revenue of about $25 million.
In the year-earlier period -- with its results restated to reflect an acquisition -- Compumat had net of $186,774, or 10 cents a share, on revenue of $14.9 million. 

Mr. Schwartz said the latest earnings would have been about three cents a share higher, or about $255,000, except for expenses associated with a recently collapsed agreement under which Compumat was to have been acquired by an investment firm for $6.25 a share. 

The breakdown of that agreement last month, though it pushed the company's stock down about 35%, hasn't hurt Compumat's operations, Mr. Schwartz said. 

Compumat is "continuing to see a voracious appetite for our product" among the major companies where it focuses its sales efforts, said Mr. Schwartz. "We haven't seen anything to indicate" that a slowdown in personal-computer sales is imminent. 

But even though PC sales remain strong, profit margins, always thin for resellers, are being compressed even more by the intense competition among what he calls an oversupply of resellers and retailers.
Mr. Schwartz said a shakeout of the resale industry is under way and will probably last another 12 months. 

Compumat, which is "starting to see longer-term agreements from some customers" who used to shop around before each purchase, is benefiting from the lower per-sale costs of such pacts.
In addition, to boost margins, the company is emphasizing its post-sale services -- which are billable to customers and provide higher profits.
It can do so, Mr. Schwartz said, because of the increasing complexity of the applications for PCs. 

As part of its efforts to maintain profit margins, the company trimmed its selling, general and administrative expenses to 11.5% of revenue in the latest period from 13.4% in the second quarter. 

Mr. Schwartz declined to elaborate on why the planned buy-out of Compumat by the investor group Levine, Tessler, Leichtman & Co. derailed.
He reiterated that the pact hadn't been called off because of any perceived Compumat shortcoming.
He said no talks are currently under way with the Beverly Hills, Calif., company, which had indicated when the talks broke off that it remained interested in Compumat. 

