.START 

As Treasury secretary, Nicholas Brady stands at the center of economic policy making in the Bush administration.
During his first year in office, he's already author of two major initiatives: a massive plan to clean up the savings-and-loan industry and a new approach to the Third World debt crisis.
Moreover, he's recently announced plans to launch a major initiative to increase savings and to encourage long-term thinking in American business.
But despite these undertakings, Secretary Brady continues to be dogged by criticisms that he hasn't mastered the Treasury office or the policies he's promoting. 

Wall Street Journal reporters Alan Murray and David Wessel met with Mr. Brady on Friday, as he was both preparing for this week's meetings of international monetary officials here and working to win approval of the president's proposed capital-gains tax cut on the floor of the House.
The following are excerpts from the conversation. 

Q: Are you concerned by the current level of the dollar? 

A: There is a confidence around the world in the United States which has produced an increasing desire for dollars.
I think it's born of two general trends.
One is uneasiness about the uprisings in China, questions about how the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe changes are going to play out and a feeling that President Bush in his first eight months has been very successful.
The other is the economic situation in the United States, which some said would be headed for a downturn, but that doesn't seem to be the case. 

Many who look at the fundamentals feel that the dollar is higher than it should be for this reason.
This has a consequent effect on our trade deficit and the general level of our exports.
So those are the kinds of things we're thinking about. 

Q: You've been criticized for not making public statements more often to try to influence the dollar the way your predecessor, James Baker, frequently did.
Why aren't you more outspoken on the dollar? 

A: Policy coordination and intervention should be judged, in my mind, in terms of how the world economy is going.
And we have an unparalleled record of solid growth.
What would be added to the world economic well-being by additional comments on policy coordination and intervention?
It couldn't get much better than it is. 

Q: Your colleagues, Budget Director Richard Darman and Economic Adviser Michael Boskin, have indicated they'd like the Fed to bring down interest rates a little bit.
Do you agree with them? 

A: I think the president has said that our objective is solid growth in this country, while keeping a weather eye on inflation.
With regard to public statements on what the Fed is doing, I meet frequently with Chairman Greenspan, he is abundantly aware of my feelings, I make them very clear to him, and they are private. 

Q: Does the recent drop in the junk-bond market mean the day of reckoning is at hand for heavily indebted companies? 

A: I don't think so.
But on the other hand, whenever you have the leveraging that we've had in the last several years in our financial markets, individual situations are going to be put to the test.
And it shouldn't come as any surprise that there were going to be companies that can't stand the level of debt that's been placed on them. 

Q: Is there anything the government should do about it? 

A: I've said on any number of occasions that it bothers me when so much of our country's resources, be they physical or human, are dedicated to rearranging financial structures, as opposed to laying long-term plans, building plants, creating jobs, coming forward with new products.
This isn't any deep philosophical thought.
Nor is it new.
But it is what our main competitors around the world are doing.
You don't see convulsions of restructuring in West Germany, Japan, Taiwan, Korea and our other major competitors.
They are putting their assets to work. 

Q: The International Monetary Fund wants the U.S. and other countries to increase their financial commitment to the fund.
Nineteen of the 22 countries in the fund have agreed.
You have not. 

A: The United States has not. 

Q: We think of you as the United States.
What will it take to convince you that an increase in IMF resources is necessary?
A: The case is not clear that the IMF needs the additional liquidity at this time.
There is liquidity in the IMF at this time which is sufficient to do the job before them.
In the longer term, we are going to have to have a quota increase.
But the United States' question is one of timing. 

Also, many in Congress do not feel this is a high priority this year.
We have to take this into consideration. 

Q: A number of major banks have just made large increases to their reserves against developing-country debt.
Doesn't that suggest that they may no longer be willing to lend to Third World debtors?
And if so, who is going to provide those countries with the money they need? 

A: I don't feel that the recent increasing of reserves by United States banks is a bad sign.
To me, it's a good sign.
We've got stronger banks. 

Q: Senators Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas), Nancy Kassebaum (R., Kan.) and Robert Dole (R., Kan.) have all suggested a proposal to tax some short-term trades by pension funds to discourage market turnover.
Do you favor that idea? 

A: Well, it's one of a number of options that the Treasury is looking at.
There are disadvantages as well.
We pride ourselves in this country in the depth of our markets, the liquidity we provide to investors and corporations.
I don't think there is much question about the fact that if you put a tax on turnover you're going to decrease the liquidity and depth of markets.
So this is something that has to be studied. 

Q: Is it possibly something that you would propose as part of a revenue-neutral package to overhaul the corporate tax? 

A: You know, we are nowhere near coming to that kind of a determination.
We are looking at these things, which is the responsible thing to do. 

Q: The House of Representatives will soon have to make a choice between cutting taxes on capital gains and expanding tax breaks for individual retirement accounts.
You've said individual retirement accounts are a good idea.
Why shouldn't they go ahead and resume them now? 

A: When I mentioned a series of things that we thought the Treasury ought to be looking at when we were talking about lengthening the time horizons in this country and increasing the level of this country's competitiveness, IRAs was one of them.
At the time, I also talked about looking at the double taxation of dividends and some other things which would increase our world-wide competitive position with regard to the cost of capital. 

I also said that these things are expensive, and that we are in a time of budget crunch.
There is at least discussion that capital gains produces increased revenues for the budget deficit.
We think it does.
But no one with regard to IRAs says that this is the case. 

Q: Both the capital-gains proposal and the IRA proposal would undo key elements of the 1986 Tax Reform Act.
Do you think the tax-reform bill was a mistake, a flawed piece of legislation? 

A: No.
I don't think it was a mistake.
But I don't think that when it was passed anybody said we're never going to touch the tax code again.
In fact, we touch it, it's changed almost yearly. . . . So I think that's a red herring. 

Q: What in your view is the biggest risk to the economy right now? 

A: The matter that we are concentrating our efforts on is making sure we get the budget deficit continuing to move down. 

Q: Is the bitter partisan debate on the capital gains tax going to make it more difficult to get any kind of significant bipartisan budget agreement in the future? 

A: I don't think it's necessarily a partisan argument.
I would point out that the {tax} bill was reported out of the Ways and Means Committee with Democratic and Republican support. 

Q: Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski has been heavily criticized for the way he handled the capital gains tax cut in the committee.
What's your view? 

A: I think he was in an impossible position, and that half of his committee was on each side of the issue.
He simply decided to let the process work.
That's leadership in my opinion. 

