.START 

With Congress set for a brawl over taxes, it's time to burst a bubble.
Maybe a few tax-policy illusions will explode in the bargain. 

The "bubble" of course refers to the anomaly that some upper-middle-income taxpayers pay a marginal tax rate of 33%, while higher-income people pay a marginal rate of 28%.
Richard Gephardt and the Democratic leadership in Congress somehow think this anomaly offers a populist and tax-revenue bonanza, and so are proposing that the 33% rate apply to all levels of income. 

On inspection this argument fades as fast as bubble bath.
During the fight over tax reform we sweat blood trying to get people to understand the concept of marginal tax rates -- that is, the rate applied to each new dollar of income.
We suppose we should be gratified that the Gephardt Democrats now think the marginal rate is the rate.
Except that in terms of who pays more tax, what matters is average rates.
In this sense, there is no bubble. 

The bubble anomaly results because the 1986 tax bill established two basic rates, 15% and 28%.
Normally everyone would get the lower rate on the first bracket of income, but the tax writers decided to phase out this benefit as incomes increased.
A surtax is applied through the phase-out brackets -- $43,151 to $89,561 on individual returns and $71,901 to $149,250 on joint returns -- which results in a marginal rate of 33%.
However, some part of such income is taxed at only 15%, so the average rate remains below 28%.
After the phase-out, you have a flat tax, with the average rate and marginal rate both at 28%. 

Despite the marginal-rate bubble, in short, no taxpayer pays an average rate more than 28%.
Or to put it in Gephardtian class-warfare terms, the rich still pay more taxes than the middle class. 

We are not suggesting that the 33% rate isn't an extra burden on many taxpayers.
Marginal rates, not average rates, are what determine incentive effects and economic production.
We certainly would support closing the bubble with a 28% rate with no phase-out of lower brackets, resulting in a 28% top marginal rate and lower taxes for the middle class in general and two-income families in particular.
This did not happen in 1986 because of feared revenue losses based on static revenue estimates, though we doubt that losses would be severe in a real, dynamic world. 

The point to keep in mind now is that the Gephardt proposal, closing the bubble with a new 33% top rate, does nothing whatever for these taxpayers.
Their taxes would not be affected.
To be fair, they could take advantage of the individual retirement account he proposes, if they have any money left over to lock up for government-approved purposes.
But to be realistic, once rate boosts start, the definition of "rich" will soon start to drop.
On the historical evidence, it will come to include the two-income family making more than a Congressman's salary, currently $89,500. 

If Mr. Gephardt really cared about the middle class, he'd lower everyone's rate to 28%.
Instead, he wants to tax them as much, and others more.
It's a soap bubble that is sure to burst, leaving an unsightly film around the Democratic Party. 

*After deductions, including exemptions for dependents and earned income credit for low-income families. 

Source: Based on Internal Revenue Service tax tables, 1988 

