.START 

As Swiss military and political dignitaries gathered for a solemn ceremony near Lake Lucerne earlier this month, three hang gliders appeared overhead.
Their mission: to blanket the crowd, which was commemorating Switzerland's World War II mobilization, with pamphlets calling for abolition of the Swiss army. 

The pamphlets were dropped but missed their mark.
The gliders and their pilots splashed into the lake and had to be ingloriously fished out by fellow anti-militarists.
Many of the dignitaries had a good laugh. 

But the message was no laughing matter.
The Swiss are scheduled to vote Nov. 26 on the once-unthinkable idea of doing away with the citizen force that has backed Switzerland's armed neutrality since the 1815 Congress of Vienna. 

The government and the military are campaigning seriously to defeat the proposal, and polls indicate it has virtually no chance of passing.
But the vote itself represents a startling confluence of two institutions that form the very fabric of Swiss society, the army and the right to referendum. 

Leading the campaign in favor of the proposition is an organization called the Group for Switzerland Without an Army, which collected 111,300 signatures to force the referendum.
The group argues that having an army makes little sense in a world of nuclear weapons. 

"With or without an army," maintains Andi Gross, one of the group's organizers, "most Europeans could not live through a war in Europe.
There will be no winners, only losers.
The army is today, and in the future, useless." 

Moreover, advocates of the proposal argue that maintaining the army is an onerous chore for Switzerland's population of just over six million.
Every able-bodied man must serve part-time for 30 years, between the ages of 20 and 50; the Swiss army numbers 625,000 men and women. 

The group started its initiative because of repeated rejections of reforms in the system; the final straw came in 1984 when voters rejected a civil-service option for conscientious objectors.
Under Swiss law, anybody who refuses to serve in the army faces a jail sentence. 

"You can't have long hair for 30 years because every year it has to be cut off" when militiamen perform their annual military duties, complains Bruno Kaufmann, the anti-army group's secretary. 

Although he concedes that the initiative will fall short of passage, he says he thinks the vote will prompt some reforms "because for the first time there is a discussion of this sacred cow." Mr. Kaufmann adds: "In a few years, we may have come so far that the people will actually vote to get rid of {the army}." 

Indeed, the military is clearly concerned that the debate could create pressure to reduce spending on weapons.
Next year, for example, parliament is to consider a proposed purchase of 34 U.S. F/A18 Hornet fighter plans from McDonnell Douglas Corp. for SFr3 billion ($1.78 billion).
Switzerland spends about SFr2 billion on arms each year. 

Paul Wyss, a conservative member of parliament, dismisses anti-militarists' arguments that Swiss disarmament could contribute to world peace by influencing other nations to follow suit. "You might as well say that we should get rid of the police and fire brigades because that's going to stop crime and fires," he says. 

And anyway, the existence of the Swiss army ensures that "both the Warsaw Pact and NATO can operate from the standpoint that a march through Switzerland wouldn't be a stroll," contends Helmut Hubacher, president of the Social Democratic Party, which is part of the governing coalition.
His party is sharply divided over the issue and, rather than urging a vote against it, told members to vote as they wished, drawing a blast from conservative parties. 

For his part, Mr. Hubacher suggests that for the Swiss, the issue transcends military arguments.
As a heterogeneous confederation of 26 self-governing cantons, divided into four language groups, Switzerland needs a common denominator. "The army is a big sport and gymnastics association," Mr. Hubacher says, "a corset for a land like Switzerland." 

Switzerland hasn't been overrun since Napoleon, and it hasn't fought an offensive war in nearly 500 years.
Its policy of armed neutrality kept it out of both of this century's world wars. 

There is hardly a Swiss who isn't joining the debate.
Ernst Reichhart, who runs a house-cleaning business in Zurich, thinks that "it's a couple of crazies who have brought this initiative.
Why shouldn't we have an army?
But let them vote." Still, he says he would favor putting less of his tax money into sophisticated arms. "It could be done on a smaller scale," he suggests. 

And at a recent army exercise, a young Swiss soldier quietly made his point by thrusting an anti-army button into the hand of a surprised reporter.
Only a shadowy figure could be seen disappearing into the surrounding woods. 

Remarks a U.S. diplomat in Bern on Switzerland and its army: "Certainly, Switzerland is the only country with the chance to vote on having one." 

