.START 

Special promotions on cars boosted Americans' personal spending last month even as telephone strikes held down their income, a Commerce Department report shows. 

Growth in personal spending far outstripped growth in personal income in August, the department said.
Farm income also fell. 

Personal income grew 0.4% last month, to an annual rate of $4.466 trillion, after increasing 0.7% in July, the department said.
Personal spending jumped 0.9% during the month, to a $3.508 trillion annual pace, the largest increase since April.
The spending figure, which includes all outlays except interest payments, climbed 0.6% in July. 

"We think the data supports the pattern that's become accepted in the markets: that the third quarter is going to show a big rebound in consumption and a fairly healthy economy," said Michael Englund, research director at McGraw-Hill Inc. 's MMS International, an economic forecasting concern in Redwood City, Calif. 

But analysts generally expect the spending spurt to subside by the end of this month, since most of the growth came in automobile buying.
U.S. auto companies are preparing to introduce their 1990 models, at prices 5% to 8% higher than for the 1989 models, and they recently reported that their sales slackened in the first part of September. 

The spending surge last month sliced into personal savings.
After climbing in recent months, Americans' savings rate dropped to 5.4% of after-tax income from 5.8% in July. 

The report contained some sunny news on inflation.
A price measure tied to the department's personal-spending calculations declined 0.1% last month.
In July it rose 0.2%. 

While retail food prices rose a bit, prices to farmers fell, leading to the fifth straight month of decline in farm income.
The strikes at a number of regional telephone companies sharply curbed gains in wages and salaries, the chief components of Americans' income.
After shooting up 0.9% in July, wages and salaries only grew 0.3% in August.
Manufacturing payrolls rose 0.6%, buoyed by a step-up in automobile production. 

Here is the Commerce Department's latest report on personal income.
The figures are at seasonally adjusted annual rates in trillions of dollars. 

