.START 

{First of two articles on the religious right.} 

When the Rev. Jerry Falwell challenged religious conservatives to wake up and change history a decade ago, Mary Margaret Norman was one who answered his call. 

"Back then we were just a bunch of little, separate individuals," says Mrs. Norman, whose family cotton farm sits astride the West Texas plains outside the town of Post.
Mr. Falwell, she says, "gave us the idea" that religious conservatives, if united, could wield political power.
So she joined Moral Majority Inc., donating her energy to the tide of right-wing activism that swept through American politics. 

But a few years back, Mrs. Norman dropped out of Moral Majority.
Deluged by appeals from conservative causes, she decided instead to help a local Christian school train the next generation of fundamentalists. "It just seems like the need is greater here," she says. 

In the past decade, Moral Majority has been one of the major forces propelling America to the right.
The shift helped make abortion an evil word to many, school textbooks a censorship matter and racy advertising a reason for boycott.
But just now, when Mr. Falwell's footprints appear to be everywhere, he has retired from politics.
Last month he quietly dismantled Moral Majority.
He says its work is done and he is going back to preaching. "We have raised up a generation of fighters and leaders and activists," he says. 

In fact, Moral Majority was collapsing.
The weight of years of strident outbursts and embarrassments caused by zealous members overburdened it.
The competition, a raft of right-wing splinter organizations that successfully wooed once-loyal followers like Mrs. Norman, caught up.
Money stopped coming.
Moral Majority's annual revenue fell to barely $3 million last year from a peak of $11.1 million in 1984, says Mark DeMoss, Mr. Falwell's administrative aide.
Active donors dwindled to the point that the mailing list wasn't even paying for itself, according to an activist who has worked closely with Moral Majority.
Worse yet, Mr. Falwell was finding himself upstaged by younger leaders with trendier causes, such as Randall Terry with his militant anti-abortion group Operation Rescue. 

Without Mr. Falwell's generalship, the religious right has become an army of scattered battalions led by lesser-known but determined leaders, some of whose groups coalesce or split apart depending on the nature of the battle before them.
Many religious and political specialists are questioning what that means for the movement's future. "I think the New Right is going to remain in tough times.
Until they have an administration to organize against, they are just not going to cut it," says James Guth, a Furman University political scientist specializing in the religious right. 

Ten years ago, Mr. Falwell's was the only game in town.
Then, the religious right was so disparate and disorganized it didn't even have a name.
Its members were so frustrated by the Civil Rights movement, the sexual revolution and other events of the prior two decades that they seemed almost to be waiting for the likes of Mr. Falwell. 

He possessed a special blend of qualities that could bring them together.
Among the first television preachers, he had built one of the largest Sunday Schools in the nation, put in a decade on the lecture circuit and was heralded by Esquire magazine as the next Billy Graham. 

He drew his followings like an old-fashioned politician, by pressing flesh.
As a young preacher in the 1950s, he knocked on 100 doors a day, scouring working-class neighborhoods of Lynchburg, Va., for people overlooked by the other churches.
In building Moral Majority, as he had built his Thomas Road Baptist Church, he reached out to those on society's fringe, who may have felt estranged from other churches and institutions, and offered them a way back into the mainstream. 

In the church, Mr. Falwell preached self-esteem along with Scripture, to let his followers know they were as good as anyone else.
He urged them to shuck their leisure suits, stop saying "ain't" and overcome fear of financial success.
In Moral Majority, he lectured born-again Christians that they could be powerful if only they put aside their historical distaste for politics. 

Mr. DeMoss says Mr. Falwell has never troubled himself about social status.
But others who have known him believe his crusade to win respect for fundamentalists resulted partly from his attempts to overcome a childhood on the wrong side of the tracks in class-conscious Lynchburg, in a family tainted by drugs, alcohol and violence.
His father, Carey Falwell, was a restaurateur and bootlegger who killed his drug-addled younger brother in a gun battle, then died of cirrhosis of the liver when Mr. Falwell was 15.
When a teen-age Jerry Falwell began dating his future wife, Macel Pate, the girl's mother warned that the young man might turn out to be a "typical Falwell." 

But if Mr. Falwell was trying to make Moral Majority entirely respectable, he never quite succeeded.
Nor was he able to control it.
The organization wasn't ever tightly organized.
Usually it functioned simply as a mailing list of people who shared similar fears and hostilities toward modern society.
But those people, gathered mainly in independent, white Baptist churches in the South and other rural areas, followed the lead of their pastors, who followed the lead of Mr. Falwell.
His call for a sort of civil-rights revolution for fundamentalists was salve for a decade of pent-up conservative anger. 

While Mr. Falwell could get his following out for a vote, the group never entirely lost its backwoods image.
Mr. Falwell was deeply embarrassed when a Moral Majority member made headlines nine years ago by picketing a bakery that sold sexually explicit cookies.
The organization's New York director embarrassed it too, by saying that Jews have "almost a supernatural ability to make money." 

Strident activism hardly squared with the image of Moral Majority that Mr. Falwell had wanted to project, that of an increasingly sophisticated group of well-mannered, church-going middle-class citizens.
But, says James Price, a professor of religion at Lynchburg College, "The kind of crowd that was in on it was not the kind of crowd Jerry enjoys being with.
He enjoys putting on a tuxedo and going to these Republican functions." 

Sometimes Mr. Falwell's own comments and actions did Moral Majority more harm than good, too. 

In 1985, he caused an uproar when he called South African Archbishop Desmond Tutu a "phony." Last year, Moral Majority tried to rally evangelicals against the Civil Rights Restoration Act, warning the law could force churches to hire "a practicing, active homosexual drug addict with AIDS to be a teacher or youth pastor." Panicked churchgoers jammed Capitol Hill phone lines, embarrassing conservative Republicans supporting the bill.
Speaking from the Senate floor, Wyoming's Alan Simpson accused Moral Majority of conducting a "massive misinformation campaign." The act reinstated federal protection against discrimination on the basis of sex, race, age or disability that had been curtailed by a 1984 Supreme Court decision. 

While Mr. Falwell remained a hit on the lecture circuit and in the White House, he became something of a liability to other conservatives.
After he praised a Christian radio program called "Focus on the Family" a little too warmly last June, its officials worked to distance themselves from the comments. 

"Moral Majority took stands on South Africa.
Man, we don't do that] Our organization is concerned with the health of the nuclear family," says Tom Minnery, vice president of the Focus on the Family organization in Pasadena, Calif. 

As Moral Majority was losing ground, others were gaining it.
Conservatives who had dreamed of Falwell-like success were starting their own organizations. "He was like the ice-breaker and we were the little ships who followed him in," says Gary DeMar, a Falwell admirer who now heads a Christian publisher called American Vision. 

The result was a flowering of new organizations, which today define the landscape of the religious right.
They copied Moral Majority's direct-mail tactics, but often took a simpler approach, focusing on single targets: pornography, feminism, the American Civil Liberties Union or abortion. 

Hungry for cash and volunteers, they began recruiting from the same pool of conservative activists that had supplied Moral Majority.
In Lynchburg, a city of 70,000, at least three single-issue organizations sprang up.
Many organizations offered what Moral Majority had not been able to: a clearer focus, better organization and, in causes such as anti-abortion, a plan of action. 

Appeals went directly to many of Mr. Falwell's top people. "I got a constant flow of mailings from organizations that wanted me to be involved or to give money," says the Rev. Robert Moore, Moral Majority's former Tennessee director.
He quit three years ago, to supervise his church's move to Mississippi. 

He wasn't alone in leaving.
Last year, Moral Majority got a glimpse of its own weaknesses when it helped sponsor "Family Forum," a rally of right-wing groups in Atlanta intended to remind the Democratic Convention of this particular constituency.
Though organizers expected 1,000 participants, barely two dozen registered.
Mr. Falwell had to telephone dozens of pastors himself to drum up enough support so the show could go on. 

Even then, Moral Majority was soundly upstaged by a new group, Operation Rescue, which drew all the crowds and publicity by launching sit-in protests at Atlanta's abortion clinics. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Falwell has a new project: to turn his Liberty University in Lynchburg into a fundamentalist institution capable of influencing American culture in a broad way. 

He founded the college 18 years ago in a couple of spare rooms at Thomas Road Baptist Church.
It has just enrolled 8,000 students in fall classes.
Its president, A. Pierre Guillermin, is a graduate of fundamentalist Bob Jones University, in Greenville, S.C. 

Like Bob Jones, Liberty enforces a strict code of student conduct.
Men wear shirts and ties to class.
Alcohol is forbidden and its use is ground for exclusion.
Other no-nos are "witchcraft, seances, {and} Ouija boards." 

By the next century, Mr. Falwell is predicting, students and faculty of Liberty "will have the kind of impact that Harvard has had on this country." 

