.START 

In a precedent-setting decision, a federal judge ruled that bankruptcy law effectively allows Public Service Co. of New Hampshire to circumvent state regulation of its electricity rates and other matters. 

The ruling by Judge James E. Yacos in Manchester, N.H., marks the first time a court has ruled that bankruptcy law takes precedence over state regulatory law, and thus could affect any future bankruptcy-court filings by utilities. 

Because PS of New Hampshire is the first major utility to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law protection in about 50 years, the case has been closely watched. 

The ruling on Friday -- which the state of New Hampshire said it will appeal -- is an important victory for PS of New Hampshire and its creditors.
The major obstacle to a reorganization plan has been a dispute over rates, with the state contending that the utility wants future increases that are too high.
The state has vowed to use its regulatory powers to block unacceptable increases. 

Federal regulators are generally more lenient in granting rate increases.
Thus, in ruling that PS of New Hampshire can seek to set up a holding company that would be regulated by a federal agency -- without first getting the approval normally required by state regulators -- the judge has effectively given the utility the upper hand in negotiations. 

Judge Yacos said bankruptcy law "is clear, is unambiguous and was intended by Congress to pre-empt local {regulatory} statutes" from being used as an "effective veto" over reorganization plans.
Congress reduced powers of state regulatory agencies to control reorganization plans, he added, because "it is hard to negotiate when one of the parties trundles a cannon up to the negotiating field 'just in case. '" 

The judge, in another barb aimed at the state, said Congress was wise in permitting circumvention of state regulators because "there are enormous political pressures to use every regulatory device" to make creditors and other parties agree to the "lowest possible rates." 

PS of New Hampshire filed for bankruptcy-law protection in January 1988 because it was unable to meet interest payments on its $1.72 billion in debt, much of which was taken on to finance its 35.6% stake in the long-delayed Seabrook, N.H., power plant. 

A major problem for the company has been the fact that, under New Hampshire law, it can't charge ratepayers for its investment in Seabrook until the plant begins operations.
Federal regulations, however, permit some of the costs to be recovered prior to operation, and thus a switch to federal regulation would work in the state's favor. 

The decision "most definitely shifts the balance of power," Gary Hindes, chairman of Delaware Bay Co., an investment firm that is a major unsecured creditor of PS of New Hampshire. "This is akin to the Texas Supreme Court ruling against Texaco in the Pennzoil case." 

PS of New Hampshire said it wouldn't immediately seek to switch to federal regulation. "It's our intention to continue negotiating with the state in hopes of achieving a mutually agreeable solution.
We're not going to try to ram it down their throats," a spokesman for the utility said. 

However, state officials said they won't make any further concessions to PS of New Hampshire and creditors. "We're not going to agree to any more {rate increases} now because of this decision than we would have agreed to without it," said Larry Smukler, senior assistant attorney general. 

In addition to appealing the decision, the state will consider a variety of options, including the purchase of all or part of PS of New Hampshire under a new state law permitting such takeovers by eminent domain.
The decision, Mr. Smukler added, "short circuits the process that was leading toward resolution of this bankruptcy . . . Public Service wants all the benefits of a monopoly without any regulation." 

Judge Yacos had held off ruling on the federal law vs. state law issue in hopes that a compromise could be reached.
But while differences have been narrowed, none of the four reorganization plans filed in the case has the support of all parties. 

The state initially endorsed a plan by Northeast Utilities, Hartford, Conn., to acquire PS of New Hampshire for $1.9 billion and raise rates 5.5% annually for seven years.
But then it said it preferred a newer bid from New England Electric System, Westboro, Mass., for $2 billion because it would raise rates just 4.8% annually over the same period. 

Both of those plans, however, are opposed by creditors and shareholders, and the judge said Friday that he wasn't going to let the state conduct a "reverse auction." 

Creditors and shareholders have given their support to an internal reorganization filed by PS of New Hampshire.
The plan, which would permit it to emerge from Chapter 11 proceedings as an independent company, values the company at $2.2 billion and required 5.5% annual increases for seven years.
Investors have also indicated they might agree to a proposal by United Illuminating Co. to merge with PS of New Hampshire, also valued at $2.2 billion and requiring similar rate increases. 

The state, however, objects to the internal reorganization because it says such a plan would have the possibility of higher increases after 10 years. 

