.START 

The mistrial in Texas's largest bank-fraud case has prompted a federal investigation of possible jury tampering, according to people familiar with the inquiry. 

The mistrial, declared on Sept. 15 after the jury said it was hopelessly deadlocked, capped a six-month trial of seven men accused of defrauding savings and loan associations of more than $100 million.
Federal prosecutors intend to retry the case. 

The Federal Bureau of Investigation opened its inquiry into the suspected tampering shortly after the mistrial was declared by U.S. District Judge Sam Cummings of Lubbock, Texas, say the individuals familiar with the investigation.
Judge Cummings also placed the jurors under a gag order, which has been challenged by lawyers for the Dallas Morning News. 

An FBI spokesman in Dallas would neither confirm nor deny the inquiry. 

The jury of 11 women and one man deliberated about 15 days before the mistrial was declared and indicated at least once that they were deadlocked in their deliberations on the 88-count indictment.
The jury was understood to be split 11-1, with one juror reportedly refusing to discuss anything but an innocent verdict for all defendants on all charges. 

Defense lawyers who could be reached for comment said they were unaware of the investigation. 

"I certainly am unaware of any improprieties with respect to the jury and would hope that the FBI is not acting in response to the jury's not being able to reach a verdict," said Cheryl B. Wattley, who represents D.L. "Danny" Faulkner, one of two real-estate developers charged in the bank-fraud case. 

In other developments, U.S. Attorney Marvin Collins of Dallas, whose assistants prosecuted the case, filed court papers supporting Judge Cummings's unusual gag order on the jurors. 

"While I think it is a close question under the First Amendment, I do believe a trial judge has broad powers to limit pretrial publicity," Mr. Collins said. 

Defendants' lawyers, who previously sought a change of venue from Dallas because of pretrial publicity, filed a response supporting the Dallas Morning News in its request to have the gag order on the jurors lifted by the federal appeals court. 

SHAREHOLDER SEEKS to hold Home Shopping executives personally liable for $100 million verdict. 

In July, a state-court jury in Clearwater, Fla., found that Home Shopping Network Inc. defamed GTE Corp., when the company filed suit blaming sagging sales on phone foul-ups by 

In its successful countersuit, GTE said the video retailer's woes were because of uncontrolled growth, coupled with mismanagement and poor planning by Home Shopping's chairman, Roy M. Speer, and its president, Lowell W. Paxson.
The jury award hit Messrs.
Speer and Paxson for $40 million each and assessed an additional $20 million against Home Shopping. 

Early this month, Nancy Lloyd, a Home Shopping shareholder, sued in Delaware's Chancery Court asking that Messrs.
Speer and Paxson be forced to pay all the damages out of their own pockets -- not those of the company. 

Ms. Lloyd, who owns 300 Home Shopping shares, seeks a court order that would block Home Shopping's board from indemnifying Messrs.
Speer and Paxson for any of the damages and force them to pay the entire $100-million amount themselves. 

"We don't think Home Shopping Network should have to pay for it," said Susan Schneider Thomas, one of Ms. Lloyd's two attorneys. "We think Paxson and Speer should pay for it." 

Nando DiFilippo, Home Shopping's general counsel, called the suit "ill-advised and premature," saying the company is confident the $100-million award will be vacated after post-trial motions or overturned on appeal. 

KEY FEDERAL COURT ruling limits doctors' liability in AIDS cases. 

A federal judge in New York ruled that doctors don't have to warn patients who previously had transfusions that they may have received blood tainted by the acquired immune deficiency syndrome virus. 

Andree Walton Hoemke, who contracted AIDS after receiving a blood transfusion in 1981, sued her doctors, New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and the hospital's blood bank in 1988. 

Martin Wendel, a partner at Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, the New York law firm that represented the doctors, said Ms. Hoemke's claim was novel. 

"If the court had granted the plaintiff's theory, in effect hundreds of thousands of people in the city would have been told {by their doctors} of the risk of getting AIDS and there would have been pandemonium," Mr. Wendel said.
In addition, he said, "You would have had thousands of lawsuits by people with AIDS who couldn't pay their medical costs." 

V. Elizabeth Grayson, of Witherspoon & Grayson in San Francisco, who filed the suit, said she wanted the court to apply precedents set in cases involving intra-uterine devices.
Judges have ruled that women who were harmed by IUD birth-control devices should have been contacted by their physicians once the risks were discovered. 

The suit against the hospital and New York Blood Center is still pending. 

U.S. LAW FIRMS reopen China offices.
International deal-making is bouncing back in Beijing after the massacre in Tiananmen Square in early June, and it hasn't taken long for law firms to reopen their Chinese offices. 

"We go back when our clients go back," said Charles Conroy, partner-in-charge of Baker & McKenzie's Asian practice. 

Chicago-based Baker & McKenzie reopened its Beijing, Shanghai and Canton offices at the end of June, said Mr. Conroy.
The firm has seven lawyers in China, ten in Hong Kong and about 30 lawyers firmwide who represent foreign investors in China. 

Graham & James, of San Francisco, had one lawyer, William Wang, in Beijing during the Tiananmen Square conflict.
Mr. Wang elected to stay, said Pitman Potter, a partner who left and returned by mid-June.
Mr. Potter said the conflict had less of an impact on foreign enthusiam for investment than the Chinese government's tightening of its capital expenditures. 

Lawyers from Skadden, Arp, Slate, Meagher & Flom have also returned to Beijing but only to a hotel or a client's office, says Handel Lee, an associate who returned from Beijing early this month. 

Artillery fire broke the windows of the World Trade Center, where the firm had offices.
Chinese officials say the building won't reopen until next spring. 

Shattered windows notwithstanding, Mr. Lee says business is "getting back to where it was quite quickly." 

OBERMAIER CONFIRMED as U.S. attorney: The U.S. Senate confirmed the nomination of Otto Obermaier to be the new U.S. attorney in Manhattan.
Mr. Obermaier, 52 years old, is a partner at Obermaier, Morvillo & Abramowitz, a white-collar-defense firm in New York.
Before entering private practice, he served as an assistant U.S. attorney, chief trial counsel for the Securities and Exchange Commission in New York, and assistant counsel to the Knapp Commission, which investigated police corruption in New York in the early 1970s.
As U.S. attorney, in a post vacated when Rudolph Giuliani decided to run for mayor of New York, Mr. Obermaier will be in charge of a continuing investigation of alleged insider trading, stock parking and market manipulation on Wall Street. 

A FORMER Warner Communications Inc. official who is executive publisher of Spin Magazine joined the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz & Mendelsohn in an "of counsel" capacity.
David Horowitz has worked as a consultant in the communications industry and financial-services field since 1985.
He was previously chief executive officer of MTV Networks Inc. and a member of Warner's office of the president and co-chief operating officer. 

