.START 

The challenge of managing a high-growth, innovative or creative industry has not been handled well by many of the start-up companies of the 1980s.
But even one of their elders is finding that the techniques that helped get it to the top are different from those needed to stay there. 

Out of the clutter of the computer revolution of the 1970s came Digital Equipment Corp., which rose to the powerful number two slot by developing a management system modeled after one often used at research institutions like the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

Under the system, which continues to this day, every employee is part of a group.
Each group has a leader, a project and a budget.
The group is free to spend its budget with virtually no upper-management control, provided it stays within its allotment.
Every once in a while, a group produces something wondrous and its budget is increased.
The groups that don't produce anything of value are left alone for a long while.
If they still don't produce, they are disbanded and their people join other expanding groups.
Digital's approach is: Don't get organized.
Don't manage.
Don't control.
Just let it happen. 

This decentralized management system has kept the company far ahead of the pack in terms of product development, which continues apace.
A byproduct, however, is that Digital employs large numbers of less than essential people.
The personnel costs are considerable, but the returns no longer justify them.
Inevitably, the hands-off management system that produced unparalleled growth and creativity also has produced a country-club atmosphere.
Many employees, instead of fighting their way through the current tough times, are just putting in their time until tough times are over (whenever that may be]).
The current challenge is what to do now that Digital's spectacular growth curve is leveling off.
Earnings for the past four quarters were down 19%, 12%, 11% and 16%, respectively, from the same periods a year earlier. 

Digital is trying hard to cut costs without violating its commitments to its creative staff.
A hiring frost has turned into a deep freeze.
But at the height of the company's ascent, managers over-hired by about 50% (out of a total world-wide work force of 125,000).
Attrition cannot bring such vast numbers down to size in any reasonable period. 

Last month, management set a goal of reducing administrative jobs by 10,000 in 24 months.
The danger of this strategy is that top-notch workers, unwilling to forgo promotions into administration, will quit.
All salaries have been capped, and there's a hold on upper-level stock options as well.
Early-retirement packages have not yet been offered, but that strategy often weakens an organization considerably, since management can't make the offer only to those it wants to leave. 

Finally, thousands of manufacturing people have been sent to sales.
This tactic is seldom effective; industrial musical chairs does not cut costs, nor does it produce new business.
Furthermore, this move emphasizes another weak link in Digital's management philosophy: allowing the hands-off management system to work its way into the sales organization.
What was right for managing creative growth turned out to be very wrong for sales management, where no innovative approach was needed.
In sales, the Marine Corps model (get the best people and work 'em by the numbers) -- not the laid-back model -- works best. 

While Digital's products have been outstanding, they have not been matched with a sales team of equal quality.
So long as the products stood out so much that they practically sold themselves, this wasn't much of a problem.
But as the competition edges closer and closer to Digital's level, lack of expertise in basic sales management is becoming ever more apparent.
And that cannot be remedied overnight. 

The prescription is maddeningly simple.
The late chairman of Parade Magazine, Arthur "Red" Motley -- who coined the phrase "Nothing Happens Till Somebody Sells Something" -- set forth the formula for success in sales in just 15 words: "Know your customer.
Know your product.
See a lot of people.
Ask all to buy." 

Meeting this challenge is well beyond Digital's current sales management group.
Under ideal conditions, it would take a minimum of 18 months and more like 36 months to produce an effective selling team. 

At some point, something must give.
The deficiency in sales management is just about an insurmountable obstacle.
But there is a greater lesson from Digital's recent travails: Despite the success of a particular management technique, a company must always have the flexibility to alter that technique as conditions change.
The proof of Digital's high-growth strategy now awaits the outcome of its struggle to deal with a major decline. 

Mr. Falvey, a writer based in Londonderry, N.H., teaches sales management at the University of Massachusetts, Boston. 

Swiss companies acted legally in helping Libya build a chemical plant that the U.S. claimed could make poison gas, the Swiss Federal Prosecutor's Office said. 

A furor arose over the plant late last year when the U.S. said it had evidence the factory was about to produce chemical weapons.
Switzerland's investigation was touched off by a West German prosecutor's request to probe links of Swiss companies to the project. 

Several Swiss companies did provide financing and equipment for the plant, the prosecutor's office said.
But it said the companies didn't violate laws that bar military exports to areas of conflict or crisis. 

The prosecutor's office said it was dropping its investigation. 

Two members of the Nobel Literature Prize selection committee quit over the body's refusal to speak out against threats to British author Salman Rushdie, and a third quit over an undisclosed matter, but the committee is refusing to let them go.
The two quitting over the Rushdie matter were novelists Kerstin Ekman and Lars Gyllensten; the other resigning member was poet Werner Aspenstrom.
But Sture Allen, chairman of the Sweden's Academy of Letters, said: "Members serve for life so we cannot grant their resignation requests." 

Van Gogh may have died broke, but the Netherlands has budgeted $12.5 million for an exhibition of his paintings to mark the 100th anniversary of his death next year.
The exhibit will fill two museums and will include some 40 oil paintings and 120 sketches from abroad. "It is probably the last time these works will be brought together, because it is complicated to bring them together and traveling is not good for paintings," said Frits Becht, managing director of the Van Gogh 1990 Foundation. 

Peru's news agency quoted President Alan Garcia as saying his country would be willing to lift its four-year-old halt on debt payments to the International Monetary Fund if Peru received large new loans.
President Garcia reportedly said Peru could resume interest payments if it won a $500 million standby loan plus an $800 million bridging loan to cover its debts to the IMF. Later, in Lima, armed critics of the IMF invaded the offices of Agence France-Presse and United Press International but left after painting slogans on the walls. 

"I don't want to say it's an industry, but almost," said Tamar Leshem, head of Tel Aviv's independent Office for Human Rights.
The almost-industry: Israeli couples traveling by plane or ship to Cyprus to be united by civil marriage.
The reason: In Israel, marriages may be performed only by religious authorities -- Jewish, Moslem, Christian or Druse -- and not everybody likes that idea.
In Cyprus's capital of Nicosia, Deputy Mayor C.S. Christopoulos estimated he has married Israelis at some 230 civil weddings over the past three years. 

Long in the throes of armed conflict, Eritrea is once again coming to grips with another woe: drought.
Having received only 20% of expected rainfall in June and July, the northern province of Ethiopia now is seeing a major failure of its current crops.
Preliminary estimates by the Eritrean Relief Association indicate that 1.6 million people in the province will need 359,000 metric tons of emergency food to ward off famine over the coming year. 

A growing number of Europeans see the electric car as the vehicle of the future -- if major problems can be resolved. 

"We aim to introduce several million electric-driven cars by the end of this century," European Community Transport Commissioner Karel van Miert said while attending a seminar of electric-transport experts in Bruges, Belgium. 

Fans of electric cars say they are clean, quiet and economical.
A disadvantage, said David Porter of Britain's Central Electricity Generating Board, is "their range, which is typically only 40 miles.
After that, they must be recharged for eight hours." Another drawback is that they cost more to build than gasoline-powered cars. 

Gaston Maggetto, professor of electrical engineering at the Flemish Free University in Brussels, said the way to get the cost down is "political action, because the pollution-free aspect of the electric car is an advantage to the whole community, not to the individual." 

South African censors relaxed a three-year ban on a biography of jailed black nationalist leader Nelson Mandela.
Mary Benson's "Nelson Mandela," censored immediately after publication in 1986, will be available for study at university libraries but still can't be released for purchase or lending. . . . Korea's government-owned phone company told National Assembly investigators it made an additional $59.7 million over the past seven years from its pay phones that don't return change. 

