.START 

Airlie Group L.P. said Dallas investor Morton H. Meyerson has withdrawn as a general partner because of "differences in business philosophy" with fellow general partner Dort A. Cameron III. Airlie also said that, as a result of that split, Fort Worth, Texas, investor Richard E. Rainwater has withdrawn as a limited partner. 

None of the three could be reached for comment but the split between Messrs.
Meyerson and Cameron was described as "amicable" in a news release by Airlie.
The investment partnership is based in Fort Worth and in Greenwich, Conn.
Airlie officials wouldn't comment on whether they planned to maintain a Fort Worth office. 

Fort Worth attorney Steve Robinson, who represents Mr. Rainwater, said the departure of his client, a long-time friend of Mr. Meyerson's, was also friendly. 

Airlie is an outgrowth of Investment L.P., a profitable investment partnership founded by Mr. Rainwater and Mr. Cameron in 1984.
Investment L.P. was part of a shareholder group that won a 1988 proxy battle for control of Denver-based Consolidated Oil & Gas Inc. Mr. Robinson said Mr. Rainwater has withdrawn from managing Investment L.P. but will remain as a limited partner. 

Although Investment L.P. is no longer seeking new ventures, Mr. Robinson said Airlie would continue to do so. "The participation that Mr. Rainwater had in Airlie, while significant, as a percentage of the whole thing was fairly small," Mr. Robinson said. "Airlie will continue to be actively looking for new investments.
It's just that Mr. Cameron will be doing it." 

Earlier this year, Airlie was among the investors backing Pan Am Corp. 's unsuccessful bid to acquire NWA Inc., parent of Northwest Airlines. 

Airlie is said to have amassed funding of more than $1.6 billion since it was founded a year ago by Mr. Cameron, a former aide to Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. junk-bond chief Michael Milken, and Mr. Meyerson, who was president of Electronic Data Systems when H. Ross Perot owned the company. 

In addition to Mr. Rainwater, other Airlie investors included brothers Sid and Lee Bass of Fort Worth and the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States.
They will remain as limited partners, Mr. Robinson said. 

