.START 

Senate Finance Committee Chairman Lloyd Bentsen sent chills through the suspender-clad warriors of Wall Street last week by suggesting he might propose a new tax on short-term trades by pension funds.
Those mammoth pools of capital, now tax-exempt, hold more than a quarter of all the stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange, and account for an even greater share of daily stock transactions.
A tax on their trades would transform the nation's financial markets, as well as raise money for the Treasury. 

The Senator's trial balloon probably won't fly this year.
It's a clear violation of the President's "no-tax" pledge.
Moreover, it's a complicated proposal that cannot -- and should not -- be pushed through Congress during the year-end rush to adjourn. 

But next year is another matter.
Top Bush administration officials have privately been discussing a similar pension tax proposal as part of a broad plan to overhaul the corporate tax.
President Bush's economic trio -- Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, Economic Adviser Michael Boskin and Budget Director Richard Darman -- are all sympathetic to the pension-tax idea.
Indeed, it could surface as early as next year's State of the Union address. 

The administration's plan, still vague, would bundle the pension tax and other corporate tax changes into a single package.
Some of the changes under study, such as a new deduction for dividends paid out by corporations, would drain revenue from the Treasury.
Others, like the pension tax, would raise revenue.
Taken together, they would be a wash, enabling President Bush to say he's sticking to his no-new-tax pledge. 

The point of all this, in the words of Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, is to "encourage Americans to take the long-term view in their economic thinking." Pension fund managers have got a reputation in recent years for buying and selling huge blocks of stock at the drop of a hat.
Some analysts say that increases stock market volatility; panicky pension funds are frequently blamed for turning a stock market correction on Oct. 19, 1987, into a full-fledged rout.
More importantly, critics charge that hyperactive pension funds force corporate managers to focus on short-term performance, and ignore investments that pay off in the long-haul. 

The drive to damp pension fund trading is especially strong in the corporate community, where pension funds are blamed for fueling the takeover trend.
Andrew Sigler, chief executive of Champion International Corporation, has argued before his Business Roundtable colleagues that pension funds have a "short-term" investment orientation which "increases the pressure on corporate managers to produce immediate results, leading to actions which can endanger our country's future global competitiveness." 

Even a few Wall Street executives share Mr. Sigler's concerns, fearing that elephantine pension funds are scaring small investors away from the market.
In testimony to the House Ways and Means Committee last February, for instance, Prudential-Bache Securities Chairman George Ball proposed imposing a 5% surcharge on all short-term stock gains, including those by tax-exempt pensions. "The collective lust for immediate financial gratification has fostered an unhealthily promiscuous approach to investing," he said. "Fully curbing that lust may be impossible, but it can be bridled." 

Moreover, support for taxing short-term trades by pension funds is growing on Capitol Hill.
Last week, Republican Senator Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas introduced a bill that would slap a 10% tax on capital gains earned by pension funds on assets held less than 30 days, and a 5% tax on assets held less than 180 days.
The plan's co-sponsor is Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole. 

Despite the growing support, however, the obstacles in the way of the pension-tax bandwagon are huge.
Wall Street will howl.
Labor unions may attack the idea by arguing it raids the retirement nest eggs of middle-income Americans.
Democrats are sure to feast on the idea of Republicans cutting corporate taxes while taking a bite out of the working man's pension. 

But that's only partly true.
More than two-thirds of nation's workers who are covered by pensions are in so-called defined benefit plans.
Under those plans, the retiree is entitled to a certain benefit, regardless of how much the pension fund earns.
Indeed, since 1980, corporations have made billions of dollars by taking money back from pension plans that are overfunded. 

More troublesome may be the opposition from state and local government officials, who are sure to attack any plan that taxes their massive public-employee pension fund.
State and local officials are a potent lobbying force in Washington. 

In addition, it's far from clear that the pension fund tax would have the beneficial effects its proponents claim.
Many market analysts say it would simply make financial markets less liquid, and thus less efficient. "There's not much sense in it," says Merton Miller, professor of finance at the University of Chicago. "It's not all that clear it's in the social interest to stop this shifting around of assets." 

Free-marketeers like Mr. Miller might have held sway a year ago, when Ronald Reagan was in power.
But President Bush is more willing than his predecessor to use the government's power to engineer economic change.
As a result, the pension-fund tax may well find its way onto the administration's second-year agenda. 

