.START 

Jaguar PLC, with few defenses to ward off Ford Motor Co. 's unfriendly advance, appears to be pinning its hopes on finding a friendly partner. 

The board of Britain's leading luxury-car maker confirmed late Friday that Ford's surprise bid for a minority stake was "unwelcome." Jaguar directors, after their regular monthly meeting, also vowed to "pursue plans that would preserve Jaguar's independence." A Jaguar spokesman said, "That means they have some ideas in their heads, but they aren't prepared to say what it {the defense plan} is." 

Ford caught Jaguar off guard Tuesday by disclosing intentions to buy as much as 15% of Jaguar's shares -- the maximum permitted under British government restrictions.
Jaguar's best bulwark looks like a friendly tie-up with General Motors Corp., through a substantial minority holding or a joint venture, say several takeover experts and industry analysts.
During the weekend, the British news media speculated on an imminent Jaguar-GM alliance, giving GM a minority holding that eventually would rise to no more than 30%. 

A rival car manufacturer's purchase of a sizable Jaguar stake "might well do" the trick for Jaguar, said an individual knowledgeable about the situation. "If two people are interested in this thing {Jaguar}, it could drive up the price quite dramatically." Indeed, Jaguar's share price is zooming.
It soared 33 pence, to 581 pence ($9.18) a share, this year's highest level, in late trading Friday on London's Stock Exchange, after gaining 143 pence during the previous three days. 

A partnership with GM could offer Jaguar another line of defense against Ford. "It might give Ford antitrust problems if it tried to acquire a company which had a major joint venture with GM," said Jeffrey Gordon, a takeover lawyer at the London office of the U.S. law firm Mayer, Brown & Platt.
Mr. Gordon isn't involved in the Jaguar matter.
But there is a hitch.
It isn't clear how badly GM wants to strike a deal with Jaguar.
Like Ford, GM executives have held fruitless talks with Jaguar Chairman Sir John Egan.
The tough-minded Jaguar boss probably hopes he can woo GM by offering more attractive terms.
But with its car-market share sagging in the U.S., GM doesn't need another problem child.
In addition, the giant auto maker generally avoids bidding wars. 

Alternatively, Jaguar could join forces with one of Ford's European competitors, such as West Germany's Volkswagen AG, Sweden's AB Volvo and Peugeot S.A. of France.
But all three car makers have denied market rumors about their possible interest in Jaguar.
Analysts reckon Jaguar's value in a takeover fight lies between #6 and #10 a share -- or between about #1 billion ($1.58 billion) and #1.8 billion. 

The British government limits will keep Ford a minority shareholder for more than a year, allowing Jaguar breathing space to construct defensive walls.
The restrictions prevent any outside investor from buying more than 15% of Jaguar shares without permission until Dec. 31, 1990. 

But unless Jaguar lands a rich and protective "sugar daddy," it may have difficulty finding an alternative defense strategy, takeover specialists said.
A political campaign against Ford as an unwanted U.S. invader could backfire. 

Jaguar "doesn't want to whip up anti-American feeling if it's trying to do a deal with General Motors," said Daniel Jones, a professor of motor-industry management at the University of Cardiff business school in Wales. 

Ford's active courting of British government officials is costing Jaguar some potentially powerful allies.
On Thursday, for instance, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said Ford's stake purchase should strengthen the luxury-car maker.
Many auto-industry watchers say Mrs. Thatcher may relax the government's antitakeover barrier prematurely if a full bid would assure Jaguar's financial security. 

Also, Jaguar's union leaders, unhappy with Sir John's anti-union sentiments, are willing to embrace Ford because they fear Jaguar is too small to survive alone. 

On Friday night, Jaguar executives tried to assuage unionists' fears by telling them Jaguar's long-term survival plan involves a collaborator.
But one union officer said he and other auto-industry union representatives will confer with Ford officials tomorrow about the U.S. car maker's plans for Jaguar. 

In its current financial dilemma, Jaguar also can't easily rally support from institutional shareholders.
Two weeks ago, largely blaming setbacks in the U.S. market, the company reported a 94% plunge in pretax profit for the first half. 

Some form of corporate restructuring might fail to fend off Ford as well. "I doubt {Jaguar} shareholders will be very enamored of a restructuring" especially when "they see a possible bid by Ford or GM," said Mr. Gordon, the lawyer. 

A management buy-out also seems unfeasible. "The sums involved just don't stack up," said Bob Barber, a car-industry analyst at British brokers James Capel & Co. 

