.START 

Fifteen months after American International Group agreed to become the anchor tenant in a major development proposed for downtown Brooklyn, the company has changed its mind. 

The insurance company will remain in its lower Manhattan headquarters, where expansion space has recently become available, and look for another Manhattan location as well. 

By not relocating 2,000 employees to Brooklyn, AIG has slowed New York City's efforts to develop boroughs other than Manhattan.
But AIG's decision, based in part on the softening value of Manhattan real estate, spotlights a trend that may be beneficial to the city in the long run. 

"A little slowdown in the real estate market in terms of price escalation can be good for business because it makes firms stay and grow," says William Hedman, senior managing director at Edward S. Gordon, a New York real estate services firm. 

Adds Lloyd Lynford, president of Reis Reports, a real estate market research firm in New York: "We're seeing the positive flip side of the decline of real estate values in the aftermath of October 1987.
People tended to dwell on employee cutbacks, office vacancies and a decline in rents, without considering the positive impact these can have on New York's long range competitiveness." 

According to Mr. Lynford, New York City rents have declined an average of $2 a square foot, with most of the drop in lower Manhattan.
But the real change is in the value of concession packages landlords give tenants.
Owners typically give tenants a free rent period and money toward interior improvements, a package worth between about 12% and 18% of the asking rent.
There's been an increase of five to seven percentage points in the value of those concessions, Mr. Lynford says. 

Worries that corporations would flee New York began at the beginning of the decade, Mr. Lynford explains.
Experts feared average rental prices for Manhattan office space would reach $60 a square foot by 1984.
Today average office rents in Manhattan are $37 a square foot.
Companies moving just across the East or Hudson rivers an can expect to pay between $15 and $20 a square foot for office space. 

Companies that would have felt pressure to move to Brooklyn, New Jersey, or out of the metropolitan area are willing to pay the smaller premium to be in Manhattan.
Many businesses that might have been expected to flee older properties in the financial district for midtown are either renewing leases or remaining in the Wall Street area because rents are more reasonable. 

The latter is particularly true of law firms -- the biggest space user in New York -- because partners' incomes are directly affected by the firm's bottom line.
Among those law firms that have remained in lower Manhattan are Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam & Roberts; Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton; and Carter Ledyard & Milburn. 

In a soft market, landlords and tenants are more eager to make deals. "The good landlords who understand how things work in the long run want to button down their buildings," says Howard P. Malloy, a senior vice president of Helmsley-Spear Inc.
He says some owners have extended leases well before their expiration date for the security of having a long-term tenant. 

Industry analysts estimate there are about 11 million square feet of vacant office space in lower Manhattan, up from about six million in 1988.
Much of that space is in older buildings, out of sync with the needs of computerized financial services tenants. 

Companies such as AIG, however, are finding they can make do in renovated older buildings.
The firm scuttled its plans to move to Brooklyn for a number of reasons, including financial pressures within the company and the insurance industry.
In addition, says Thomas McCann, the company's vice president of real estate, "In the past year or six months, the market has softened so much downtown that we're looking at alternatives in Manhattan.
As a tenant, he says, the Wall Street real estate market provides "a virtual feast." 

Joshua Muss, the developer of the $165 million Renaissance Plaza in Brooklyn, where AIG was to be a tenant, says the project can still go forward.
But the company's pullout last week prompted the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to withdraw its $6 million grant.
Renaissance Plaza has been designed to include a Hilton Hotel and a 30-story office building. 

New York City is now likely to step up efforts to lure companies to Brooklyn and Queens with tax and energy price cuts. "It will become more important to provide incentives to companies who are considering all the alternatives," says Stanley E. Grayson, deputy mayor for economic development. "Many won't go without these programs." 

