.START 

UAL Corp. Chairman Stephen M. Wolf, under fire from employee groups over profits he stands to gain from a labor-management takeover, pledged to work to ensure employees make a profit on their own investment in the buy-out. 

In his first interview since UAL's board approved a $6.79 billion takeover bid from senior managers, United Airlines' pilot union and British Airways PLC, Mr. Wolf defended both the buy-out plan and the terms it offers him and other managers.
The 85% stake reserved for management and employees would make UAL the largest employee-owned company in the U.S. 

While the 48-year-old chairman is guaranteed to benefit financially from the buy-out, he cautioned "there can be no promises" that the same would be true for rank-and-file employees.
However, he added: "It is my objective to return to employees 100% of their investment and a significant profit margin on top of that." 

Tender offer documents made public Friday disclosed that Mr. Wolf would reap $76.7 million from the stock and options he holds in UAL once the transaction is completed.
John C. Pope, UAL's chief financial officer, would receive $37.7 million from his stock and options. 

The documents also showed that Messrs.
Wolf and Pope and another 35 UAL executives participating in the buy-out would receive new stock and options amounting to a 10% stake in UAL once the buy-out is completed.
Financial experts estimate the value of these new options at between $65 million and $90 million. 

The disclosure of the executives' profit comes at a time when Mr. Wolf is trying to persuade all UAL employees to make wage concessions and productivity improvements to help finance the takeover.
So far, only the pilot union has agreed to participate, pledging $250 million in annual concessions and $200 million from a pension plan toward the buy-out. 

In the interview, Mr. Wolf said he was convinced UAL would succumb to a takeover following a $5.4 billion bid from Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis. 

Mr. Wolf called the terms offered to management "fair." But in an apparent effort to deflect criticism, he said he plans to forgo his $575,000 annual salary for the first year following the takeover.
He also said he would work without a contract indefinitely. 

Such a move would prevent him from receiving substantial "golden parachute" severance pay should he leave United's employment.
He also said that he would lose his lucrative new options in the employee-owned company if he is fired. 

He said he has asked other senior managers participating in the buy-out to work without similar contracts.
He also said he plans to donate $1 million from his profits to charities that run educational profits, in addition to starting his own foundation dedicated to education issues. 

Mr. Wolf's overtures did little to appease United's machinists union, which has complained the most about the current buy-out plan.
A machinists spokesman said the union finds the management windfall "offensive." 

The machinists union is also upset that UAL's outside directors gave themselves $20,000-a-year salaries for life.
They also approved unlimited free travel privileges for themselves and their spouses.
Mr. Wolf said only one of the current outside directors will be returning to the board once the company is sold. 

The union criticized the directors for rejecting a recapitalization plan its financial advisers had proposed as an option.
The recapitalization would have given employees a 50% ownership stake but placed less debt on the airline.
The labor-management buy-out would result in $7.2 billion in debt. 

The recapitalization would have resulted in $2.5 billion less new debt, "but less of a financial boon for management and the financial advisers," the spokesman said. 

Allen Kelley, spokesman for a group representing UAL non-contract employees, said those workers find management's profits "hard to take, especially when the company is about to take something out of {workers'} pockets." Mr. Kelley said he believes the latest disclosures will cost management some support. 

Mr. Wolf's support also appears to be slipping among UAL's flight attendants.
The flight attendants union balked last week at management's request for a maximum 10% wage cut. 

Mr. Wolf said he doesn't anticipate opposition to the buy-out from the Department of Transportation.
Last week, Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner expressed renewed concern about the leveraging of U.S. airlines and investments in them by foreign carriers. 

On Friday, people familiar with Northwest said Mr. Skinner asked Northwest Airlines owner Alfred Checchi to reduce KLM Royal Dutch Airlines' $400 million investment in Northwest.
The move raised the possibility the agency may seek changes in British Airways' $750 million equity investment in UAL in return for a 15% stake. 

UAL's stock dropped $5.125 to $281.125 in composite trading on New York's Stock Exchange Friday on fears the UAL transaction might be disrupted. 

Under terms of the new executive options, a management group of 37 executives will pay $15 million for a 1% stake in the new company, and won't have to pay any extra for options on another 9% at the same exercise price. 

Stephen Figlewski, a finance professor at New York University business school, said a rough "back-of-the-envelope" estimate of the value of the options is $80 million to $90 million.
A takeover stock trader valued the options at about $65 million. 

The deal will also generate fees of more than $231.6 million for several Wall Street securities firms, law firms, and banks.
First Boston Corp., adviser to the UAL board, will receive $23.9 million.
Lazard Freres & Co. and Salomon Brothers Inc., advisers to the UAL pilot union, will share $34 million. 

