.START 

A major stumbling block over the different ways that Arthur Andersen & Co. and Price Waterhouse fund their retirement plans could scuttle the proposed merger of the two big accounting firms, parties close to both firms said. 

Chicago-based Andersen accrues or sets up a reserve for its partners in advance of their retirement, and they generally get between $25,000 and $50,000 a year in benefits after they retire, the parties said. 

On the other hand, Price doesn't fund its retirement benefits in advance and pays its partners about $100,000 a year after they retire, they added. 

James Emerson, publisher of Emerson's Professional Services Review in Bellevue, Wash., said that "more people in the profession are saying that the Andersen and Price merger is unlikely." He added: "There may just be too many stumbling blocks." 

Officials at both Andersen and Price Waterhouse declined comment on the merger talks.
Three months ago the two firms announced that they were beginning discussions that could lead to a merger over the following 60 days.
Earlier this month, they said the talks were being extended indefinitely.
If the two firms merged, they would become the biggest U.S. and world-wide accounting firm. 

Steven Stiling, who resigned from Andersen last month as a managing director in consulting to join CSC Consulting Group in Cambridge, Mass., as a group vice president, said that the hurdles that Andersen and Price must overcome are formidable. "There's the differences in funding the pension plans, who will get the balance of power and other major economic issues," he said. 

Combining the two retirement plans would be extremely tough, say benefit consultants. "It could be done, but it would be difficult, expensive and detailed," said Howard Golden, a partner in Kwasha Lipton, a Fort Lee, N.J.-based benefits consulting firm. "And even after they're joined, in order to preserve previous benefits on both sides, you'd have to produce a hydra-headed monster that might be difficult to administrate." 

There are several other major hurdles to an Andersen-Price merger, other accountants say.
As one of the biggest computer systems consultants, Andersen does some joint ventures with companies like International Business Machines Corp. and Hewlett-Packard Co., both audit clients of Price.
Accounting profession ethics rules ban business ties with audit clients. 

Also, the Justice Department currently is asking for reams of data from Andersen, Price and four other firms that already have merged to see if the transactions violate antitrust law.
Earlier this year Ernst & Whinney and Arthur Young & Co. joined as Ernst & Young while Deloitte, Haskins & Sells and Touche, Ross & Co. combined as Deloitte & Touche.
The data concern financial analyses used in the mergers, client data bases and results of recent proposals to prospective clients. 

Other sticking points include the name of the new Andersen-Price firm, Andersen's recent lid on consulting revenue reverting to other partners and profit results at both firms that didn't meet previously set targets, parties close to the firms said.
The Andersen-Price talks resume this week after a week's hiatus and they "could blow up or jell," said a party close to the talks. 

Two major impending deadlines are the U.S. partners' meetings of both firms, each scheduled for mid-October. "They've got to have something to tell their partners by then," said a knowledgeable party. 

