.START 

A less dramatic legal controversy than flag-burning and civil rights is raising questions of equal significance to our republic.
The state of Vermont, in accordance with its constitution, has ordered one of its Supreme Court justices to retire at age 70.
He refused to do so and won a victory in a federal district court by arguing that Vermont's rule had been pre-empted by the federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act.
Vermont has appealed to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in New York.
The case is likely to end up in the U.S. Supreme Court. 

This dispute turns on a question as old as our political framework: What is the proper division of authority between the national and state governments?
The judicial response to this question has varied over the years.
In 1871 the Supreme Court voided the application of a federal income tax to a state judge's salary, as a threat to the "unimpaired existence" of the states, but since the "Constitutional Revolution" of 1937, the pendulum has swung decisively against state sovereignty. 

The Supreme Court has already sustained the Age Discrimination Act's application to a state official -- a Wyoming game warden -- in 1983.
And in the important Garcia v.
San Antonio Metro Transit Authority decision of 1985, the court upheld federal wage and hour standards for state and municipal employees.
Nevertheless, Vermont should persist, for it is right, and the high court is wrong. 

The court's current posture is open to criticism on three grounds: 

(1) Textbooks and the Constitution's text teach that Congress is a legislature of limited, enumerated powers, but what Thomas Jefferson once derided as "the house that Jack built" mode of constitutional reasoning is now common: Congress may order Wyoming game wardens to retire because of its power to use necessary and proper means for Congress to regulate state commerce. 

National politicians have proved willing students of the court's new teaching.
A congressman, enamored of West Virginia's choice to deny driver's licenses to school dropouts, has introduced a bill to nationalize the policy by making it a condition for full allocation of federal highway funds.
Sen. Donald Riegle (D., Mich.), in the immediate aftermath of the court's recent abortion decision, suggested that Congress should abort even legitimate state restrictions by a cutoff in funds.
Recent Democratic presidential aspirants have seen no constitutional difficulties in using the federal spending power to compel (the euphemism is "induce") state approval of constitutional amendments. 

(2) These sweeping claims of national power draw sustenance from the court's justification for the federal wage and hour standards for state and municipal employees in the Garcia decision: States do not need any protection by the court, the argument runs, because they are already quite adequately protected by the national "political process," i.e., representation of local interests in Congress and the political parties, the state-centered arithmetic of the electoral college, etc.
But to say that local interests receive a hearing in Congress is not to say that the states as policymaking governments receive a hearing there.
Congress responds to electoral threats: States don't vote; neither do they give to PACs. 

(3) Defenders of state and local autonomy are often justly accused of a nostalgic romanticism.
Their concerns are held to block the rationalized framework of national economic and social controls required in a competitive world.
Localism is stained by the massive injustice of racial segregation historically associated with it. 

By accepting this logic, the court has unduly ignored the counter-arguments of Alexis de Tocqueville.
The 19th century French political philosopher saw critical elements for human freedom sustained by smaller political associations.
Material comforts may blossom in a large, centralized regime, but slowly this form would eviscerate human capacities.
The responsibilities of self-government would be relinquished to bureaucratic officialdom.
This stultifying tendency of modern life could be resisted by leaving a good deal of autonomy in local governing bodies, to teach people the importance of local efforts. 

Tocqueville conceded that localism would occasion more errors in policy, but he insisted that in the long term it would produce a more public-spirited citizenry.
For all I know, Vermont has made a silly rule: Vermont Supreme Court Justice Louis Peck may combine the wisdom of Socrates and Solomon.
But the U.S. Constitution leaves, and should be understood to leave, to Vermonters the authority to make such a choice. 

Mr. McDonald is an adjunct professor at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York. 

