.START 

The focus on arms-control issues here over the weekend when Secretary of State James Baker met with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, reflects the traditional side of the U.S.-Soviet relationship.
But a series of unusually candid talks on the dire state of Moscow's economy show how that relationship is evolving. 

During a three-hour dinner here Friday night, several Soviet economists discussed with U.S. officials such ideas as backing their currency with gold in order to restore their citizens' faith in it.
They talked about a plan under discussion in Moscow to import consumer goods and sell them at huge profits to soak up the alarming excess of rubles in the economy.
And they asked the American officials whether they thought a 5% interest rate on bonds would attract Russian investors. (The U.S. officials said it wouldn't because the yield is below the current Soviet inflation rate.) 

At the end of the dinner, to express their thanks as well as their concern about worthless money, the Soviets gave their host, Robert Zoellick, the State Department's counselor, two gifts: a counterfeit 100 ruble note and a counterfeit $500 bill.
Mr. Zoellick will accompany Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, on a trip to the Soviet Union next month for further discussions about Moscow's economy. 

Some Bush administration officials share the Soviets' fears about economic instability.
Although U.S. officials continue to pay homage to the standard agenda of arms control, regional disputes and other bilateral issues when the superpowers meet, increasingly these officials believe such issues no longer pose the greatest threat to world stability.
Rather, they are concerned that the prospect of major economic dislocation -- along with anti-Moscow nationalism across the Russian empire -- have become greater dangers. 

Thus, there is an increasing focus on the need for economic solutions. "If you want to talk about the future of perestroika and of Mikhail Gorbachev, it will depend more on this {economics} than on arms control," said a senior U.S. official here, referring to the Soviet leader and his program for radically restructuring Soviet society. 

This growing concern about the forces unleashed by Mr. Gorbachev's shake-up of Soviet society is even creating some nostalgia for the good old days of U.S.-Soviet confrontation.
In a recent speech, Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger said: "For all its risks and uncertainties, the Cold War was characterized by a remarkably stable and predictable set of relations among the great powers." 

Currently, the prospects are for even more dislocation in the Soviet Union, some experts believe.
Jan Vanous, research director of PlanEcon, a Washington-based group that tracks the Soviet economy, said that economic activity declined about 1% in this year's second quarter.
During the same period, Mr. Vanous said, inflation rose at a 7% to 9% annual rate, caused largely by rising wages as Moscow tried to appease discontented workers. 

Mr. Vanous said that Moscow's current problem is that it has a huge overhang of rubles because Russians have nothing to spend their money on.
As a result, the savings rate has climbed to 11% of disposable income, about triple what it was at the beginning of the 1980s.
If the Soviets genuinely want to change their economy, they must remove price constraints, but the huge pent-up demand would produce hyperinflation, Mr. Vanous said. 

"Everybody is trying to spend, but they can't.
The minute you free up prices, the whole thing will explode," he said. 

Soviet officials are seeking ways to avoid such an explosion.
They told U.S. officials here that they are considering ways to drain rubles from the economy.
In addition to selling bonds and consumer goods, another idea discussed was for the government to sell assets -- property, equipment or even factories -- to Soviet citizens.
This is uncharted territory for Soviet Russia and so the Soviet officials are asking Washington's advice. 

"We are prepared to listen if you have some technical expertise, some management expertise," a senior Soviet official said. 

Secretary Baker made clear last week that he would like to help. "It is the position of the president, the position of the administration, that we want perestroika to succeed, and we'd like to see the general secretary {Gorbachev} succeed as well," he said. 

