.START 

Pierce J. "Jack" Roberts is so busy making deals that even his bosses at BellSouth Corp. have trouble reaching him. 

Colleagues liken him to a whirling dervish.
When he isn't jetting around to scout acquisition prospects, he is usually hunkered down with his staff in the secure "war room" at BellSouth's Atlanta headquarters. 

"He's always in the war room.
To get him, you have to know his beeper number," says Roger W. Hale, a former BellSouth unit executive. "His pager is going off every 15 to 20 seconds because no one can reach him in the office." 

Recently, the pager has been working overtime.
Mr. Roberts was architect and key negotiator of the agreement earlier this month to merge BellSouth's cellular properties with those of LIN Broadcasting Inc., a transaction Wall Street hails as a "win-win" for shareholders.
It would create the nation's No. 2 cellular concern and one positioned to dominate the market, with 46 million potential customers. 

"In terms of planning and strategy, Jack was the quarterback on the deal," says William O. McCoy, president and chief executive of BellSouth Enterprises.
Donald A. Pels, LIN's president and chief executive, says Mr. Roberts came up with a "very creative idea" and was persistent in getting both sides to embrace it, despite resistance on plenty of issues. "My hat's off to Jack," says Mr. Pels, who calls the transaction "unusally imaginative for a company of that size." 

The brash outsider was hired five years ago to help transform a plodding bureacracy into a force able to compete in unregulated markets following the breakup of the Bell System.
Mr. Roberts, 43, vice president for corporate development at BellSouth Enterprises, the company's unregulated businesses unit, quickly made his presence known. "I can't think of a single meeting where there haven't been sparks," Mr. Hale says.
Mr. Roberts's reaction to those favoring prolonged discussion, he says, is likely to be: "Damn it, let's stop thinking about it and go do it." Adds John J. Huntz, managing partner of Noble Ventures International in Atlanta: "He's not lacking in ego.
He lets you know that he thinks highly of himself and what he's doing.
He's terribly aggressive and extremely diligent." 

Although some of his colleagues might consider him abrasive, few would argue that Mr. Roberts hasn't produced results -- a string of deals expanding BellSouth's cellular, paging and Yellow Pages businesses.
For example, he was instrumental in the acquisitions of Mobile Communications Corp. of America in 1988 and the L.M. Berry & Co. Yellow Pages advertising sales concern in 1986. 

Mr. Roberts "is in constant motion and works extreme hours, long into the night.
He has three or four deals working, one pending and one in the vision somewhere," says his former boss, Mr. Hale, who is now president and chief executive of Louisville Gas & Electric Co. 

Mr. Roberts, whom friends describe as a workaholic, acknowledges he might be driving himself a bit hard.
He used to enjoy guitar duets with a close friend and former business partner, Sam Mitchell, who died in May.
At the funeral, Mr. Roberts recalled that Mr. Mitchell, shortly before his death, cautioned "there are more important things in life than working your head off" and that Mr. Roberts should learn to "slow down." Mr. Roberts remarked that he wasn't following the advice, but "I hope to be able to one day." 

Mr. Roberts, who spent eight years as an independent consultant, was hired in 1984 after assisting BellSouth on several small acquisitions.
Though his admirers attribute his success to the force of his ideas and his persuasive powers, the strong backing of Mr. McCoy and BellSouth Chairman John L. Clendenin hasn't hurt. 

Mr. Roberts first proposed the complex LIN merger more than a year ago in informal discussions with LIN Vice President Michael Plouf.
Mr. Roberts "kept us thinking about the deal" and then seized the opportunity to push it aggressively in early August, after LIN finally rejected McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. 's tender offer, Mr. Pels says. 

Mr. Roberts's merger proposal substantially increases shareholder values, without a costly acquisition that would dilute BellSouth's earnings and without tampering with LIN's proven ability to generate profits, analysts say. "This adds a little sex appeal to BellSouth," says analyst Jack Grubman at PaineWebber. 

Once Mr. Roberts has identified his quarry, he can be relentless in negotiations. "He sees what motivates everyone involved and is very good at designing a transaction that gives everyone what they want," says a New York investment banker who has worked with Mr. Roberts. "He is a breath of fresh air in his ability to cut through nonsense." 

During marathon negotiations on giant transactions, Mr. Roberts has been known to break the ice with southern homilies such as, "That dog won't hunt." 

"He tries to cover up the fact he is a very smart, tenacious guy with a sort of 'aw shucks' country boy demeanor," says Jack Welsh, managing director of Prudential-Bache Capital Funding in New York. "Some people are disarmed by it, and some people are aggravated by it, but in the end most people respect him a great deal." 

