.START 

Cahners Publishing Co. said it plans a major expansion of its 84-year-old entertainment trade publication Variety, and named a Hollywood producer as editor of the weekly and daily editions. 

Cahners, a Newton, Mass., subsidiary of Reed International PLC of London, said Peter Bart, an independent film producer and author in Los Angeles, would assume the post in New York as of Oct. 9. 

Gerard Byrne, executive publisher of Variety, said that Cahners is developing an East Coast version of Daily Variety, the daily newspaper that is a bible of the Los Angeles-based film industry.
The weekly Variety has a circulation of about 30,000 spread throughout the U.S., Europe and Asia. 

"The New York daily would be for the entertainment industry in New York," said Mr. Byrne. "There are so many vertically integrated companies doing just about everything in media and we should be reaching them." 

Cahners acquired Variety from the Silverman family for an estimated $60 million in 1987, and has made it the core of its recently formed Business Newspapers division.
Cahners executives said they will use the division to develop and acquire specialized business newspapers. 

Advertising in Variety is expected to reach 3,300 pages this year, up 8% from 1988 but down 7% from 1986, according to Mr. Byrne.
Variety has been hurt by a drop in advertising spending by television syndicators. 

Variety has broadened its coverage in recent years to all aspects of U.S and foreign entertainment.
But with a growing number of specialized trade publications serving those markets, Variety has faced increasing competition for both readers and advertisers. 

Cahners has already made some changes in the old-fashioned newspaper format of Variety.
Earlier this year, Cahners introduced for the first time four-color pages, editorial photographs, a redesigned front page and higher-quality newsprint. 

"At first we regarded the changes in Variety like the new Coca-Cola, we didn't like it," said Harvey Sabinson, director of the League of American Theatres & Producers. "Variety is still as important to the industry as it used to be.
We are even becoming used to seeing pictures in it." 

