.START 

The U.S. knitwear industry petitioned the Bush administration to impose heavy penalty duties on imports of acrylic-fiber sweaters from Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan. 

The anti-dumping petition is the first to be filed against imported apparel since the products came under an international quota agreement, and importers charged that the complaint could undermine the current textile-trade system. 

Acting for the domestic sweater manufacturers, the National Knitwear and Sportswear Association accused the three countries of "dumping" sweaters, or shipping them to the U.S. at prices that are below production costs or below the prices charged in their home market. 

The petition sought anti-dumping duties of as much as 190% for sweaters from Taiwan, 115% for Hong Kong and 94% for South Korea.
Such duties are intended to offset the allegedly unfair price advantage enjoyed by the foreign producers. 

U.S. importers promptly countercharged that the action could undermine the Multilateral Fiber Arrangement, or MFA, the pact under which the U.S. and other countries regulate textile and apparel imports through quotas.
Martin Lewin, a lawyer for the U.S. Association of Importers of Textiles and Apparel, claimed that the complaint threatens importers with "double jeopardy" since such duties would further restrict imports that already are under quotas. 

The current MFA, which runs until July 1991, calls on the signatories to refrain from taking "additional trade measures" that would have the effect of "nullifying the objectives of this arrangement." 

The petition isn't expected to have any immediate impact on product availability and prices, as sometimes happens when anti-dumping petitions are filed.
Textile traders say most of the sweaters intended for the fall and Christmas seasons already have been ordered. 

However, importers worry that the petition could be just a trial balloon to test the Bush administration's tolerance of such actions. 

"If it succeeds, you'd see a wave of anti-dumping complaints against other, more meaningful apparel categories," warned Bruce Mitchell, a lawyer for the Hong Kong Woolen and Synthetic Knitwear Manufacturers Association. 

In 1988 shipments of acrylic sweaters from the three Asian suppliers were valued at $631 million, accounting for 53% of the U.S. market.
These products were sold by leading U.S. merchandisers, including Sears, Roebuck Co., Dayton Hudson Corp., K mart Corp., R. H. Macy & Co., and Associated Merchandising Corp., according to the knitwear association's petition. 

The association said these Asian products' rapid penetration of the U.S. market forced it to act. "Imports now control 70% of the domestic market" as a result of "unfair selling prices," complained Ivan Gordon, the association's president. 

Seth Bodner, the association's executive director, asserted that as much as $540 million in anti-dumping duties could be imposed on Taiwanese sweaters.
He said equivalent penalties of $250 million could be slapped on sweaters from South Korea and $96 million on those from Hong Kong. 

The U.S. International Trade Commission has to determine that these imports are hurting U.S. producers before the Commerce Department can start investigating the dumping allegations.
The ITC ruling has to be issued in 45 days and the Commerce Department finding must be issued in 160 days.
The entire investigation could run for an additional four months before it is finally settled. 

If stiff punitive duties are eventually placed on sweaters from the three Asian exporters, it would be a comparatively bigger blow to Taiwan and Korea than to Hong Kong, which focuses more on upmarket wool and cotton sweaters. 

The penalties on the three Asian exporters also could cause sweater production to shift to nations with lower labor costs and less-restrictive sweater quotas. 

In Taiwan, sweater factories already have been closing by the dozens in recent years because rising wages and rapid currency appreciation have left local manufacturers less competitive. 

