.START 

The Japanese are throwing money at a new area of U.S. investment, and this time their targets are tiny: the publicly traded stock funds that invest entirely in a single country. 

Heavy buying by Japanese investors sent the shares of several country funds surging to 52-week highs on U.S. exchanges last week, on very strong volume.
But analysts and money managers warn that many of the major gainers -- including the Spain Fund, Germany Fund, Thai Fund and Malaysia Fund -- could soon tumble. 

That's because investors are doing the financial equivalent of paying ever-higher prices for a gift just because its wrapping looks better and better.
If the stocks inside the package -- or portfolio -- fail to keep keep up with the funds' own soaring stock prices, investors who buy in now could get hurt, the skeptics say. 

"Those who lose sight of that will lose sight of their wallets soon enough," says Adam Shapiro, an analyst and portfolio manager at Kayne, Anderson & Co. 

Once the Japanese stop buying, predicts an executive at a big Japanese securities company, "These funds are going to fall under their own weight -- and you're looking at a major decline in the price." 

The strong Japanese demand has thrown traditional valuations of country funds way out of kilter.
The Spain Fund, for instance, now is trading at an astounding 78% above the value of its portfolio holdings -- by far the largest premium of any fund trading in a market that doesn't restrict direct investment by foreigners.
The fund traded at a 10% discount in July. 

The funds' sharp run-ups already have burned many U.S. investors who had been betting their shares would decline.
And the activity has sparked an inquiry by the New York Stock Exchange into activities of at least two large Japanese securities firms that have been doing the trading. 

More than 40 single-country funds are listed in New York or London.
Typically they are so-called closed-end funds, which issue a fixed number of shares for trading on major stock markets.
Country funds have raised more than $1 billion in recent years from investors seeking rich returns in nations from India to Taiwan.
Demand for closed-end stock funds often wanes after their initial offerings, leaving the shares trading below the portfolio value. 

But the four funds being targeted by the Japanese now trade at fat premiums to their net asset value.
And analysts say there's little justification for such pricey valuations: The only country funds that historically have traded at premiums invest in markets that are otherwise closed to foreign investors. 

"It's like tulip bulbs; there's no fundamental basis at all" to the recent run-ups in the funds, says Jeffrey Hopson, an analyst at A.G. Edwards & Sons. 

Why, then, are the Japanese buying?
For one thing, Japanese investors are seemingly comfortable paying what by Western standards are inflated prices for stock.
They are used to share prices in the Tokyo market that average about 65 times annual company earnings. 

Japanese investors also are fond of investing in so-called themes, such as the development of the Tokyo waterfront.
Japanese firms have been pushing the pending 1992 unification of Europe as one such theme, a broker says.
Another theme: the rapid growth rates of smaller Southeast Asian economies, such as Malaysia and Thailand. 

"Somebody woke up some morning and said, 'Let's run and gun these countries, '" says an executive at one of the so-called Big Four Japanese securities companies: Nomura Securities, Daiwa Securities, Nikko Securities and Yamaichi Securities. 

The Spain Fund has attracted the most interest from the Japanese.
But the recent frenetic trading activity also has sparked interest from the Big Board.
Nikko and Yamaichi both said they received letters last week from the compliance authorities at the New York Stock Exchange asking for information concerning trades they had made in the fund.
Both firms declined to specify what the exchange was looking for; other brokerage houses are expected to receive similar inquiries. 

But one person familiar with the correspondence said the letter "mentioned LBOs, buy-outs and such; it looked like an insider-trading letter." The person adds: "I think {trading in the Spain Fund} hit the exchange's parameters, and the computer popped out a letter.
Nobody takes over a fund trading above its net asset value." 

An executive at a big Japanese firm defends the Japanese trading, saying: "If they were going to manipulate stock, a country fund would be a ridiculous choice." He adds: "There could be some jealousy here that the Japanese made a good call and that some Americans feel they missed it or shorted {bet against} the wrong stock." 

Some U.S. investors got badly burned by the Spain Fund's gain. "I wouldn't go near any stock that Japan had any presence in," says Norman Lizt, a former Oppenheimer Management Corp. portfolio manager and now a private investor who had heavily shorted the Spain Fund before bailing out late last week.
Says Mr. Lizt: "There are no bounds anymore." 

ClothesTime stock has enjoyed quite a year, but some analysts say it has risen far enough.
Maybe too far. 

The apparel retailer's stock, below 6 during most of 1988 and early 1989, rocketed up in May and reached a high of 14 1/2 in July before backing down.
The shares closed Friday at 12 1/2, off 1/2 for the day, in over-the-counter trading. 

"We think it's fully priced," says Elizabeth Armstrong, retail analyst with Prescott, Ball & Turben in Cleveland.
She suggests that investors who own ClothesTime consider selling it as a "source of funds" for other stocks that are bargain-priced. 

This year's big gains came when investors became convinced that ClothesTime would make money in 1989 and 1990, after a loss in 1988.
That was a hard year for women's clothing retailers -- and particularly hard for ClothesTime, which ordered large quantities of merchandise early, Ms. Armstrong said.
She estimates the chain will earn 40 cents a share this year and 80 cents a share next year. 

ClothesTime used to emphasize low prices as its main selling point, but lately it has tried to play up fashion and de-emphasize price.
Last week, President Norman Abramson told a group of money managers at the Montgomery Securities conference in San Francisco that prices in many of the chain's 330 stores are 40% above those of a year ago, and 60% above those of 1987. 

Mr. Abramson also said the chain was hurt in 1988 because it was "junior and casual only." Now the company is seeking to broaden its product line to appeal to career women as well. 

Sales have been running only about $160 a square foot this year, which Mr. Abramson called "not good by our standards." His short-term goal is $200 a foot. 

That's still below averages for such competitors as Gap and Limited, which average about $328 and $285, respectively, according to Prescott's Ms. Armstrong.
But she notes that ClothesTime is situated mainly in strip shopping centers, which generally charge much lower rent than malls do.
Mr. Abramson takes pride in the company's balance sheet: no debt.
At the conference, he said the chain, which now has more than half its stores in California, aims eventually to have 1,000 stores.
Its plan, he said, is to enter new markets in Florida, Chicago, Detroit, Dallas and Houston in 1991. 

-- John R. Dorfman 

