.START 

The Senate enters the last week of this fiscal year unable to break the impasse over anti-drug funding that has stalled action on most appropriations for fiscal 1990, which begins Sunday. 

Talks abruptly broke off Friday, and although some lawmakers were still hopeful for an eventual agreement, Congress will have to rely on a stopgap, omnibus spending bill to keep the government operating past next weekend.
A one-month spending bill is scheduled to be considered in the House tomorrow. 

The dominant personality last week in the five days of talks over increased spending for law enforcement and anti-drug programs has been Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Byrd.
It was the West Virginia Democrat who two weeks ago offered an alternative to President Bush's anti-drug plan, and it was Mr. Byrd, frustrated with the White House, who suspended talks. 

A major question now is whether Senate leaders will step in to fill the vacuum they've allowed to develop.
The breakup of the talks puts pressure on Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell to become more directly involved.
The Maine Democrat has held back in apparent deference to Sen. Byrd, his predecessor as leader, but Mr. Mitchell risks looking weak if the talks fall apart after the two sides appeared to be so close to agreement. 

When the talks broke off, Mr. Mitchell was aboard a plane to Maine.
Earlier, he had said it would be "tragic" for the Bush administration to block an agreement. 

Senate Republicans have relied heavily on Sen. Mark Hatfield, the senior GOP member of the Appropriations Committee, because of his relationship with Sen. Byrd.
The Oregon liberal shares many of the Democrats' priorities, but he appears to have been held in check at important points by the White House, which may be forced now to step forward and explain why it can't move further. 

Tired and tense, both sides sought Friday to shift the blame to the other.
Each side will find it hard to say why a settlement can't be reached.
There is so much impatience with the drawn out negotiations that many senators would prefer to see the issue fought out on the Senate floor. 

When the talks were suspended, only $150 million separated the two sides' proposed additions to Mr. Bush's $7.9 billion proposal.
Democrats had given ground by agreeing to pursue selective, individual, spending reductions, rather than offsetting all of the increased spending with across-the-board cuts as they had initially insisted, and by agreeing to give the administration the flexibility it sought to protect certain military-spending accounts. 

In return, Sen. Byrd hoped the Republicans would move closer to the Democrats' $1 billion figure for additional spending authority, which was already well below their initial demand and which Democratic participants described as "bottom line." But GOP lawmakers held firm at $850 million. 

Mr. Byrd was said to be especially frustrated because Republican senators had discussed the possibility of a $900 million increase but clung to the lower number after consultations with White House Chief of Staff John Sununu, Budget Director Richard Darman and William Bennett, the administration's director of anti-drug policy. 

Sen. Byrd said the next move was up to the Republicans, and Mr. Hatfield said he hoped talks would resume with "a clear-eyed Monday morning view." Leaving the Capitol on Friday afternoon, though, Mr. Sununu said, "We're in no hurry." 

The stalemate leaves four major spending bills funding as many as a half-dozen federal departments and the entire U.S. foreign aid budget stalled on the Senate floor, as Republicans have blocked their final passage while differences remained on the anti-drug package. 

Another bill, covering the Commerce, Justice and State Departments and the federal judiciary, has been held up in the Senate Appropriations Committee.
Today, the Senate is expected to begin work on the Defense Department spending bill. 

Congress has given final approval to only one of the 13 bills needed to fund the government in the new spending year, and unless negotiations can produce a settlement, lawmakers face a potentially long fight over the high-profile drug issue. 

David Rogers contributed to this article. 

