.START 

Savings and loan officials at the Resolution Trust Corp. sold the deposit accounts of three sick thrifts and liquidated another S&L. 

NCNB Texas National Bank, Dallas, a unit of NCNB North Carolina National Bank, continued its expansion into Texas markets, where it has already acquired three S&Ls, with the purchase of deposit accounts of two sick Houston thrifts.
It acquired the deposits of First Capital Savings Association of Texas, Houston, with $79.7 million in assets.
NCNB will pay the RTC a premium of $500,000 for $123.3 million in deposits. 

NCNB Texas also acquired $159.1 million in deposits from Village Savings, Houston, which had $113.9 million in assets.
It will pay the RTC a premium of $1.2 million for the deposits. 

The RTC also sold the deposits of Colonial Savings Association of America, Liberal, Kan., with $62.6 million in assets, to Garden National Bank, Garden City, Kan.
The deposits total $61.2 million, in 4,700 accounts.
The Garden National Bank is paying the RTC a premium of $104,000 for the transferred deposits. 

The RTC found no acceptable bidders for Unified Savings, Northridge, Calif., which had $34.5 million in assets, and so is paying depositors the amount of their accounts for a maximum of $100,000, the federal insurance limit. 

Unified Savings had $49.6 million in only 600 deposit accounts -- an indication that most of its deposits were in $100,000 "brokered" accounts, which follow small increases in interest rates.
Such deposit bases aren't desirable for buyers of thrifts, who are often seeking depositors as new customers for mortgages and other financial products. 

Under the terms of the deposit transfer deals, the buyer pays a premium to the RTC to take control of the deposit accounts.
The RTC sells the assets, often real estate, separately.
Buyers, however, will have the first option to acquire the assets, usually loans or real estate. 

The RTC is the new government agency established to manage and sell insolvent thrifts and their assets under the savings and loan law approved a month ago. 

