.START 

On a recent visit here, U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady trumpeted his new plan to attack the Latin American debt crisis.
The July agreement between Mexico and its foreign banks, Mr. Brady said, had already won over a key group of converts: moneyed Mexicans who have taken billions of dollars out of their homeland and squirreled the funds away abroad. "Significant amounts of capital have been moving back to Mexico," Mr. Brady said. 

Two days later, Coronado, Calif., realtor Linda Lomas was also savoring a triumph.
She had just sold a Mexico City industrialist a $400,000 property on Coronado Cays, a palm-fringed cluster of homes with docks at the doors. "Nothing in the world can slow down our Mexican business," she said, slipping the sale papers into an international courier's envelope. 

Unfortunately for Mexico, Mrs. Lomas is probably closer to the truth than Mr. Brady. 

The Mexico debt program, the first test of the so-called Brady Plan to manage Latin America's $400 billion debt, has a simple premise: International backing for Mexico's market-oriented economic reforms, along with a modest amount of financial aid, will trigger a surge of new investment in Mexico's prostrate economy.
In particular, Mexican policy makers hope to repatriate money that their countrymen hold abroad -- some $84 billion, according to a 1988 estimate by Morgan Guaranty Trust. 

But those who work in the business built around so-called flight capital say that Mexico's missing billions aren't likely to come home anytime soon, if ever.
Mexican capital has become deeply rooted abroad, not only in bank accounts but in fixed investments ranging from art galleries to auto dealerships.
And while Mexico's government is trying to lure the capital back through a combination of incentives and intimidation, some of the world's leading financial institutions are working overtime to hang onto the money, and their valued Mexican clients. 

"Getting that capital back to Mexico will be like trying to reverse the law of gravity," says Bernardo Jordan, a Mexican businessman who lives in San Diego and has investments on both sides of the border.
Cheered by the reform program of Mexico's new, pro-business president, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, Mr. Jordan recently invested in two restaurants in Mexico.
But he hasn't been able to persuade friends to join him. "The big money is staying out," Mr. Jordan says. 

Under the Brady accord, banks have the choice of making new loans to Mexico or swapping their loans for bonds.
The new bonds would carry either a below-market interest rate or a discount on the value of the original loan.
Last week, new questions arose about the plan's viability.
Three big New York banks sharply increased reserves for losses on Third World loans, which many analysts took as a sign that they may simply cut their losses, spurning the option of making new loans.
J.P. Morgan & Co. increased its reserves by $2 billion, Chase Manhattan Corp. by $1.15 billion and Manufacturers Hanover Corp. by $950 million. 

Still, Mexico will need fresh loans to fuel growth; without them, capital repatriation becomes even more important, but less likely. "A lot of {Mexico's} small investors aren't going to invest in Mexico again until the big foreign companies put their money there," says Roberto Sepulveda, a Mexican who runs an import-export company out of San Diego. 

Mexico has suffered the region's biggest capital outflows, but the problem afflicts all of Latin America.
Morgan Guaranty estimated that, as of the end of 1987, $159 billion was held abroad by South Americans, mostly Venezuelans and Argentines.
By most estimates, the value of Latin American capital investment in the U.S. far exceeds the amount of loans to the region held by U.S. banks.
Citibank, for example, the largest lender to Latin America, has $7.7 billion in credits outstanding.
But it also has roughly $20 billion in deposits made by Latin Americans through its international, private banking network, says James S. Henry, former chief economist at McKinsey & Co., who has written on capital flight. 

In the U.S., Mexican investors have bought everything from New York lofts to Colorado lodges.
But the capital of the capital flight industry may be Southern California. "Many parts of California don't realize how much of their prosperity they owe to Mexico's crisis," says David Todd, a partner in the accounting firm of Price Waterhouse in Newport Beach.
Mexicans own an estimated 25% of the real estate in pricey La Jolla.
Coronado island, where rows of beachfront condominiums have been snapped up, has turned into the Ellis Island of the Mexican elite. 

"Even if the Brady Plan makes Mexico a better place to invest, can it compare to California?" asks Javier Benito, a Mexican real-estate developer who now lives in La Jolla.
Back in 1981, Mr. Benito was in Mexico finishing his biggest project, the towering headquarters of the government import-export bank, when Mexico devalued the peso, ruining his company.
Mr. Benito pulled up stakes and set up business in La Jolla. 

Now, he has grown attached to his adopted home.
Mr. Benito's children have attended good U.S. universities.
He spends his free time with a social club, called the Institute of Latin Professionals, formed by 100 San Diego-area expatriates.
And Mr. Benito is busy with his own economic plan: marketing a machine that determines whether a tennis ball has fallen outside the foul line. "My tennis project has me more excited than the Brady plan," he says. 

That's not to say the Brady Plan hasn't aided Mexico's economy.
It triggered a surge of new optimism in the country, which helped the government reduce the high interest rates it had to pay to keep skittish investors from sending more money abroad.
Rates on the country's 28-day treasury bills, for example, dropped sharply -- to 34% from 57%.
Nonetheless, interest rates remain high and most of Mexico's savings are in volatile, short-term instruments.
And it was a bad omen that the government last week canceled an auction of treasury bills because of new, upward pressure on rates. 

"This deal has bought Salinas some time, but that's all," says Rodolfo Fernandez, an international accountant for Touche Ross in San Diego, who has helped Mexicans set up an array of U.S. businesses. "Even if you're the president of Mexico or the secretary of the U.S. Treasury, you can't move capital by decree." 

Mr. Henry, the economist, argues that the Latin upper class, foreign financial institutions and the U.S. government all share the blame for perpetuating a system that foments capital flight and benefits all but the Latin poor.
With their money invested in the U.S., secure from shocks in their debt-ridden homelands, the Latin wealthy grow wealthier, widening inequities in a region where income distribution is already badly skewed.
By aggressively courting Mexican clients, U.S. banks obtain deposits to cover bad loans to the third world.
And by declaring most investments by non-resident aliens tax-free, the U.S. government, burdened by its budget deficit, attracts valuable investment dollars. 

"The Brady Plan doesn't address the underlying structural problems that have turned the United States into one of the world's biggest tax havens," says Mr. Henry. 

Capital began leaving Mexico in the late 1970s, during the borrowing binge of President Jose Lopez Portillo.
In 1981, Mexico received $20 billion in loans and, by Mr. Henry's reckoning, lost $9 billion to $11 billion in capital flight.
What money remained in Mexico poured out after 1982 when, to spite the "sacadolares" -- those sending their money abroad -- Mr. Lopez Portillo nationalized the banks, many of which were owned by these investors.
His intention was to punish; but, in the end, he only worsened the capital flight.
By 1986, so much money had left the country that the Mexican newspaper Excelsior was able to publish a government-leaked list of 575 Mexicans with deposits of at least $1 million in New York, Madrid and Paris.
Some fortunes were far larger.
Mexican authorities have found foreign real-estate worth about $70 million held by Sergio Bolanos, financial front man for the notoriously corrupt oilworkers union.
The holdings include a castle in France and a lavish compound in Vail, Colo. 

Moving large amounts of money requires the skill of professionals, who have been happy to lend their services.
Valdemar de Murguia, a Mexican who came to the U.S. to study at the University of California, San Diego, was one of those professionals.
Impressed by his contacts among the rich in the expatriate community, Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith quickly hired him after graduation to recruit Mexican clients.
His technique was simple: Open the Mexico City Yellow Pages and call up the presidents of the companies that had the biggest ads. "If you didn't come back from Mexico with $1 million in investments, the trip was considered a failure," he says. "But the competition was very rough." 

Mr. de Murguia once arrived in Mexico City's towering Hotel Nikko, to find that 17 other Merrill Lynch brokers, from offices all over the U.S., were also doing business.
He befriended a stewardess who operated on a more modest scale, supplementing her income by moving dozens of small accounts -- those of secretaries, beauticians and factory workers -- to the U.S. Mr. de Murguia has since left Merrill and opened his own import-export firm. 

Under Mexican law, foreign brokerage agents can't solicit clients in Mexico.
A Mexican finance official, however, says, "In the era of electronic money transfers, it's almost impossible to regulate capital flows." J.E. Woodward, chief of Merrill's San Diego office, said he isn't aware of any Merrill employees currently soliciting business in Mexico, though he says he is relatively new in his position and can't speak to what occurred in the past. 

In the wake of the announcement of the Brady Plan, many brokers have been hitting the Mexican circuit.
Raul Guzman, a businessman in Mexico City, has gotten five calls from U.S. investment specialists in the past month. "Whenever there's news on the debt, the bankers come," says Mr. Guzman, who adds that his savings are in Mexico.
And what do the bankers advise? "Take your money out of Mexico, but quickly." 

Once the money moves out of Mexico, the momentum often is against repatriating it.
Wolf Bielas, 25 years old, left Mexico City three years ago and, with a stake from his father, founded a chain of computer equipment stores called the Computer Outlet in the San Diego area.
Business has been good, he says. "We want to expand to the north, Los Angeles, San Francisco, up the whole coast." And what of south of the border? "I haven't honestly been paying much attention to the investment climate in Mexico," he says. 

Mexico's energetic President Salinas is certainly trying to get the sacadolares' attention.
A few days after the debt accord, Mexico unveiled a tax amnesty program for Mexican investors who repatriate capital. (In almost all cases, investors have failed to report income from investments abroad.) At the same time, the government has been wielding a stick.
At Mexico's urging, the U.S. has acted for the first time to extradite three Mexican industrialists from Coronado on tax-evasion charges. 

Cross-border cooperation is expanding in other ways.
Mexican officials say they will soon sign an agreement with the U.S. Treasury that will give them data on the U.S. bank and property holdings of Mexicans suspected of tax evasion. "This new cooperation between Mexico and the U.S. is scaring my clients," says Victor Vilaplana, a San Diego lawyer who advises Mexican investors. 

But some bankers say that a crackdown on the sacadolares will only send Mexican money into more discreet offshore shelters.
Mexican industrialists with investments on both sides of the Rio Grande have already developed sophisticated techniques for repatriating just enough capital to keep their Mexican businesses going.
So much money enters Mexico through shell companies in Britain's Cayman Islands and Virgin Islands, for example, that the United Kingdom, never a particularly big player in Mexico, has suddenly emerged as Mexico's second-largest foreign investor. 

With the prospects for forced capital repatriation doubtful, many analysts say that the burden will be on Mr. Salinas to make ever more dramatic reforms to spark new confidence in the economy, and thus lure capital back the free-market way.
This is at best a delicate balancing act. 

For instance, Mr. Salinas recently used military force rather than negotiating finesse to bust a recalcitrant union at Mexico's largest mine.
That strong-arm tactic drew cheers from the sacadolares, but strained Mr. Salinas's already tenuous relationship with labor. 

"How much money comes back, and how soon, all depends on whether Salinas continues to play this very dangerous game with the same skill he's shown so far," says Zack Chayet, a Mexican lawyer who lives in San Diego and has contacts with big expatriate investors. "But isn't that about where we were before the Brady Plan?" 

end 1987*, in billions of dollars 

