.START 

On Sept. 8, in his last month as the chief executive officer of CS First Boston Group, Peter T. Buchanan quietly announced that a world-wide search for new institutional shareholders was complete. 

Seven Japanese life-insurance companies, a Japanese trust company, three U.S. insurers, a Belgian investor group and the Mideastern Suliman Olayan holding company had taken stakes in the firm nine months after its $1.1 billion merger with European affiliate Credit Suisse First Boston. "Now everyone's focus can be directed toward building the best investment bank in the world," he told the firm's 6,400 employees in an internal memorandum. 

"The brass ring is out there for the taking.
Go get it." 

It may take awhile.
First Boston's main focus currently is damage control.
As the 55-year-old Mr. Buchanan prepares to retire and go fishing next month, the closely held firm has been shaken by a debacle it helped create.
Wall Street is ablaze with concern over possible corporate financial train wrecks. 

Campeau Corp., First Boston's most lucrative client of the decade, teetered off the track, a casualty of its multibillion dollar debt load.
Financings for several other highly leveraged First Boston clients also are struggling.
A $475 million junk-bond offering for Ohio Mattress Co. unraveled recently just as it was coming to market, leaving First Boston with most of that debt in the form of an illiquid, or now unmarketable, loan to Ohio Mattress. 

In a twist of fate, the credit of one set of First Boston clients, Campeau's Allied and Federated department-store units, looked so bad earlier this month that another client, Ohio Mattress, temporarily stopped doing business with it, the companies' agents confirmed. 

By last week, the strain was apparent. "I'm looking forward to this year being over," says William E. Mayer, the soft-spoken chief executive of the company's First Boston Corp. unit. 

The new management at CS First Boston, led by John M. Hennessy, is confident the storm clouds soon will pass. "Do we have problems here?
Sure," says Mr. Hennessy. "Does everyone on Wall Street have problems?
Sure.
This is a firm with an extremely powerful franchise.
We have built relationships that will last.
If anyone has some modicum of trust in investment banking, it's First Boston." 

Mr. Hennessy, 53, picked by Swiss banking giant Credit Suisse to succeed Mr. Buchanan next month, ran the highly profitable Credit Suisse First Boston affiliate in London the past six years. 

For all the upset, First Boston remains a powerhouse in mergers and acquisitions -- despite the tumultuous departure last year of its former merger stars, Bruce Wasserstein and Joseph R. Perella.
During the first six months this year, it led its Wall Street rivals by completing 83 transactions totaling $40.2 billion, according to Securities Data Co.
The only big deal that eluded it so far is the record $25 billion buy-out of RJR Nabisco Inc. First Boston is advising UAL Corp. in its pending $6.75 billion employee takeover and NWA Inc. on its $3.65 billion acquisition. 

But having earned well more than $200 million as an adviser and underwriter of Campeau's highly leveraged assembly of a U.S. retailing empire during a three-year period -- more than it has earned from any other client during the past decade -- First Boston could lose a substantial portion of that amount from the Canadian conglomerate's unwinding. 

First Boston owns about $125 million of Allied and Federated bonds, which fetched as little as 25 cents on the dollar before Campeau negotiated a $250 million emergency-cash infusion from the Canadian real-estate giant Olympia & York Developments Ltd. a week ago, according to people familiar with the situation.
In addition, it has about $250 million of currently illiquid exchange notes to Federated along with about 4 1/2% of Federated's equity. 

A top First Boston official says the firm expects to have a loss of no more than $30 million from its Campeau investments, although he concedes the firm can't sell them because the market is so fragile. "If I dumped our securities, we would have a panic and our role isn't to panic the market," he says. (In the meantime, First Boston is earning a healthy interest rate on its Campeau-related bonds.) 

Nevertheless, First Boston likely will have to mark these investments down sharply when the quarter ends. "Certainly, unless things turn around by the end of the month, earnings will be down for the third quarter," says Andrew Aran, a senior vice president in charge of the financial institutions group at Standard & Poor's Corp. 

"While First Boston's business is well managed, the fundamental riskiness of its business remains," says John J. Kriz, a securities-industry analyst at Moody's Investors Service. 

More concerned about its image right now than a potential loss, First Boston's senior executives, led by Mr. Hennessy, a former assistant secretary of the U.S. Treasury, fanned out across the globe last week to deflect the Campeau fallout and mollify new shareholders. 

"Capitalism is messy," Mr. Hennessy said in Tokyo between meetings with his new, somewhat rattled Japanese shareholders.
The "Japanese, who have been quite important investors and who own 12% of CS First Boston, wanted to know" the extent of the damage caused by the Campeau debacle.
But "people don't look at the firm {First Boston}, they look at the deal," he said. 

Some First Boston executives also say the problems with Federated and Allied bonds shouldn't be perceived as a reflection on the firm, pointing to currently depressed junk-bond offerings arranged by other Wall Street firms.
These include junk bonds issued by Resorts International Inc., Southland Corp. and Integrated Resources Inc. "We're all consenting adults in this market," a top First Boston official says. 

That is cold comfort for some First Boston customers battered by huge losses on their Federated and Allied bond holdings.
As recently as July, First Boston was still sending its clients research reports extolling Federated and Allied bonds. "We're all big boys, but this certainly doesn't help First Boston's credibility," says a large West Coast money manager who owns some depressed Campeau-related securities.
First Boston "made only one mistake, but it was a big mistake." 

Campeau isn't First Boston's only problem.
Preoccupied with its own reorganization and the last-ditch effort to put together a financial bailout for Campeau, First Boston has struggled through the first nine months.
The closely held investment bank doesn't disclose its earnings.
But "the first quarter was miserable," says a First Boston executive. "The second was one of our best ever, and the third {which ends next week} looks mediocre.
But we should come out OK and virtually unscathed." 

As it performed erratically, dozens of First Boston's top traders, salesmen and merger specialists either were forced out or lured away by rivals -- an unusually high attrition rate for First Boston.
Staff morale has plummeted during the Campeau troubles, some employees say. 

Michael Holland, a managing director who helped create First Boston's highly successful money-management division, defected to Salomon Brothers Inc. in the spring.
Mr. Holland declines to comment.
Luis Mendez, a managing director who helped make First Boston's equity department one of the most formidable on Wall Street in the 1980s, was fired after a power struggle with Curtis R. Welling, a managing director who took over Mr. Mendez's job. 

Amid the internal feuding at First Boston, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., dangling seven-figure annual-income contracts, hired a top equity salesman, bond salesman and virtually the entire convertible-bond department at First Boston.
Drexel "guaranteed these guys three times what they got here for three years and let them split 30% of the profits," says a First Boston executive. "We're not about to match that." 

Meanwhile, the new management at CS First Boston is putting a new stamp on the place.
Deloitte Haskins & Sells, First Boston's auditor for several decades, was quietly replaced earlier this month by Peat, Marwick, Mitchell & Co., the auditor for Credit Suisse First Boston. 

However, CS First Boston's initial plan to secure a single major Japanese investor to balance the 44.5% -- and effectively controlling -- stake of Credit Suisse parent CS Holding went awry.
As the $200 billion high-risk junk-bond market sputtered and revenue from the securities industry plummeted in the first quarter, CS First Boston scuttled that strategy and settled on 14 different shareholders. 

The upheaval in the junk-bond market has focused attention on the so-called bridge loans advanced by First Boston and other Wall Street firms to finance highly leveraged takeovers.
All told, First Boston had almost $2 billion outstanding of these temporary loans to a string of highly leveraged companies -- or almost twice its equity capital of $1.1 billion -- when the Campeau squeeze hit. "A build-up of bridge financing that is twice equity should be a cause for concern," says Stephen W. Joynt, an executive director at Fitch Investors Service, a credit-rating agency. "These are sizable, illiquid financings until placed with investors." 

First Boston isn't sure whether it will provide a $700 million bridge to help complete a $3.5 billion acquisition of American Medical International Inc. Late last week, it reduced its bridge loans to slightly more than $1 billion as it syndicated some of its risks to other concerns. 

Mr. Hennessy, who successfully handled several large-scale defections and market dislocations at Credit Suisse First Boston, isn't worried by the recent bad news. "I'm basically relaxed," he says. "Given what we've done this year, I take it as a pretty good report card.
I can't remember a time when the business hasn't been so bullish.
We have the prototype investment bank of the 1990s." 

Marcus W. Brauchli in Tokyo contributed this article. 

