.START 

Displaying a talent for hype rarely seen in Belgium, Super Club N.V. bills itself as "a major contender for dominance in the world video market." 

Although the Antwerp-based company is far from achieving that ambition, it is creating a stir in the U.S. video-rental business by snapping up video stores at a fast-forward pace.
Super Club's planned acquisition binge -- which industry people say is likely to total at least $120 million over the next few months -- would make the company the third-largest U.S. video-store operator by year end, behind Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. and West Coast Video Ltd.
By New Year's, Super Club expects to have 400 stores in the U.S., giving it a presence in almost every state. 

"They have retailers very anxious about what they're doing, who they are and how much money they have," says Bruce Apar, editor of Video Business, an industry magazine in New York. 

With 44 U.S. stores already acquired, Super Club shows how a company can expand fast in a fragmented industry, dominated by small businesses, that is ripe for consolidation.
As in other such situations, growth is slowing and many of the original entrepreneurs fear tougher competition. 

The trend toward national chains like Super Club makes mom-and-pop operators nervous.
In addition, some are starting to feel burned-out after riding the peak of the video-rental boom, says Steven Appel, editor of Video Insider, a newsletter.
Thus, many of the smaller operators are expected to cash in at the first good opportunity, industry experts say. 

"A lot of small chains are willing to sell quite cheaply now," says Richard Abt, executive vice president of West Coast Video, which -- despite its name -- is based in Philadelphia. 

Super Club, having built up a highly profitable European chain in the early years of the video-rental business, now has the financial strength to gobble up small competitors.
Its founder and chairman, Maurits De Prins, says his company's size and buying power allow it to hold costs 20% to 25% below those of a typical small operator. 

Super Club is attracted by the vast size of the U.S. market -- revenue is expected to be $10 billion for 1989 -- and the well-developed American appetite for take-home films; more than 60% of all U.S. households have a videocassette recorder, and the percentage is expected to continue growing.
Industry executives say total revenue from the 25,000 or so video stores in the U.S. is likely to expand about 10% annually in the next few years.
That rate is considered healthy, though it is far below the explosive growth of the early 1980s, when the business was new. 

Mr. De Prins announced two weeks ago that the company is raising 2.5 billion Belgian francs ($61.4 million) through a bond issue being arranged by Kredietbank N.V., of Belgium.
The proceeds, mostly earmarked for U.S. expansion, will provide only a fraction of the funds Super Club needs to fulfill its goals.
The rest, says Mr. De Prins, will come from cash flow, reserves and other borrowings. 

Early this year, Super Club spent about $6 million for an office building in north Dallas to serve as a base for its fledgling U.S. subsidiary.
The U.S. unit since has announced acquisitions of Movietime/Alfalfa, New Orleans, which operates 21 stores in Louisiana, Mississippi and Arkansas, as well as Video Towne Entertainment, Dayton, Ohio, which has 22 stores in Ohio and Indiana.
Terms weren't disclosed. 

This week, Mr. De Prins says, the company should reach agreements on acquisitions involving about 150 more stores, bringing its U.S. total to 200.
He declines to identify the acquisitions before agreements are in place. 

Big competitors say they aren't quaking.
At Blockbuster, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., Tom Gruber says, "We're not very nervous." Mr. Gruber, Blockbuster's chief marketing officer, predicts that Super Club's outlets won't be "in the same ballpark" as Blockbuster's larger "superstores." 

Moreover, he says, Super Club is making a mistake by letting the stores it acquires keep their old identities rather than establishing a single world-wide brand name. "That's a very strange way to put together a chain," Mr. Gruber says. 

Blockbuster has about 870 stores, all under its own name, and predicts it will have 1,000 by year end.
West Coast Video has more than 700 stores.
Most of West Coast's stores are franchised, as are about 40% of Blockbuster's.
For its part, Super Club says it won't franchise. 

Though it is green in the U.S., Super Club has built a formidable record in Europe.
It has powerful connections at home, where it is Belgium's largest video chain.
The company's board includes the chairmen of both Kredietbank, Belgium's third-largest bank, and Philips N.V. of Belgium, a unit of the Dutch electronics giant. 

Mr. De Prins, 41 years old, founded the company six years ago.
After stints in such diverse fields as mechanical engineering, computer programming, real estate and advertising, he was looking for a fast-growing business and settled on video.
Once the choice was made, Mr. De Prins rapidly opened stores offering a larger variety than most of the competition.
He vowed to increase revenue and profit by at least 2.5 times each year.
So far, he says, that goal has been met. 

For 1989, Mr. De Prins predicts that Super Club will post net income of at least 1.5 billion francs on sales of more than eight billion francs. 

Aside from Belgium and the U.S., the company has smaller video-distribution and other film interests in the Netherlands, Luxembourg, West Germany, France, Switzerland and Spain.
Though the operations outside Belgium are mostly in the early stages of development, Super Club says it's the largest video chain in the highly fragmented European market. 

Asia is next: Mr. De Prins says he hopes to have a presence in Japan by the end of next year. 

To help finance its rapid growth, Super Club is considering going public with a listing on one or more European stock exchanges within the next 18 months. 

Mr. De Prins also is diversifying.
Super Club dabbles in advertising, magazine publishing and travel agencies, and it plans to build domed resorts with swimming pools and other sporting facilities in Belgium. 

But the main focus is on films.
Aside from its stores, Super Club distributes video films through about 1,000 vending machines, designed by Mr. De Prins. 

On a much grander scale, he wants Super Club to be an "integrated" entertainment company.
Thus, the company is buying video rights to films, developing multiscreen movie theaters in Belgium and investing in movie production.
The company has bankrolled a couple of local movies, but its biggest project is an investment of $2 million to $3 million in "Wait Until Spring, Bandini," a U.S. film starring Faye Dunaway, which Mr. De Prins says will be released this fall. 

Could Super Club get carried away with the glamour of show biz?
Mr. De Prins, deadpan, says: "There's no way we'd go on a wild ride." 

