.START 

Charge With Caution 

When Traveling Abroad 

THE PRIVILEGE of using plastic can get mighty expensive for overseas travelers. 

Many travelers probably don't realize it, but some big charge and credit card companies, including American Express, Citicorp's Diners Club and Visa U.S.A. Inc., tack on a 1% fee for converting foreign charges into U.S. currency. 

This fee is figured into each charge made in foreign countries.
And that adds up quickly on big-ticket items.
On a $4,000 hotel stay, for instance, the charge would be $40 -- double many cards' annual fee. 

The card companies say the fee reflects their foreign-exchange processing costs.
But consumer advocates complain that the fee is disclosed only in the fine print of card-holder agreements.
It often isn't mentioned at all in monthly statements. "There is very little knowledge of the charge," says Peggy Miller, a banking specialist at the Consumer Federation of America in Washington. 

What's more, consumer groups say the fee should have a ceiling.
It costs credit card companies the same to convert any charge, these groups say.
Yet because the fee is calculated on a percentage basis, card holders pay more on costly items than they do on small purchases. 

The reasoning for making card holders pay at a flat rate without a cap "really isn't justified," Ms. Miller says. 

Freebies Come First 

For Some Travel Agents 

MANY PEOPLE believe travel agents are on their side.
But one out of three of them is more interested in getting freebies than getting the lowest prices for customers, according to a recent survey. 

In a Travel Life magazine "ethics poll" of 1,235 agents, 37% said they would intentionally try to talk their customers into buying a certain airline ticket or some other travel product -- just so they could win a special prize.
Another 13% said they weren't sure what they would do in such a situation. 

In addition to paying agents commissions, airlines, hotels and car-rental companies often reward them for selling a certain number of tickets or reservations.
The rewards include free trips, discounts on merchandise and outright cash payments ($50 to $2,000 isn't unusual). 

Critics say the rewards prompt agents to push customers to spend more money than they had planned. "I think that's the tackiest thing," says Carolyn Friede, consumer affairs director at the American Society of Travel Agents in Washington. "It's so unprofessional." 

Travel agents also said in the poll that they won't provide certain services many travelers want.
One-third of the respondents wouldn't make two airline reservations for the same trip, a tactic known as double booking.
Even though airlines discourage it, many travelers like to double book so they have a backup flight in case they miss one. 

Many agents are skeptical about the poll's unflattering findings and argue that it only makes sense for them to act in the consumer's best interest.
Otherwise, they say, they risk losing customers. "The loyalty of most travel agents is with protecting their clients," insists Susan Tanzman Kaplan, who owns two travel agencies in Los Angeles. 

The poll did produce some positive findings for travelers.
Fully 93% of the agents said they will book a client flying one way on a round-trip ticket if, through a promotional deal, the round-trip fare happens to be cheaper. 

Here's a Bargain Way 

To See the World 

IF YOU'RE FLYING abroad, it may be cheaper to go around the world rather than head directly back home. 

Because of quirks in the fare system, around-the-world tickets can sometimes be 10% to 25% cheaper than some round-trip tickets. 

For example, first-class round-trip fare between New York and Tokyo is $4,912.
But one around-the-world combination, taking Northwest Airlines and KLM from New York to Tokyo, then to Hong Kong, Amsterdam, and back to New York, is $913 cheaper at $3,999, says Stratton Travel Inc., a Franklin, N.J., corporate agency that specializes in international rates. 

A Japan Air Lines-Trans World Airlines itinerary from New York to Tokyo and back through London slashes $1,213 from the fare, to $3,699. 

Such globe-spanning flight plans have some drawbacks.
Obviously, they make the trip a lot longer and force fliers to switch carriers.
In addition, most of these deals are loaded with restrictions, such as advance-purchase requirements and cancellation penalties. 

Odds and Ends MAJOR U.S. airlines spent about the same on commissions to travel agents last year as they did on airplane maintenance.
Recently released statistics show that 12% of the carriers' total expenses of $42.49 billion went for agents' commissions, while 13% went to keep the planes flying.
The airlines' spending on food for passengers, at 4.1%, exceeded that for advertising, at 2.6%. . . . Lodging industry concentration: Of the 23,400 new budget-hotel rooms added by 50 lodging chains in the U.S. last year, almost three-fourths were built by the 10 biggest chains, according to the Laventhol & Horwath accounting and consulting firm. . . . Hotel chic thrives, even in America's heartland.
The Ritz-Carlton Chicago has a two-floor suite that goes for $2,500 a night.
And for $1,000 a night, the Omni Netherland Plaza offers some bilevel rooms -- with panoramic views of Cincinnati. 

