.START 

Six months ago on the eve of her 10th anniversary in office British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher seemed invincible.
Today she looks politically vulnerable.
The U.S. and Canada could -- and should -- help. 

Mrs. Thatcher's political isolation has come about in part because of her dispute with European unificationists over the extent to which Britain must relinquish its sovereignty in order to participate in the Single European Market, or SEM. British Conservative Party losses in the June election for the European Parliament and Mrs. Thatcher's decline in subsequent opinion polls both attest to the damage done to her position by the European issue. 

Mrs. Thatcher's problems derive from her opponents' success at obscuring the distinction between free trade and national sovereignty.
Unificationists such as former Prime Minister Edward Heath and European Commission President Jacques Delors have so far convinced the British public that it can't trade more openly with Europe without also accepting the dictation of internal British policy from the European bureaucracy, Parliament and courts.
Mrs. Thatcher's political future and the future of an independent Britain may depend on her ability to divorce the issue of free trade, which she favors, from the issue of diminished sovereignty, which she does not.
With Mr. Delors pressing for the European Community to assume "80% of economic legislation, and perhaps even fiscal and social legislation" within a decade, and with a British general election expected just before the SEM goes into effect in 1992, she has no time to waste. 

Given both Mrs. Thatcher's steadfast support for North American interests and the unilateralist tendencies of the British opposition, President Bush and Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney might do well to help her make her point.
They could do so by inviting the U.K. to enter the recently ratified free-trade agreement between Washington and Ottawa.
Such a proposal would have several benefits. 

First, the inclusion of Britain in the North American agreement would enhance the economic position of all three countries.
The advantages of free trade that have made the SEM so attractive to Europeans -- access to new products, markets and raw materials, enhanced competitiveness and lower consumer prices -- also would commend the idea of a North Atlantic Free Trade Area (NAFTA). 

An additional 60 million people in the U.S.-Canada pact would create a single North Atlantic market roughly equal to the SEM in population and gross national product.
With North American industries increasingly worried about being locked out of a "Fortress Europe" after 1992, a formal U.S.-Canada trade agreement with Britain would ensure that North American companies would maintain a vital link not only with Britain but also -- via Britain -- with the rest of Europe.
The possibilities for greater access to European markets made available by the new pact would help sell the idea to a U.S. Congress worried about U.S. trade deficits.
Canadians might particularly welcome the inclusion of Britain as a means of diluting U.S. presence and assuaging voter fears of U.S. "economic annexation." For Britain, freer access to a market of 250 million prosperous and English-speaking people could give a needed boost to its manufacturing and marketing interests. 

Second, the offer would give Mrs. Thatcher leverage in her battle to resist the loss of British autonomy to a politically unified Europe.
An offer to include Britain in the North American agreement would dramatize the difference between a beneficial trading relationship based on the mutual respect of national sovereignty and a semi-statist drive for political amalgamation that threatens the power of local and national legislatures.
Recent EC attempts to extend its authority over everything from cigarette labels and management practices to minimum-wage laws and tax rates compare unfavorably with the less heavy-handed North American agreement -- the administration of which requires no separate parliament or judiciary and no pan-national bureaucracy.
In short, it implies no renunciation of sovereignty. 

An invitation to join in a NAFTA would enable Mrs. Thatcher to test European intentions prior to 1992.
In the worst case, if Britain entered into a separate agreement with the U.S. and Canada, moves might be made within the EC to deny Britain membership in the SEM. If, however, the SEM is primarily concerned with promoting free trade, as most unificationists claim, then there should be no reason to expel member states that enter into separate trade pacts with other nations.
Thus, giving Mrs. Thatcher another offer will enable her to demand that the Eurocracy either cease promulgating regulations that violate British sovereignty or risk losing Britain's participation. 

Finally, the agreement would strengthen North Atlantic ties at a time when the allure of European pan-nationalism not only threatens European leaders who oppose it, but also promises to alienate Britain and its North American allies.
The recent European Court of Human Rights decision to overrule British compliance with a U.S. extradition request (in the Soering case) suggests Britain's European marriage may begin to limit vital aspects of its "special relationship" with the U.S. and Canada. 

Since World War II, Anglo-North American military and intelligence cooperation has extended, in the words of Cambridge historian Christopher Andrew, "far beyond the formal obligations of the Atlantic alliance." During the 1980s, the mutual support provided by this alliance proved essential to the success of unilateral British and U.S. military actions against Argentina and Libya, both of which were opposed by European allies.
Both the removal of the Soviet SS-20s from Europe and the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan occurred as a result of Anglo-American initiatives that were either resisted or ignored on the Continent.
The diminution of British autonomy inherent in the idea of European amalgamation raises serious questions about the future of this unique strategic arrangement. 

Bismarck observed that the most important fact of the modern world was that the British and the Americans spoke the same language.
His remark has proved prophetic.
Anglo-North American cooperation has played a decisive role in the outcome of both of this century's world wars, in the maintenance of peace in Europe for the past 40 years and in the reversal of Soviet expansionism during this decade. 

The Anglo-North American alliance, natural and beneficial though it may be, cannot be taken for granted.
A minimal precondition of decisive bilateral or trilateral policy is sovereignty of participating nations.
The current drift toward the multilateral unification of Europe threatens British sovereignty and will encourage British indecision and inaction.
Yet current economic and political realities make the gradual surrender of British sovereignty seem inevitable.
Mrs. Thatcher's attempts to resist this trend have left her isolated.
If the U.S. and Canada wish to maintain their historic relationship with a sovereign British nation, then they must act now and make her a better offer. 

Mr. Meyer is a Ph. D. student at Cambridge University. 

