.START 

The English yuppie may be an endangered species: Filofax PLC, British maker of the trendy, leatherbound diaries known as the "Yuppie's Bible," reported its first-ever loss. 

Through much of the 1980s, Filofax's bulging, monogrammed appointment books were mandatory fashion accessories for young, wealthy climbers in London's financial district.
Along with Mont Blanc pens and cellular phones, $180-and-up Filofaxes have also caught on with the flaunt-your-wealth crowd in Manhattan, Los Angeles and Tokyo. 

But in Britain, at least, the bubble has burst.
The 68-year-old Filofax company, based in a London suburb, reported a #554,000 ($875,000) pretax loss in the first half -- a near-complete reversal of its #571,000 pretax profit a year earlier.
Its sales slid 19% to #4.4 million from #5.5 million.
The bottom line: a net loss of #519,000, compared with an earlier profit of #358,000.
Worse, "a very disappointing trading result" was forecast for the entire year. 

The crumpled profit, after a year of stagnant earnings in 1988, follows that day marked in black in most London yuppies' Filofaxes: Oct. 19, 1987, the day the stock market crashed.
Since, London sales of Porsches, chic loft apartments and other luxuries have wilted, as thousands of once-rich young London brokers, research analysts and bankers have found themselves out of jobs.
But Filofax officials -- who always denied the yuppie label -- insist their problems aren't related to the crash. 

"I doubt you could say more than 5% of our users are yuppies" in Britain, bristled David Collischon, Filofax chairman, when questioned about the sales slump.
He allows that U.S. sales, accounting for about 12% of Filofax revenue last year and growing this year at a brisk 25% rate, are "much more oriented towards fashion" than in Britain.
He blamed the British sales slump primarily on high interest rates and reduced consumer spending.
He called those temporary problems, to be overcome a new strategy. 

The once-stodgy Filofax is taking a page out of other marketers' books.
Eschewing its understated strategy of selling primarily by word-of-mouth, Filofax this year plans its first, big-budget advertising campaign.
It's also diversifying: This year, it launched a pocket Filofax and a desk-top Filofax.
It's even planning a promotional gimmick -- for a limited time, buyers of its #65 Winchester model can get two round-trip air-tickets to the U.S., provided they also buy a package holiday with a designated travel agency. 

"We're going through a difficult time," Mr. Collischon said, "but I have tremendous faith in the future of the company." 

