.START 

Maynard H. Jackson is more than just the overwhelming favorite to win this city's mayoral election Oct. 3.
He is also the new toast of the business breakfast circuit. 

In recent weeks, Mr. Jackson has sometimes started his day at the downtown Commerce Club, breaking bread with the likes of architect-developer John C. Portman; T. Marshall Hahn, chairman and chief executive of Georgia-Pacific Corp.; and Robert Strickland, chairman and chief executive of SunTrust Banks Inc. 

Why the sudden chumminess?
For starters, on Aug. 8, Mr. Jackson's only serious opponent, Michael Lomax, dropped out of the race, leaving seven other candidates -- including civil rights war horse Hosea L. Williams -- who aren't expected to give the Jackson campaign much trouble.
That left Mr. Lomax's many business supporters with the choice of watching the Jackson bandwagon pass by, or stepping -- if not jumping -- aboard. 

Mr. Jackson, meanwhile, is attempting to avoid repeating mistakes he made between 1974 and 1982.
Those years marked his first tenure as mayor of Atlanta -- the city's first black mayor -- as well as a time of bitter relations between City Hall and Atlanta's predominantly white business community. 

"The big problem was that I lost personal contact with the private-sector leadership," says the 51-year-old Democrat, who readily acknowledges the errors of his first administration. "In hectic times, the relationships weren't there to survive differences of opinion." 

The hectic times have been numerous in Mr. Jackson's career.
A grandson of one of Atlanta's first black political figures, Mr. Jackson was an early participant in student civil-rights protests and later worked as a self-described "poor people's lawyer," offering free legal services to the disadvantaged.
In 1968, at age 30, he dove into the political arena, running a quixotic race for the U.S. Senate against Georgia's venerable Herman Talmadge. 

Mr. Jackson lost that contest, but the tall newcomer with the movie-star smile made a strong showing among Atlanta's voters, putting him squarely in line for the mayor's office in 1974.
The ensuing race with incumbent Sam Massell featured equal doses of racism and civil-rights activism.
Although Mr. Jackson received just 15% of the city's white vote, he was the near-unanimous choice of Atlanta's blacks. 

Upon entering office in 1974, an imposing and impatient Mr. Jackson laid out an agenda for black empowerment and affirmative action, a program that quickly put him at odds with a business community that had never dealt with a black mayor. "To say the relationship was strained is a gross understatement," says Charles Loudermilk, chairman and chief executive of Aaron Rents Inc. 

Instances of not returning phone calls and shunning invitations to private clubs made Atlanta's blue-blood community boil.
The powerful Atlanta Rotary Club, which traditionally commands an annual speech by the mayor, was stood up on several occasions, recalls Mr. Loudermilk. "When Maynard did show up, he lectured them.
I think he was too young to understand the importance of the group back then." 

Mr. Jackson once issued an ultimatum to the city's conservative banking community: "Open your inner sanctums {to minorities}, or the city will find some place else to put its money." Although that eruption came only after 18 months of fruitless talks with local banks, financial executives were still appalled, recalls the Rev. Joseph E. Lowery, president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. 

Clashes over construction of Hartsfield International Airport involved everyone from design firms to airlines to contractors.
Mr. Jackson held up design work on the $500 million project for six months while pushing local architectural and engineering firms to add minority joint-venture partners, recalls George Berry, former commissioner of aviation. 

While Mr. Jackson says his priorities will be the same, he maintains he is older, wiser, more diplomatic and more patient.
Because whites accept him more, he can be less defensive, he says. 

Mr. Jackson also is quick to note that his time in office was marked by more than just confrontation.
He says some 70,000 low-income residents, for instance, found jobs during his tenure.
The city's reputation for police brutality was curbed.
And Hartsfield Airport was completed "on time," says Mr. Jackson, helping to make Atlanta an international crossroads. 

Now, Mr. Jackson appears ready to open his doors to business leaders. "He's made a strenuous effort to reach people in the business community," says Frank Carter Sr., chairman and chief executive of Carter & Associates, a real estate development firm. "This is a good sign and promising in terms of the future." Adds the Rev. Lowery: "We see a more mature Maynard now, one that has mellowed." 

Many political observers say the problems that await Atlanta's next mayor may be more serious than the issues Mr. Jackson first confronted in 1974.
The number of drug-related crimes has skyrocketed, and some 30% of the city lives in poverty.
Outgoing Mayor Andrew Young, who is currently building his campaign machine for the Georgia governor's race in 1990, has often been criticized for spending more time promoting the city than dealing with these problems. 

Says the Rev. McKinley Young, pastor of one of the city's largest black churches: "The disparity between the haves and have-nots is no longer a black-white issue.
Maynard's biggest task will be to take Atlanta beyond the illusion of being a boom town." 

Mr. Jackson agrees and says he hopes the business community will be an ally -- not an adversary. "I think the olive branch will have to come from both sides," he says. "Atlanta has a more intense set of problems that have to be addressed, and there's less money available in the form of federal largess." 

He adds that he no longer has to contend with history. "I don't have to be the 'first' black mayor this time, so I can concentrate more on getting the job done." 

