.START 

Rise, fall or crawl? 

Investors are puzzled about where the U.S. economy is heading.
And puzzled investors sit on their hands, as was evident in the stock market last week.
Daily trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange never rose above 150 million shares.
Prices meandered in a narrow range; the Dow Jones Industrial Average edged up 7.03 last week after dropping 34.96 the previous week. 

The experts investors listen to profess no bewilderment, of course, though their collective opinions cover the entire spectrum of economic scenarios.
The most prevalent forecast currently is that the economy will crawl along with modest growth and inflation.
That isn't bad for stocks, some experts contend. 

Steven Einhorn, a partner at Goldman Sachs, says that despite a sluggish economy, earnings of many companies represented in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index will rise by more than the inflation rate in the next few quarters.
But he suggests the real kick for stocks might come in the form of heftier dividend payouts.
That's because U.S. companies have completed most of their capital spending plans and can now push more free cash into dividends. 

"Dividend growth this year and next can be about 12%," says Mr. Einhorn. "And dividend growth should offset whatever negative effects there are from earnings declines" in a slow-growing economy. 

Like Mr. Einhorn, Dennis Jarrett, market strategist at Kidder Peabody, expects the economy to "muddle through." He sees growth running at about 1.5% over the next 12 months, with corporate earnings staying stable.
Consequently, he says, stocks that respond to the economic cycle will be attractive. "Most portfolio managers made conscious decisions to be out of the cyclical stocks" this year, driving prices down, he says. "While the fundamentals of a 'muddle through' economy may not be stellar, the prices of those stocks are very cheap." 

Mr. Jarrett also says many industrial companies have low debt. "That suggests there is potential for dividend increases, share buy-backs or internal types of restructuring" that could push stock prices higher, he says.
Among his recommendations: Champion International, which has been buying its own shares; its level of debt to equity is 38%, well below the industry average of about 50%. 

Mr. Jarrett expects Weyerhauser to begin a stock buy-back program; the company's debt-to-equity level stands at a low 32%.
Cleveland Cliffs, the big iron ore processor, has increased its dividend and should lower its debt-to-equity figure to 40% by year's end. 

Not everyone agrees that earnings will hold up in a slow-growth economy.
Last week, the Commerce Department reinforced this view by reporting that second-quarter profits after taxes suffered their biggest decline on an annualized basis since the first quarter of 1986. 

That suggests to Michael Cosgrove, principal of The Econoclast, a Dallas-based economics advisory firm, that operating profits -- before depreciation and inventory costs are figured in -- will continue declining for the rest of this year. 

"The positive underpinning for the stock market -- improvement of profits -- is not going to be there," Mr. Cosgrove says.
He suggests investing in shares of multinational companies that will benefit from stronger growth abroad.
Among his choices are Coca-Cola, Merck, Procter & Gamble and Philip Morris. 

There is a fine line between an economy that crawls and one that falls.
Mickey Levy, chief economist at First Fidelity Bancorp. in Philadelphia, says he thinks the economy is walking that line.
But if a recession occurs, he predicts it will be relatively mild.
One reason is that manufacturing inventories aren't as high as they have been before previous recessions.
If sales slow, manufacturing industries won't need as much in the way of production cutbacks and layoffs to bring inventories into line. 

Further, inflation isn't as serious a problem as it has been before previous recessions. "The Fed started tightening in 1987 to control inflation," he says. "Usually, the Fed waits until it's too late and has to clamp down hard." The Fed's anti-inflation stance has inspired a degree of confidence among businessmen that inflation won't be allowed to get out of hand. 

But although he predicts a mild recession if any, Mr. Levy cautions that investors might be surprised at what a recession will look like.
He contends that the traditional victims of a shrinking economy -- the basic manufacturing industries -- are much better equipped to ride out the next recession than are such traditionally safe industries as retailers, finance, insurance and real estate companies. 

"The old Rust Belt went through a painful restructuring in the late 1970s and early 1980s," he says. "They cut out a lot of fat, and they're operating lean and mean now." What's more, U.S. manufacturing companies have been successful in penetrating overseas markets in recent years, so exports should help keep their factories operating in a recession. 

The service industries, on the other hand, haven't had to discipline themselves. "Some of the wholesale and retail firms have gotten fat and sloppy just like the manufacturing firms were in the late 1970s," Mr. Levy says. "Some of the old traditional defensive industries could be prime candidates for getting their clocks cleaned in a recession." 

That's why he advises picking defensive stocks carefully in preparation for a recession.
Avoid heavily cyclical stocks such as autos and steels, he says, and hunt for manufacturers with good export bases, such as machinery stocks. 

A darker view of a possible recession comes from A. Gary Shilling, president of A. Gary Shilling & Co., a New York-based economic consulting firm. 

He contends that in its quest to get "lean and mean," U.S. industry has exchanged variable costs for fixed costs.
Many of the blue-collar workers who used to make things have been replaced by more productive machines, usually financed by debt.
But while blue-collar workers could be laid off when recessions occurred, machines can't be fired, and interest payments don't go away. 

"The easy cost-cutting has been done," says Mr. Shilling. "From now on it's going to be very difficult for business to match declines in sales with cuts in costs.
That means there's tremendous volatility on the downside for earnings." 

Mr. Shilling also takes exception to the idea that manufacturing inventories aren't at dangerous levels. "Very few wholesalers, retailers or manufacturers admit that they have an inventory problem," says Mr. Shilling. "But they never do admit it until it's too late." On average, Mr. Shilling says, around 79% of the decline in gross national product in a recession is due to inventory liquidations. 

For those reasons, Mr. Shilling is predicting a much more severe recession than many others expect.
And any downturn is likely to worsen other problems in the economy, he says. "That's when the Third World debtors are going to default, and that's when the LBOs {leveraged buy-outs} are really going to be in trouble." 

But, Mr. Shilling says, the stock market obviously isn't behaving according to his scenario so far. "Either we're dead wrong or there's going to be a lot of vulnerability in stock prices at some point," he says.
He recommends moving assets into high-quality bonds and "stocks that act like bonds." Those would be utilities, especially the Baby Bells. 

Then there are the optimists. 

David Levine, chief economist at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., says the Federal Reserve intends to keep the economy growing.
Recessions, he says, occur only when the Fed wants one. 

"Every recession in the last 35 years -- and there have been six -- has happened because the Fed kept tightening even though the economy slowed," says Mr. Levine, who notes that the Fed was quick to cut interest rates this summer when job growth slowed. 

Mr. Levine says he thinks the U.S. economy will reaccelerate. "In eight other periods of slow growth since 1953, the Fed held steady or eased, and the result was above 5% GNP growth," he says. "History suggests that recession is unlikely and a soft landing is unlikely.
We haven't had a soft landing in at least 60 years." 

Does it sound good for stocks?
Maybe not.
Mr. Levine says the stock market does best when the economy is slow and rates are falling.
A reacceleration would bring on higher interest rates, which would be likely to offset stronger earnings gains. 

Friday's Market Activity 

Stock prices closed slightly higher in the lightest trading of the week. 

Takeover stories and bank restructurings captured investors' attention, causing activity in selected issues.
Otherwise, trading was dull.
New York Stock Exchange volume of 133,350,000 shares was the lightest since Sept. 11. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average moved within a narrow band throughout the day, ending 1.33 points higher at 

Its gain was limited by losses in Procter & Gamble and Goodyear Tire & Rubber.
P&G fell 2 to 119 7/8 after announcing its intention to buy Noxell, whose Class B shares surged 10 to 31 1/4 in over-the-counter trading.
Goodyear fell 1 1/4 to 53 5/8. 

J.P. Morgan gained 2 to 41 3/4.
The banking concern Thursday added $2 billion to loan-loss reserves and said it will post a $1.8 billion third-quarter loss as a result. 

Other big banking stocks were active, including Citicorp, which advanced 1 1/8 to 32 7/8, and BankAmerica, which rose 1/2 to 34. 

International equity funds were again actively traded, and -- as was the case all week -- traders said Japanese investors were big buyers. 

A newcomer, Austria Fund, began trading at 16, compared with its offering price of $12 a share, before dropping 3 1/8 to 12 7/8 on 1.4 million shares. 

Germany Fund, which soared nearly 40% in the two previous sessions, lost 1 to 13.
Asia Pacific Fund gained 1 1/8, or 8%, to 15 1/8. 

Cummins Engine plunged 5 1/8 to 57 1/2.
The company expects to report a "substantial loss" for the third quarter.
A year earlier, Cummins had a loss of $17.6 million on sales of $808.2 million. 

Transamerica gained 1 1/2 to 46 5/8.
Business Week magazine said the company is a likely takeover target unless it quickly undergoes a major restructuring.
The report quoted one analyst as valuing Transamerica at $79 a share. 

