.START 

The third quarter ends this week with a question that has been fodder for economists since it began: Will consumers buy more cars? 

Today's mid-September car sales data should add a smidgen of evidence on the strength of an industry that has been credited with much of the economy's resilience this summer.
The rest of the week's data is fairly sparse: August durable goods orders, which are expected to rebound, and the index of leading indicators, which is expected to rise. 

"We'll still be catching the tail end of good numbers before they rapidly deteriorate," said James Barokocy, deputy manager, Brown Brothers Harriman & Co., New York. "The third quarter will look good, but starting with the next quarter there will be a sharp contrast," he added. 

Mr. Barokocy insists that inflation is still a nagging problem, noting that excluding volatile food and energy parts the consumer price index is still in the 4% to 4.5% range for the year. 

Friday's report of a solid gain in August personal income showed consumers have more money, but will they use it to buy more cars? 

Stephen Roach, senior economist at Morgan Stanley & Co., New York, thinks they will. "Consumer buying power is there to support demand for cars.
The outlook for consumer goods is very strong," he said. 

But what of weakness in the early September car sales figures? "Auto sales are intriguing," he said.
Some economists saw the softness as evidence the economy is cooling.
Others, including Mr. Roach, viewed it as a supply constraint as some dealerships ran out of popular models. "The auto sector is key because it is widely thought to be a strong source of potential negative GNP growth," he said. 

Demand for durable goods is thought to have rebounded in August from a sharp drop in July, thanks partly because of auto production.
Demand for primary metals and nonelectrical machinery was also thought to have bounced back in August.
The consensus view calls for an increase of about 0.5% in durable goods, due out tomorrow. 

Leading indicators are also expected to rise, marking the second consecutive month of gains.
The report, due out Friday, is expected to show an increase of about 0.3%, thanks partly to strong stock prices and money-supply growth. 

INFORMATION INFLATION: The National Association of Purchasing Management will quadruple the price of its monthly business survey to $1,000 from $250 a year, beginning in January of 1990.
This summer, the the association changed the way it disseminates the potentially market moving report and began charging $250 for a fax subscription to nonmembers such as economists and traders.
Previously, it only mailed the report for a $100 charge. 

"We had so many requests and it isn't our primary business, that's why we priced it where it is," said Jerry Baker, executive vice president. 

So, subscribers -- the association says there are currently about 40 -- will pay 900% more than a year earlier for data that are simultaneously released on news wires. 

