.START 

Imagine a guy who sits in his basement 12 hours a day, poring over junk mail the way Frank Perdue scrutinizes chickens.
That's Denison Hatch. 

To Mr. Hatch, junk mail is both profession and obsession.
He has been creating it since 1968, collecting it since 1976 and publishing Who's Mailing What], a monthly newsletter about it, since 1984.
The bottom of Mr. Hatch's split-level home in Stamford is a shrine to junk mail, with more than 8,000 pieces crammed into every drawer and basket. 

"This is the kind of stuff that's never been gathered before," says Mr. Hatch, who estimates that he reads about 1,000 pieces of junk mail a week. "Nobody's ever been crazy enough." 

In fact, for many people, just having to lug all those smoked-ham catalogs, sweepstakes teasers and fund-raising appeals from mailbox to wastebasket is annoying enough.
Last year, almost 62 billion pieces of such third-class mail found their way into American homes, more than double the 26.3 billion pieces 10 years earlier, according to the Direct Marketing Association, an industry trade group.
In a 1987 study, the U.S. Postal Service found that the average American household was receiving about 10 pieces of junk mail a week, and that those households definitely wouldn't respond to some 59% of the direct-mail advertising they received. 

Mr. Hatch believes that however much people carp about junk mail, most couldn't live without it. "People are basically lonely," he says, "and no one likes an empty mailbox.
The mail is your private check that the system is working." Furthermore, by the year 2000, Mr. Hatch argues, "the entire country will be individuals sitting in their individual rooms looking at their individual television sets.
Direct mail will cash in on that isolation." 

Perhaps the only one as addicted to junk mail as Mr. Hatch is Axel Andersson, a semi-retired owner of correspondence schools in Europe who often spends days at the Library of Congress studying the theory and practice of junk mail. "Direct mail gives you extraordinary insight into human nature," says Mr. Andersson, to whom Mr. Hatch sends his surplus every month. "You change one little headline, and you may have 80% more response." 

Until Mr. Hatch set up shop as self-appointed archivist, critic and watchdog of junk mail, the grass-roots industry was largely uncataloged.
Although the people who sent it knew if it was working, no one else was keeping track.
There was no central library of direct mail, nor were there any computerized data about it. "We're the only organization trying to tame what's basically secret," he says. 

Now, thanks to Mr. Hatch's archive and his research about various mailings, a person can quickly find out such esoterica as how many collectibles companies included sweepstakes in their direct-mail offers in the past year, as well as the size of the envelopes used.
This information, which Mr. Hatch sells to the public for a modest fee, is free to the 1,500 or so subscribers who pay $168 a year to get his newsletter. 

To keep the archive up to date, Mr. Hatch relies on 20 unpaid correspondents across the country, ranging from industry insiders to Mr. Hatch's brother-in-law, a New Jersey lawyer named Ralph Neibart.
Mr. Neibart remembers once delivering a bag of his junk mail by hand to Mr. Hatch's house. "It was like taking him a great present -- his eyes lit up, and he went off to look at it," Mr. Neibart recalls. "I don't ever expect to have the enthusiasm for it that he does, but I know enough not to call it junk anymore." 

Mr. Hatch employs three part-time helpers to open, measure, count and code each piece.
When these tasks are done, he reads it all himself. 

Mr. Hatch estimates that a direct-mail package has about four seconds to capture someone's attention before it hits the garbage can.
That's why mailings that look like checks or telegrams, or that incorporate tabs to pull or cards to tear apart, are so successful.
People also respond to packages that require the customer to insert disks into slots. "It's Freudian," Mr. Hatch opines. 

As for what makes a piece of junk mail "bad," Mr. Hatch says the sole criterion is that it fails to make a sale.
But the mystery behind that failure is one reason Mr. Hatch loves junk mail so: It's both mathematically precise (results of a mailing can be measured to the hundredth of a percentage point) and completely unpredictable. 

When Historical Times Co. was soliciting customers, in a so-called dry test, for Civil War-related products that didn't yet exist, the company's lawyers insisted that the package include a microscopic line noting that the offer was contingent on receiving enough orders.
That line, the only difference between the new mailing and earlier ones, increased response by 15%.
From then on, the company put the line on all its offers. 

Of course, the unpredictability of junk mail sometimes works the other way.
Mr. Hatch, who created direct-mail offerings in a variety of jobs and still does free-lance work, devised a package for the mutual-fund giant Fidelity Investments that hit mailboxes on Oct. 19, 1987. "The mailing got one letter," he says. 

Mr. Hatch believes the writing in direct-mail packages is the best being done in English today. "You have to put yourself inside the head of the person who's going to get the mailing and figure out all the reasons why he isn't going to buy the product," says Mr. Hatch. "Four weeks later, someone's going to get this thing, which they've forgotten they ordered, and you damn well better resell it.
Then you've got to figure out why this guy isn't going to mail his check.
You have to think so many steps ahead, it's like a good novel." 

Mr. Hatch acknowledges that there is some deception in junk mail -- decorating the envelopes to make people believe they are receiving overnight mail or interoffice envelopes, for example.
Even he is occasionally tricked into opening something under false pretenses. "I got a letter from Isaac Asimov," he says. "Now, I've never met Isaac Asimov, but people occasionally write to me. . . . I opened it, and it was a pitch for {public television} Channel 13.
I was ticked off at being duped." 

Mr. Hatch also says he goes into terrible funks when he sees the scams that come in direct-mail packages.
He hands over 30 to 40 such mailings every month to the local postal inspector.
Recently, he has been amazed by the raft of graphic fund-raising solicitations from animal-rights groups. 

Last April, using the pseudonym George Haskins, he sent letters to some 60 animal-rights groups, saying that his great aunt had recently died and left him in charge of distributing a large bequest to groups like theirs.
On reviewing their financial statements, Mr. Hatch says he found that some were stuffing an "unconscionable" amount of revenue back into the bank instead of paying for programs.
Others were raising money without having any programs in place, simply plowing the money back into more direct-mail efforts. 

"Little old ladies are throwing money at some of these guys," he says. "These guys have discovered that women, children and animals make money." 

Nevertheless, Mr. Hatch believes that, at its best, junk mail can be a force for the good.
It's a mall on your shelf, he says, especially good for two-income couples with no time to spare.
In fact, two-career couples figure prominently in his favorite junk-mail fantasy. 

"It's a mailing to a two-income family," he says. "After dinner, when the kids are in bed, the wife comes in to her husband and says, "Darling, I got the most interesting mailing today, and I want to sit down and talk to you about it. '" Mr. Hatch pauses briefly, then adds, "I don't think that has ever happened." 

