.START 

Lomas Financial Corp., facing a debt-induced liquidity crunch, said it filed for bankruptcy-court protection. 

The filing yesterday in New York under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code, put an end to three months of tense and frustrating negotiations with lenders to restructure about $1.45 billion in debt. 

The action came just as the last two holdouts among 34 senior creditors had shown signs of agreeing to a proposed refinancing plan, according to people close to the talks. "I think it would be fair to say that the agreement was finally falling into place," said Jess Hay, chairman and chief executive officer of the financial services and real estate concern. 

But he added that the final settlement wouldn't likely have been reached until the middle of next month, and that by that time the company would find it difficult to make the debt payments originally contemplated by the restructuring plan. "Throughout the process, time was our mutual enemy, and finally was the factor which produced our decision," Mr. Hay wrote in a letter to creditors. 

In an interview in his office yesterday, Mr. Hay expressed regret about the filing, but predicted the move ultimately will speed Lomas's effort to streamline itself and shed debt. "Although the senior creditors will be momentarily disrupted, I suppose, there really is no question in my mind that we will emerge in a relatively short period of time from Chapter 11 with a plan that will not only provide 100% {payment} for all creditors but with our equity firmly intact," he said. {Under Chapter 11, a company continues to operate protected from creditors while working out a plan to pay its debts.} 

The bankrupcy filing affects only Lomas Financial and its Lomas Realty USA and Roosevelt Office Center Inc. units, the company said.
The company's insurance, mortgage banking and commercial leasing subsidiaries weren't included in the filing; nor were Lomas Advisors, Lomas Corporate Services, Lomas Management, Lomas Information Systems or Lomas Administrative Services. 

The company added that four independent, publicly-held entities bearing the Lomas name -- Lomas Mortgage Corp., Lomas & Nettleton Mortgage Investors, Lomas Mortgage Securities Fund Inc. and L&N Housing Corp. -- won't be affected. 

Lomas's problems began in 1987, when its core mortgage-lending business nose-dived. 

Liquidity problems mounted earlier this year after federal banking regulators ordered some of Lomas's bank creditors to classify their loans.
Although most banks finally agreed to the restructuring, two minor lenders -- First National Bank of Louisville in Kentucky and a Dutch bank -- refused until recently to go along, according to people close to the talks.
Those banks couldn't be reached for comment. 

