.START 

Thyssen AG's profit in fiscal 1989 will show faster growth than sales because the company expanded in high-profitability market niches, Chairman Dieter Spethmann said. 

The steel and engineering company expects to report a 14% rise in sales for the year that will end Saturday to around 33 billion marks ($16.98 billion) from 29.22 billion marks in fiscal 1988, Mr. Spethmann said in an interview. 

"The concentration on our own niches, which we can exploit, has helped us measurably in 1989 and has strengthened our profit disproportionally," he said. 

Thyssen plans to look for acquisitions as well, especially in Britain, Spain and Portugal, but will continue to shy away from hostile takeover bids, Mr. Spethmann said.
Thyssen also is likely to search for suitable takeover targets in the U.S., he said. 

The chairman said Thyssen will raise its fiscal 1989 dividend from the 7.50 marks a share paid for fiscal 1988, but he wouldn't be specific about the increase. 

Mr. Spethmann also declined to be specific about Thyssen's fiscal 1989 profit.
But his comments appeared to confirm analysts' belief that the earnings trend of the company's first six months continued in the second half.
Thyssen's first-half net income rose 29% to 372 million marks from 289 million marks.
Analysts have said they expect its fiscal 1989 net to approach one billion marks, compared with 680 million marks in fiscal 1988. 

Thyssen will start fiscal 1990 with a "friendly undertone in all of our four divisions," Mr. Spethmann said.
He cited a sharp rise in orders in the capital goods and engineering unit to a record level and stable order backlog in the steel, specialty steel and trading sectors. 

"When it comes to profit, I am insatiable," he added, though he declined to make any forecasts for fiscal 1990 profit and sales. 

Some analysts nonetheless are cautious about Thyssen's outlook, predicting a profit drop. "I assume that this year's boom will come slowly to an end," says Richard Schramm, an analyst at Trinkaus & Burkhardt in Duesseldorf. 

As an example of Thyssen's success in specialized areas, Mr. Spethmann cited the plastics production of Budd Co., a subsidiary based in Troy, Mich., that has become a major profit center in recent years.
Budd has just received an order to build the body for the "wave runner," a recreational item that is a sort of cross between a motorcycle and a surfboard, for a major Japanese customer. "This is a real hit; they want to have more than one million units over a period of time," he said. 

But Budd's profit will come under pressure next year from the regrouping of production lines and the launch of two new plants, Mr. Spethmann said. 

Another unit with excellent prospects is Blohm & Voss AG, the shipbuilding subsidiary that recently received major orders from the Australian and New Zealand navies, Mr. Spethmann said.
He also confirmed reports that Blohm & Voss is interested in acquiring the navy technology activities that Daimler-Benz AG and Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm G.m.b.
H. are required to sell as a condition of their merger. 

