.START 

Part of a Series} 

To get the individual investor off the endangered species list, Wall Street might consider firing the arbitragers and hiring a few Boy Scouts. 

The investing public distrusts the securities industry and knows precious little about what it sells, according to The Wall Street Journal's "American Way of Buying" consumer survey.
Further, conversations with individuals and marketing professionals suggest that the small investor -- effectively missing from the 1988-89 bull market -- may not return until stockbrokers demonstrate more honesty, personal attention to the customer and a willingness to explain their investment strategies more clearly. 

What the public wants, in short, is what brokers derisively refer to as hand-holding.
A face lift could also help.
The Ivan Boesky-greed-is-good stereotype is well entrenched and is reinforced by the power messages and aggressive characters in much financial advertising.
For a new image, some marketing specialists suggest a shift to how-to primers and honest admissions that the stock market has been a terrifying place lately. 

As part of the Journal survey, the Roper Organization and Peter D. Hart Research Associates each asked some 2,000 adults about their savings and investment attitudes.
Among other things, the Roper Organization found that half of all consumers -- including a quarter of those with incomes above $50,000 -- say they don't even know how to buy shares of stock.
And in the Hart survey, even among those people in professional/executive jobs, twice as many rate themselves as poor investment consumers as good ones. 

Roy Grace, a partner in the Grace & Rothschild advertising agency in New York, lays the blame for investment ignorance on the lack of information in Wall Street's marketing. "When you have an industry personified by bulls and a variety of other animals to communicate confidence, you know you're in trouble," says Mr. Grace, whose clients include Whittle Communications Inc. and Salomon Brothers Inc. 

He suggests advertising that emphasizes the basic strengths of investing and tries to expand the customer base, rather than pitches to existing investors. "What people really need is an education," says Mr. Grace. "When you have a truth that is conclusive and concrete -- like the fact that the stock market has outperformed everything else historically -- and that isn't being communicated, that's a lost opportunity." 

The Journal survey also found that Americans in general profess to trust brokers less than bankers and other financial intermediaries -- including the scandal-ridden, shaky savings and loan industry.
And consumers give stockbrokers' service a poor rating. 

Carol Moog, a psychologist and advertising consultant in Philadelphia, says the low level of confidence in Wall Street is a result of "failing to be sensitive to what goes on psychologically among investors." Since people's fears about volatility and dishonesty were reinforced by the 1987 crash and the insider-trading scandals, she suggests that a confessional approach to advertising could help restore credibility. 

Brokers, she advises, should start with an apology. "They should say, 'We want to get your trust back.
Maybe in some ways the stock market was oversold.
Maybe some of you were caught unaware by all this.
So were we. '" 

Apologies might not be enough, though, for some skeptical consumers.
Asked for the first word that comes to mind when he hears the word stockbroker, Cincinnati truck driver James Hines says "crash." Mr. Hines and his wife make nearly $50,000 a year.
All their savings -- including $5,000 in certificates of deposit -- is at the local bank.
Why not reach for a higher return, maybe call up a broker and buy a good common stock? 

"I just can't see giving it to someone I don't trust," says Mr. Hines, one of the participants in the Journal survey. "The banks can fold up as easily as the other places, I know, but at least they're straight." 

Andrew Stockdale, a postal clerk in Wildwood, N.J., and his wife earn $40,000 to $45,000 a year.
With a little extra saved, they're buying a second house to generate rental income.
The stock market? 

"I don't like it and I don't know too much about it," says Mr. Stockdale. "For the customer, it's a very risky business, but the brokers are in a no-lose situation.
They collect if it goes up and they collect if it goes down.
All they want is to buy and sell your stocks like crazy." 

If they knew a little bit more about investments, Messrs.
Hines and Stockdale add, maybe they wouldn't be so afraid of getting fleeced.
In the Hart survey, respondents rate themselves better informed on exercise equipment, bank loans, insurance and stereo equipment -- every other product in the poll except computers, which are a virtual dead heat with stocks in inscrutability.
Misinformation runs rampant in the survey respondents' answers to follow-up questions.
One blue-collar worker in the Midwest reckons mutual funds would use his money to buy "futures or pork bellies." A Texas homemaker says commissions on stock transactions are about 10%, instead of the 1% to 3% that brokers typically charge individuals.
A retired Illinois custodian doesn't know that securities in customers' accounts are protected by federal insurance. 

Consumers are reasonably confident they know how to invest in certificates of deposit, U.S. savings bonds or money market funds.
But that's where it ends.
Buying, say, a stock mutual fund is beyond the grasp of half of the adult public.
Treasury, corporate and municipal bonds are even more befuddling. 

Investment understanding improves with income -- but not by much.
Among the highly taxed citizens with incomes above $50,000, about half know how to buy tax-free municipal bonds, but more than 40% don't. 

Since the 1975 deregulation of fixed commissions, variety has been the investment industry's strategy for broadening its consumer appeal.
The industry has offered a supermarket of diverse financial products to attract customers who might then be switched into higher-profit investing such as trading stock.
Investment firms have made a lot of money since then, but the Journal survey shows that consumers' traditional financial loyalties remain strong. 

According to the Roper segment of the Journal survey, two out of three Americans hold certificates of deposit, making them the most-owned investment.
Despite the huge growth in stock market volume and mutual fund assets, only one in seven people has dealt with a stockbroker in the past year, and only one in five says he holds stocks directly or through a mutual fund. 

Too often, says Michael Emmert, a Chicago business consultant, stockbrokers don't even view themselves as long-term service providers.
Mr. Emmert says he deals with brokers regularly, and has just entrusted one with $20,000 to help finance his five-year-old son's college education. 

"I get called regularly by brokers who don't want to know anything about me or my goals," says Mr. Emmert. "All they want is to sell me some hot stock.
That approach just turns me off." 

make each investment trust most to give good advice on investing a $10,000 windfall 

Source: Wall Street Journal Centennial Survey 

