.START 

Michelin Group, in a move that will make it the world's largest tire maker, agreed to buy Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co. for $690 million. 

Michelin, the secretive French company that last year lost a bidding war for Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. to Bridgestone Co. of Japan, will achieve two long-sought goals: it will replace longtime rival Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. as the world's biggest tire concern, a useful marketing claim in the highly competitive tire business, and it will shore up its position in the U.S., the world's biggest tire market. 

And while Goodyear remains the largest tire maker in North America, the added clout of Michelin will make No. 2 Uniroyal Goodrich a more formidable competitor. 

The combination would result in a company with world-wide annual sales of $10.3 billion, outstripping Goodyear's $7.93 billion annual sales, according to Lloyd Stoyer, editor of Modern Tire Dealer Magazine, a trade publication for North American retail tire dealers. 

The Michelin Group's revenue for 1988 was 51.82 billion francs ($7.89 billion).
For the first half of 1989, Michelin reported profit of 1.46 billion francs on revenue of 28.47 billion francs. 

Bridgestone, which paid $2.6 billion for Firestone, is the world's third-biggest tire company. 

The Michelin purchase is the latest in a series of acquisitions in the U.S. by French companies.
Last week the state-owned chemical giant Rhone-Poulenc S.A. bought some operations from GAF Corp. in the U.S. and from RTZ Corp. of the United Kingdom, for a total of $1.5 billion.
Late last year the French state group Pechiney S.A. bought Triangle Corp., the parent of American National Can Co., for $1.26 billion, to become the world's biggest can maker. 

The Michelin acquisition marks the latest inroad by a foreign tire maker into the important North American market.
In recent years Pirelli S.p.
A. of Italy acquired Armstrong Tire & Rubber Co., and Continental AG of West Germany purchased General Tire & Rubber Co., in addition to the Bridgestone purchase of Firestone. 

For Uniroyal Goodrich, long considered a retread in the tire business, the Michelin marriage can only enhance its position.
Under the purchase agreement, Michelin will assume $810 million of Uniroyal debt.
Uniroyal also is expected to benefit from Michelin's research and development prowess. 

"We were leveraged.
It would have been difficult to spend the kind of money we needed to spend over a long period in order to be in the forefront," commented Martin H. Dubilier, chairman of Clayton & Dubilier Inc.
The New York buy-out firm took control of Uniroyal Goodrich in 1988, two years after it was formed as a joint venture between Uniroyal Tire and the tire business of B.F. Goodrich Co. 

Uniroyal, which is trying to become a bigger player in the high-performance tire market, recently embarked on a $650 million to $700 million five-year capital spending program to upgrade its plants.
Michelin said it intends to "augment" that capital investment plan. 

For Michelin, the addition of Uniroyal Goodrich provides entry into private-label and associate-label tire markets, from which it had been absent.
Most makers other than Michelin had long sold tires to other companies that then marketed them under their own names.
It also gives it a stronger footing in the U.S., which comprises 40% to 45% of the $45 billion non-Communist world tire market.
Nearly overnight, Michelin would gain more than 25% of the North American tire market, up from 10% to 12%. 

Michelin said it intends to maintain Uniroyal Goodrich as a wholly-owned subsidiary under present management, and keep the unit's headquarters in Akron, Ohio.
Uniroyal would continue to make and sell tires under its brand name, Michelin said.
The acquisition would give the French company 31,000 employees in North America in 11 plants in the U.S., five in Canada and two in Mexico. 

The move into the U.S. follows recent efforts by Michelin to expand in the Far East, where its market share is about 3%.
Last year it entered into a joint tire-making venture with Okamoto Industries of Japan.
In 1987 it linked up in separate ventures with Siam Cement Co. of Thailand and Wuon Poong International Co. of South Korea. 

Michelin last year bought the airplane tire-making business of B.F. Goodrich for an undisclosed amount.
This gave Michelin a 20% share of the airplane tire market, and represented Goodrich's withdrawal from tires, after it had sold its stake in Uniroyal Goodrich to Clayton & Dubilier. 

NOTE: Michelin/Uniroyal assumes a combination of Michelin's 40,000 tires a day capacity with Uniroyal/Goodrich's 132,000 tires a day capacity 

