.START 

Although I hate to write for free on pages where I once got paid, your daft editorial ("A Neoliberal Mystery," Sept. 5) blaming me somehow for the race riots in Bensonhurst is too flattering to let pass. 

The story thus far.
You strongly supported President Bush's nomination of William Lucas to head the Justice Department's Civil Rights division, on the grounds that he opposes "reverse discrimination." The New Republic pointed out that Mr. Lucas obviously got the nomination because he is black, and therefore was a beneficiary of "reverse discrimination." You replied, in an editorial, that there is a difference between "voluntary" affirmative action (good) and "coerced" reverse discrimination (bad).
I wrote a column asking what exactly that difference is.
You now accuse me of "intellectual prancing" while Bensonhurst burns. (And, just to deal with that silly smear, my "intellectual prancing" came before Bensonhurst; yours came after.) 

You state my point with admirable concision: "reverse discrimination is inherent to the idea of affirmative action." You then say that my "basic proposition . . . that if it's OK for the President to weigh Mr. Lucas's race . . . it must be OK for the city of Richmond to set aside 30% of contract awards for minorities -- is jejune." But that is not my basic proposition. (I specifically said business set-asides are idiotic.) My basic proposition is that The Wall Street Journal is hypocritical when it thunders about its alleged belief in "colorblindness." I would not assert that this hypocrisy is responsible for race riots.
But it is not trivial or jejune to accuse a major conservative voice -- especially one that specifically complains of the "intellectual quality" of liberal arguments on the subject -- of failing to have its own thoughts in order. 

Through all the name-calling you never answer my questions.
What difference does it make to a white man who loses out whether reverse discrimination was "coerced" by the government or "voluntary" on the part of an employer?
Since "voluntary" discrimination against blacks is unacceptable (I presume), how can "voluntary" discrimination against whites be justified under the alleged "colorblind" principle?
Wasn't Richmond, for that matter, acting as "voluntarily" as President Bush in creating its 30% set-aside?
In short, isn't the Journal's endless self-righteous attitudinizing on this subject unsupportable? 

My views on affirmative action are honestly ambivalent.
Your views on affirmative action are dishonestly ambivalent.
You regularly attempt to stir up moral indignation regarding a principle you don't really accept.
On the charming assumption that blacks and whites in Brooklyn read both The New Republic and The Wall Street Journal while contemplating their next move, whose views are more likely to drive them crazy? 

Michael Kinsley 

Editor 

The New Republic 

Washington 

(A related item appears in Asides under Review & Outlook.) 

