.START 

Morgan Stanley Group Inc. 's legendary "black box" computer trading operation has fallen on hard times. 

The secretive high-technology operation of 50 traders and analysts, which its former director says made $50 million for Morgan in 1987 alone and comparable amounts in prior years, has been hurt by the market's post-crash lethargy.
Last year, it was only "slightly profitable," said Richard B. Fisher, Morgan's president. 

Morgan officials said the profit drop in its prized operation led to a management shake-up there last week.
Nunzio A. Tartaglia, the black box's director since 1984, resigned and was succeeded by an assistant, Joel Kaplan. 

Mr. Tartaglia, a 53-year-old former Bell Laboratories astrophysicist and Jesuit seminarian, was one of Wall Street's "rocket scientists" -- a group of academics and scientists recruited by investment banks in recent years to help design complex securities-trading strategies. 

Mr. Tartaglia had run the black box operation through four highly profitable years and one and a half disappointing ones since joining Morgan from Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., where he was an analyst.
The Morgan operation is officially called Analytical Proprietary Trading, or APT. 

The APT unit, which trades for Morgan's own account and is separate from the firm's other program-trading activities, uses sophisticated software to track such things as parallel price patterns of stocks within selected industry groups. 

Some of the systems require the Morgan traders to wear 3-D glasses as they scour elaborate computer models of stock patterns.
Mr. Tartaglia says the operation was recently delving more into futures markets and international stocks. 

In an interview Friday, Mr. Tartaglia conceded that the APT operation was no longer the profit center it was in pre-crash days.
But he said he and his scientist/traders were working on adjusting their computer models to the current lethargic market conditions. "The system needed to evolve to meet the needs and conditions of the currently slow trading environment," Mr. Tartaglia said.
The APT operation is one of several at major securities firms that blossomed because of the trading opportunities presented by the volatile stock market leading up to the October 1987 stock crash.
Typically, these computer-driven strategies home in on small price discrepancies caused by rapidly moving markets.
But with slower markets, more high-tech competition and less price volatility, such operations have struggled to make money. 

According to Mr. Tartaglia, he felt that the Morgan operation needed to spend money on research and development, even during hard times such as today's. "It wasn't that we didn't make trading revenue, it's just that a research lab requires a certain amount of overhead," Mr. Tartaglia said.
But Morgan officials were distressed that their formerly lucrative operation was barely turning a profit. 

It probably didn't help Mr. Tartaglia's cause that in a rare interview published in May in Institutional Investor, he didn't appear as distressed as a conventional trader might have been that the operation wasn't cranking out the profits it had before. 

"If we lose money, that turns me on," he was quoted as saying. "Because {then} there's something I don't know.
You program something and it sits there and makes money -- that's boring.
It's profitable, but it's boring." 

Morgan's Mr. Fisher said his firm remains committed to the APT group.
However, he said, the group last year "didn't meet our expectations, our financial measurements." Morgan apparently hopes a management change can rejuvenate it. 

Still, said Mr. Tartaglia, Morgan's computers may not be capable for the time being of producing any such profit turnaround, no matter who is running the show. "The internal system itself hasn't evolved to meet the current {market} conditions," Mr. Tartaglia said. 

Mr. Tartaglia, who was hired by Morgan in March 1984 and was named a managing director in November 1985, said he doesn't have any current plans: "You have to interface with the environment and go where the cracks are." But he said he is committed to applying his scientific knowledge to the markets. 

"I'm trying to back out of the {Morgan} situation, reset the head and formulate what I want to do," Mr. Tartaglia said. "Clearly, I need an environment where I can be entrepreneurial, challenging and innovative, where I can nourish that without coming up against organization structures," he said. 

Although trading units such as Morgan's are currently struggling, Mr. Tartaglia said such operations will only increase in decades ahead: "I think the use of technology, of analystics, of software, of electronic trading, is the wave of the future.
It'll be more and more so in five to 10 years as we go international fully." 

