.START 

A television special produced by the National Audubon Society was broadcast last night without commercials on a cable channel owned by Turner Broadcasting System Inc. after eight advertisers pulled out because of pressure from the logging industry, the program's producers said. 

The special, "Ancient Forests: Rage Over Trees," was aired with public-service announcements instead of the scheduled commercials.
Although Turner declined to release the names of the sponsors, other officials close to the process identified some as Stroh Brewery Co., the Exxon Corp., the Michelin Group, Ford Motor Co. and Sears, Roebuck & Co., whose subsidiary Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. was advertising its Discovery credit card.
The officials asked that they not be identified. 

The special, broadcast over the Turner Broadcasting channel WTBS, which is seen on cable systems nationwide, will be repeated three times during the week as are all other programs in the "World of Audubon" series. 

The program dealt with the cutting down of trees in the old growth forests in the Northwest states, specifically Washington and Oregon.
The logging industry and environmentalists have been arguing over the logging in such forests, which are the natural habitats of the northern spotted owl. 

"Due to concerted and apparently organized pressure from the timber industry," Turner Broadcasting said in a statement, "many of the advertisers scheduled for the {special} canceled their commercials for the time period." 

Spokesmen for Ford and Dean Witter confirmed their companies had withdrawn commercials. 

"I think it's outrageous," said Peter A.A. Berle, president of the National Audubon Society. "The notion that a bunch of people would keep a documentary off the air and keep an issue away from the public is against everything America stands for in terms of free speech and the open exchange of ideas." 

One group of loggers that organized what it called a grass-roots boycott said it was "pleased" with the results. "I'll take some credit," said William N. Grannell, executive director of the Western States Public Land Coalition, which is based in Pueblo, Colo. "Our people got the word out and told Stroh's beer that if they sponsored such a program, well, our members would not be so inclined to drink Stroh's beer any longer.
I'm just glad these companies became sensitive to our side of the issue." 

Mr. Grannell dismissed the argument that the Audubon Society said it produced a "balanced" documentary. "I'll reserve judgment on that," Mr. Grannell said.
Mr. Berle said the program interviewed loggers and presented their point of view, although, he added, "the script does have a pro-environmental attitude." 

Mr. Berle also said that Stroh had decided to withdraw its sponsorship of the entire "World of Audubon" series, which consists of four specials annually.
Stroh, which couldn't be reached for comment, contributed $100,000 annually to the projects. 

There is, of course, nothing new in special-interest groups threatening to boycott advertisers they believe sponsor controversial shows.
For instance, conservative religious organizations called for a boycott of companies sponsoring "Roe V. Wade," a made-for-television movie on General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co. about the Supreme Court's landmark ruling legalizing abortion. 

"But this is not that controversial," said Mr. Berle. "It is, however, on the front burner out in the Northwest." 

