.START 

I was quite distressed by your Aug. 23 page-one article "The Accused" about baseless child-abuse allegations. 

During my years as a pediatrician I learned that child abuse was quite common and that society did not protect the children adequately.
Far better to investigate a suspicion than to wait for definitive proof, which often is a dead child. 

Barring a confession or trauma that is unquestionably linked to abuse, such as a raped three-year-old, the only way to protect a child is to investigate the situation carefully, to look for patterns of behavior, history of "accidents," and to assess the ability of the parent(s) to provide a safe and secure home.
Children cannot protect themselves, and they are not the property of parents who can do whatever they want to the child. 

Unfortunately, I saw many cases of abuse, most of which were not handled properly.
The one that made the biggest impression on me was an 11-month-old girl brought in by her father because she would not stop crying.
Examination revealed a well-cared-for child with a dislocated elbow.
Review of the records of a previous in-patient stay resulted in a strong suspicion of parents unable to cope with their child.
The case was reported.
A social worker reviewed the emergency-room records and concluded that this was not a case of abuse. 

Several weeks later, the child came to the emergency room dead.
Another investigation revealed that this child had been brought by her father to other hospital emergency rooms.
Had this child's case been handled the way the Maccaquano case was, she might be alive today. 

Eve A. Klipstein, M.D. 

New York 

It is axiomatic that bureaucracies don't work, and child-protection agencies are no exception.
However, in my observation, such agencies far more often err in the direction of failing to adequately protect children at risk, rather than by displaying excessive, misguided zeal. 

For every parent falsely accused, there are many children who suffer physical or sexual abuse at the hands of putative caregivers, while the system stands idly by.
Studies show that more than 25% of all girls and 15% of all boys experience some form of sexual abuse. 

Bruce McCulley Ukiah, Calif. 

In 1975 I took my seven-year-old son to the emergency room of a hospital.
He had a fever, a stomach ache and, what seemed to me to be of minor importance, a rash.
The emergency-room doctor became very interested in the rash.
He called in a number of colleagues -- interns and residents.
And then I got the bad news.
They all agreed that the rash was really a series of cigarette burns.
And guess who they were sure inflicted them? 

My son was questioned in my absence.
I was asked a great number of highly personal questions, and accused of being a child abuser.
My son was X-rayed from head to toe in a search for smashed bones that would have confirmed their suspicions.
I was told that it would be appropriate for me to get a lawyer.
I did just that. 

At the end of that long day an experienced doctor looked at my son and said he had impetigo, a common childhood problem.
The next morning, there was a conference attended by two of my tormentors of the previous day, the head of the social services department of the hospital, my lawyer and myself.
There were no apologies, no confession of any error. 

I was much luckier than the people in your story.
My son and I were rid of those incompetent fools in about 28 hours. 

Robert D. Kempner 

Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y. 

While I can sympathize with the horrifying experiences of the families described in your story, they are adults with the ability and the means to fight for their rights.
The Lisa Steinbergs of this world do not have that ability and depend on the rest of us to protect them. 

The story we normally read about is at the end of a victim's short, tortured life because people in a position to react don't want to cause embarrassment to the adult -- in other words, protecting adult rights over those of the child. 

Debbie D. Runge 

Belle, Mo. 

