.START 

Many U.S. technology companies appear headed for a slump in domestic sales, but the trend is being offset by penetration of European and Asian markets. 

Indeed, U.S. electronics concerns are finding that a fat dose of foreign sales can ease the pain of a bad quarter or even a recession, and help the U.S.'s huge trade deficit to boot. 

Just ask Drew Osterman, president of a small semiconductor maker in San Jose, Calif.
A flat U.S. market for chips hasn't hurt his International CMOS Technology Inc., he says, thanks to booming sales in Asia and Europe.
Likewise, Microsoft Corp. says foreign sales -- accounting for 55% of its revenue -- smoothed out a dip in domestic revenue early this year. 

With overseas sales "you have a much better chance of coming through nicely than if you have all your eggs in one basket," says Jeremy Butler, senior vice president for Microsoft's international operations. 

After essentially ignoring foreign markets for years, U.S. companies are beginning to reap the fruit of stepped-up overseas sales efforts, says economist Richard Berner of Salomon Brothers Inc.
That move overseas -- which has been among a broad range of U.S. industries -- is "a factor that's helped to forestall, or to completely keep us out of, a recession," Mr. Berner says. 

The shift to foreign markets is clearest in electronic industries.
Of every 20 microcomputers that U.S. makers sell this year, seven will go to overseas buyers, up from about two machines out of 20 in 1984, according to the research firm InfoCorp.
Overseas markets accounted for about 40% of sales at U.S. chip makers in 1988, up from 30% in 1984, according to Dataquest Inc., a market-research firm. 

"The strategy in the past was that the U.S. would do," says Timothy Dwyer, a Sun Microsystems Inc. vice president who heads operations in Asia and several other foreign markets. "The strategy now is that you have to be a global player." Sun's international sales grew to 42% of total revenue this year from 10% in 1985. 

All this has helped to arrest the once-exploding U.S. trade deficit.
Electronics exports accounted for 17.2% of U.S. exports in 1988, up from 15.7% in 1987 and 8.9% in 1980, according to the Electronic Industries Association. 

Of course, heavy overseas sales carry risks: Currency swings can wither earnings, profits come years behind initial investments and threats of protectionism are always hanging overhead.
But the biggest risk today, says Delbert Yocum, president of Apple Computer Inc. 's Apple Pacific unit, is in not doing business overseas. "It could absolutely destroy your business overnight if the U.S. economy goes into recession." 

Apple has seen its overseas sales grow to 37% of revenue today from 22% in 1985.
The company's Asian sales, which will expand about 45% this year, are the company's fastest-growing segment, says Mr. Yokum, who before heading up the Apple Pacific unit was Apple's chief operating officer. "The Asia-Pacific arena is the area of the 1990s and beyond," he says. 

Asian and European computer markets are strong partly because they lag behind the U.S. in computer installations.
Intel Corp. 's European sales are growing twice as fast as its domestic sales because "Europe has a lot to catch up," says Bernard Giraud, president of Intel's European operations. 

Even in fiercely competitive markets for products such as semiconductors, U.S. companies are making headway -- one reason that U.S. electronics exports grew faster than imports last year.
Such companies as Motorola Inc. have reorganized their Japanese operations to tap into the huge market for chips that go into consumer gadgets made there.
And while some U.S. semiconductor-equipment makers such as Perkin-Elmer Corp. are dropping out of the business, Applied Materials Inc. of Santa Clara, does 40% of its sales in Japan.
Applied Materials is doing well now partly because it got in the door early, having established its own subsidiary in the late 1970s.
It has been able to work directly with customers, rather than depend on a Japanese representative. 

For such companies as Applied, success overseas stabilizes the bottom line.
Earlier this year, Applied's domestic markets slipped into the doldrums as U.S. chip makers cut back on outfitting new plants and updating old ones.
But Asian orders blossomed.
The company landed a $20 million order from Samsung Electronics Co. in Korea, more than its total sales in Asia for all of 1988. 

Computer Associates International says its acquisition of Cullinet Software Inc. caused some domestic customers to postpone orders as they waited to see what new products would come out.
But overseas sales grew 50% in the latest quarter.
Similarly, Sun says that Thanksgiving always brings slow sales here; fortunately, that's Europe's busiest period. 

But cracking the world's markets is expensive.
Companies estimate that it costs 25% to 35% more to do business in Europe than in the U.S.
The cost of office space in Japan can be four times more than U.S. space.
And companies must pour millions of dollars into development of products that are tailored to local languages and customs.
Microsoft says its research and development budget this year will increase partly because it must spend more to develop software for foreign markets. 

Protectionist sentiments add to the cost, as well as to concern for the future.
To get access to the Australian market, Apple agreed to do research and development there and to export computer communications devices it builds in the country.
Silicon Valley worries that the European Community will increasingly demand that chips sold in Europe be made in Europe or face tariffs.
Many U.S. companies therefore talk of building European factories to bypass possible duties, but new plants would add capacity at a time when there's already too much. 

"The investment may be a duplication of what already exists somewhere else," says Intel's Mr. Giraud. "But we have to be ready to serve that market with or without restrictions." 

It's also harder to keep tabs on operations across the ocean, and uncertainties can be greater.
ComputerLand Corp. posted a loss $13.9 million in its third quarter, mainly because of management problems in Australia and unrest in China.
Earlier this year it was troubled by fraud in its Hong Kong office. 

"The biggest risk," says InfoCorp. analyst David Carnevale, "is currency fluctuation and political instability." Political unrest in areas such as Latin America and China can make investments go sour on short notice, he says, and a rising dollar forces exporters to raise prices or accept slimmer profits. 

Amdahl Corp. blamed the strong dollar for at least part of the 38% drop in earnings in its latest quarter.
Zenith Electronics Corp. guessed wrong at the direction of the dollar when it hedged in forward exchange contracts, ending up with a $13 million loss during the second quarter, despite growing sales.
Commodore International Ltd., with scant domestic sales to cushion the dollar's blow, had a $10.1 million loss from operations in its latest quarter.
Commodore does more than 75% of its business overseas -- business that, ironically, helped save the company when domestic sales plummeted years ago. 

And for a few, foreign markets have just plain failed them.
Chip maker Micron Technology Inc. of Boise, Idaho, leased an expensive Tokyo office in December 1984, hiring Japanese employees to start a sales drive.
Fourteen months later it hadn't sold a single chip, and closed the office. 

Japanese companies say Micron didn't offer the right quality, price or service.
Micron maintains that the market was simply closed to it.
The company still doesn't sell any chips in Japan, and sells only 25% of its chips overseas. 

