.START 

Losses caused by Hurrican Hugo, which battered the Carolinas and a string of islands in the Caribbean, could add up to the biggest claims bill the insurance industry has ever faced. 

Insurance adjusters and brokers estimated the damage at about $1 billion in the southeastern U.S. where Hugo came ashore, even though South Carolina officials increased their original estimates of property damage, saying the cost there alone could run as high as $2 billion.
Preliminary reports from insurance brokers in Puerto Rico indicate that insured losses on this island and others in the Caribbean could amount to another $1 billion to $2 billion. 

South Carolina officials predicted the fallout from the killer storm would continue to plague that state's economy well into 1990. 

Meanwhile, officials said they were equally concerned about the long-term effects on South Carolina's agricultural businesses and the tourism industry, which contributed $4.7 billion to the state economy in 1988 and accounted for 98,000 jobs. 

South Carolina officials had been predicting an 8% growth in tourism revenue this year.
That number was cut in half. 

In the $1 billion agricultural sector, Hugo hit just as South Carolina's cotton, corn and peanut crops were nearing harvest.
State officials said they still lacked dollar estimates because the storm cut off contact with rural farms. 

Although attention has been focused on the storm's damages in South Carolina, Hugo also wreaked havoc when it blew across the border into Charlotte, N.C.
A city official there placed damage to local property at a minimum of $50 million.
North Carolina officials have asked the federal government to declare 51 western counties a disaster area. 

Throughout the Carolinas, insurers are still trying to locate all of their policyholders in the affected areas. 

An agent with Travelers Insurance Co., a unit of Travelers Corp., in Charleston, S.C., reported to his home office in Hartford, Conn., that just about every building in the city's downtown commercial district appears to have been damaged. 

The losses from Hugo could be greater because the storm moved well inland with its driving rains and spawned numerous tornadoes, rather than just bashing the coastal regions as insurers had originally anticipated. 

Insurers, who had set up claims offices in Columbia, S.C., and Charlotte to handle the rush of claims after the hurricane passed through, had to dig out and get phone and electrical service restored before they could begin helping clients.
Travelers Corp., Aetna Life & Casualty, State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., and Nationwide Insurance Cos., among others, have adjusters in the Carolinas and have set up emergency-claims offices.
Some companies are putting ads in local newspapers with 800 numbers that policyholders can call for assistance. 

Allstate Insurance Co., a unit of Sears, Roebuck & Co., has two mobile units driving through parts of Charleston to locate some of its policyholders. 

Since banks aren't opened because there's no electricity in much of the city, many Sears stores are cashing checks for Allstate policyholders. 

In Puerto Rico, damage to the island's electric-utility company is estimated at about $20 million.
Losses at San Juan's international airport, where much equipment and small planes were damaged, could also top $20 million. 

