.START 

International Business Machines Corp. named James A. Cannavino, head of its personal computer operations, as general manager of the group that includes both personal computers and workstations. 

He succeeds Richard T. Gerstner, who has a chronic back problem that has kept him from working full-time and who will move into an unspecified, special assignment. 

Mr. Cannavino, 45 years old, will bring more technical knowledge to the job than Mr. Gerstner possessed -- at a time when the line between personal computers and workstations is blurring, creating a confusing array of technical choices. 

Sam Albert, who recently left the computer company and is now a consultant in Scarsdale, N.Y., pointed to the various operating systems, user interfaces and chip technologies that are vying for control of the personal computer and workstation markets and said: "That complexity is something that plays to Cannavino's strengths." 

Mr. Cannavino began as an IBM repairman as a teen-ager and, without benefit of a college degree, worked his way up the product side of IBM.
Before being appointed 10 months ago as president of IBM's personal computer division -- a position he retains -- Mr. Cannavino spent several years with responsibility for developing mainframes. 

Mr. Cannavino is also known as someone who will make a decision quickly and not waffle -- a trait that IBM Chairman John Akers has been stressing as he has tried to make IBM faster on its feet. 

At the same time, Mr. Cannavino lacks the broad experience on the business side that Mr. Gerstner had.
Mr. Gerstner, the 50-year-old brother of Louis Gerstner, chief executive officer of RJR Nabisco Inc., was, among other things, one of two executives generally credited with turning around IBM's Japanese operations. 

As Mr. Cannavino gears up for his biggest immediate challenge, the expected announcement soon of personal computers from the so-called Gang of Nine, IBM has scheduled a press briefing for tomorrow that industry executives said is designed to launch a preemptive attack. 

IBM, based in Armonk, N.Y., declined to comment on the substance of the meeting.
But the industry executives said the main point will be that IBM's controversial data pathway, the Micro Channel, can transmit information two to four times as fast as is now done when one part of the personal computer talks to another.
IBM is expected to say this gives the Micro Channel a top speed of 80 megabytes a second, compared with 33 for the Gang of Nine's EISA data bus.
The executives added that this won't require a so-called Micro Channel 2, as has been rumored; the capability is already present in current machines. 

The Gang of Nine, a group of PC makers led by Compaq Computer Corp. that is pushing to make its EISA data pathway the industry standard instead of Micro Channel, has argued that such speed comparisons are meaningless because the bus isn't the bottleneck that keeps personal computers from operating faster, except in a very small number of cases.
The group also points out that, while circuit boards had to be redesigned to fit into the Micro Channel, what it calls standard circuit boards will still be able to fit into its machines. 

But IBM is clearly hoping to set the terms of the debate that will go on for many months.
Mr. Cannavino said in an interview Friday that the EISA group has "decided to try to be compatible with the cards {circuit boards} in the past. . . . Micro Channel stands here and looks forward.
EISA stands here and looks backward." 

The industry executives said IBM will also announce a chip set that will help outside companies develop circuit boards for the Micro Channel.
Most boards to this point are 16-bit boards, meaning they can grab or transmit 16 bits of data at a time, so the IBM chip set will be aimed at development of 32-bit boards. 

The executives said IBM won't announce either of two machines it is rumored to be working on: one using Intel Corp. 's new 486 processor or a 33 megahertz version of the Intel 386, the fastest version of that chip available.
They said it still isn't certain whether IBM will be able to announce tomorrow or ever the availability of circuit boards demonstrated this summer that contain a 486 processor and can be used to soup up existing machines. 

