.START 

Thomson McKinnon Inc. was sued by 16 current and former employees claiming that the company and its top executives misused an employee stock ownership plan. 

The suit, which seeks an estimated $150 million in damages, claims that the ESOP's assets were used for personal gain by company executives and that the fund may now be worth nothing.
In addition to the company, the other defendants in the suit are John J. Maloney Jr., former Thomson McKinnon chairman and chief executive officer; J. Ronald Morgan, current chairman and chief executive; and seven other Thomson McKinnon executives.
All the company executives named as defendants were also trustees of the ESOP, the suit says. 

The lawsuit, filed in federal court in Manhattan, also accuses Coopers & Lybrand, the accounting firm for Thomson McKinnon, of negligence in its handling of financial statements for the company and the ESOP. Thomson McKinnon is a financial services company. 

Donald G. McCabe, counsel for Thomson McKinnon, said that the lawsuit is "without merit" and that the defendants deny all allegations.
He said the company will file a response to the charges after it has reviewed the suit. 

An attorney for Coopers & Lybrand said the company hasn't seen the suit and can't comment. 

The suit seeks to be made a class action on behalf of all Thomson McKinnon employees who participated in the ESOP.
The ESOP held about 77% of the stock in Thomson McKinnon and was part of the plaintiffs' regular compensation, the suit said.
Fred Taylor Isquith, an attorney for the plaintiffs, said the ESOP was a "major selling point in recruiting people" to work as brokers for Thomson McKinnon.
He said most of the plaintiffs had stakes valued at more than $100,000 each in the ESOP. 

The lawsuit said the ESOP's assets were valued at $140 million in 1986 and $125 million in 1987.
But the company didn't report the value of the ESOP in 1988, the lawsuit said, and in July 1989 a letter was sent to employees stating that "it is possible {that the ESOP} will have no value whatsoever." 

Among other things, the suit says the ESOP assets were improperly used to provide interest-free loans to executives and directors, to buy and operate a $1.3 million yacht used for the defendants' personal entertainment, and to maintain luxury apartments in Puerto Rico and Manhattan for the defendants' personal use. 

