.START 

Rockwell International Corp., which for months has tried to fend off charges of alleged misconduct at the Rocky Flats nuclear-weapons plant, said it mutually agreed with the Energy Department to turn the facility over to a new contractor, EG&G Inc. 

The startling announcement came on the heels of a lawsuit filed against the Energy Department, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Justice Department, in which the company claimed to be caught in the middle of an intra-governmental regulatory battle. 

The unprecedented legal action asserted, in particular, that Rockwell faced a no-win situation: It could keep making bomb parts at Rocky Flats, accordingly churning out a mix of low-level radioactive and hazardous waste that can't legally be stored anywhere.
Or it could unilaterally cease operations there and be cited by the Energy Department for breaking its contract. 

Rocky Flats is important not only because it's the nation's only source of plutonium triggers to explode nuclear warheads, but, with problems at other plants, it's currently the U.S.'s sole supplier of plutonium to make new nuclear weapons. 

A Rockwell spokesman said yesterday that the company's hasty exit was prompted specifically by the dilemma it faced over waste disposal. "That goes right to the heart of the issue," he said, adding that Rockwell hasn't any plans to drop its suit. 

However, government officials have grumbled privately over Rockwell's management of Rocky Flats since Energy Secretary James Watkins assumed his post earlier this year and declared strict adherence to pollution-control regulations a top priority.
Since taking over the plant from Dow Chemical Co. in 1975, Rockwell repeatedly has been castigated by private watchdog groups and internal Energy Department reports for lax compliance with environmental and safety rules. 

Then in June, Federal Bureau of Investigation and EPA agents swooped down on Rocky Flats, a huge complex 16 miles outside of Denver.
They alleged that Rockwell had violated a raft of waste-disposal laws, as well as burned hazardous waste in an incinerator that was supposed to be closed, and dumped noxious chemicals into neighboring streams. 

A federal grand jury is considering evidence in the case.
Rockwell has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing. 

The Energy Department said EG&G officials will report to Rocky Flats today to begin working with Rockwell on a smooth transition, adding that the 5,200 employees there would be retained under the new management. 

EG&G, a Wellesley, Mass., scientific equipment concern, is itself no stranger to the world of nuclear weapons.
The low-profile company already runs the Nevada Test Site, the Idaho National Engineering Lab (where Rockwell also has a classified contract), and the Mound Laboratories near Dayton, Ohio. 

An EG&G spokesman pointed out yesterday that the company hasn't finalized its decision to move into Rocky Flats.
He said the company's chairman, John Kucharski, will be in touch with Rockwell Chairman Donald Beall this week to learn more about the situation at the plant. 

The Energy Department described Rockwell's departure from Rocky Flats as a "no-fault divorce" in a conversation with Democratic Rep. David Skaggs, whose Colorado district includes the 6,550-acre plant site.
Mr. Skaggs said yesterday that Rockwell's relationship with the agency was already troubled when the company filed suit last week.
The litigation "was the final ingredient in souring things beyond the point of repair," he said. 

Mr. Skaggs added that he sees the episode as a healthy signal that the Energy Department's long-standing coziness with its contractors is turning more adversarial. "We're really at a fork in the road in terms of the relations," he said. 

For Rockwell, its departure is undeniably a blow.
While it won't hurt the aerospace giant's balance sheet -- the most it ever made at Rocky Flats in any six-month period was $4.8 million -- corporate executives have talked about the importance of keeping abreast of nuclear technology through its work at the plant. 

And there were clearly other benefits for the El Segundo, Calif., defense contractor eager to please Uncle Sam. "They basically have one customer," noted a former Rockwell financial planner. "You can call it Army, Navy, Air Force or DOE." 

