.START 

In your Aug. 23 Enterprise article, "Inheritance Tax Is Choking Successors to Family Firms," you paint a bleak estate-tax picture for the nearly 20 million small, family-owned businesses in the U.S.
Although you carefully examined the extent of the problem and ways to slightly soften this incredible blow, you barely mentioned the one solution that can literally save the day: life insurance. 

Let's use your example of Kelly Hiatt, who was concerned that even after divesting himself of ownership of 75% of his business, his children could face estate taxes on a multimillion-dollar estate. 

For simplicity, suppose Mr. Hiatt's current estate-tax liability was calculated to be $1 million.
Assuming Mr. Hiatt is in reasonable health, he could purchase a life-insurance policy for an annual premium of about 3% of that estate-tax liability.
He could pay that premium for nine years and let the policy's dividends pay the premium after that.
That is a solution that, after all expenses, would take care of 75% of his estate-tax liability. 

Byron R. Moore 

Gilsbar Inc. Insurance Consultants 

Ruston, La. 

We take exception to the remarks that "second-to-die life" has a high cost, that "the children must own and pay for the policy" to avoid estate taxes, and that use of this method "avoids estate taxes entirely." 

In fact, so-called second-to-die insurance has found growing popularity as a solution to the transfer-tax problem largely because it is far less costly than comparable individual insurance plans.
For typical clients, the joint insured program will require an investment equal to only about 70% of what it would cost to insure the mother, and 50% of the cost to insure the father. 

The children do not have to own the policy, or even pay for it, to avoid inclusion of the insurance proceeds in the taxable estate.
Gifting programs may be used in conjunction with trust arrangements to solve this problem. 

This method does not avoid or reduce the tax itself.
It does, however, provide the most economically efficient means of addressing the tax liability, frequently providing effective discounts of about 80% on the amount due. 

Steven Sills 

The Enterprise Group 

Southfield, Mich. 

