.START 

Petroleum ministers will try again Monday to resolve their differences over OPEC's production ceiling and individual output quotas after wrestling with the dual issues over the weekend. 

Chances of reaching agreement on either issue before the regular winter conference of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, which begins Nov. 25 in Vienna, appear dim.
The ministers meeting here made little headway in efforts to parcel out new shares of the increased demand for their oil. 

The issues have divided the 13-nation OPEC into two camps.
They also have put Kuwait on the opposite side of its usual Persian Gulf allies of Saudi Arabia and Iraq. 

Kuwait has openly flouted its production quota this year, producing nearly double its OPEC allotment of 1.1 million barrels a day in recent months.
Last night, Kuwait held steadfast to its stand since early this year that it and some others are due special treatment in any increases in the production limits.
Ali Khalifa Al-Sabah, the Kuwaiti oil minister, has made it clear he feels free to produce whatever he chooses, so long as his claim for a higher OPEC quota isn't met. 

Saudi Arabia and Iraq maintained an equally hard position that any ceiling increase should be shared on a pro rata basis. "The ceiling is the eminent problem," said Issam Abdul Raheem Al-Chalabi, Iraq's oil minister, "but we should address the problem of the quotas if we can." 

The United Arab Emirates, which also is exceeding its allocations by several hundred thousand barrels a day, and several others are also requesting favored treatment.
Their extra output has sent production of the 13 nations to more than 22 million barrels a day.
That is a record level for this year, and it is sharply above the second half production ceiling of 19.5 million barrels a day. 

So far, demand for OPEC's oil is matching the high production rates.
Also, oil prices are holding relatively stable, although many of the ministers argued that OPEC prices still average below the 1989 target of $18 a barrel because of the excess production. 

Demand for OPEC oil is expected to climb even higher in the fourth quarter -- possibly reaching 23 million barrels a day.
As a result, some OPEC countries -- chiefly Saudi Arabia and Iraq -- are pressing for an increase in the production ceiling of as much as two million barrels a day to "legitimize" more of the extra output that would be produced anyway to meet the higher demand. 

But Sheik Ali of Kuwait won't accept any increase in the overall ceiling unless new long-term quotas are established that would treat those countries with spare producing capacity with special consideration.
For Kuwait he seeks an initial quota of 1.35 million barrels a day, based on the current OPEC ceiling of 19.5 million, plus a proportionate share of any increase in the ceiling. 

"Kuwait's position on the ceiling is that an increase is fine -- if it's used to solve OPEC's {quota} problems," said a Kuwaiti delegate. 

Some other OPEC members, such as Algeria and Libya, oppose any increase in the ceiling as long as the OPEC average price, currently less than $17 a barrel, is below the targeted $18 a barrel.
Others are flexible on the matter of the ceiling. "We basically want to maintain stability in the oil market, and we are not fixed to any position," Ginandjar Kartasasmita, Indonesia's oil minister, said in an interview. 

