.START 

Procter & Gamble, with its agreement to buy Noxell, could be playing home wrecker to one of Madison Avenue's longest and happiest marriages. 

Noxell and its ad agency, the Lintas unit of Interpublic Group, have been together for 40 years.
Lintas, based in New York, helped conceive Noxell's Cover Girl makeup -- "the clean, fresh, natural look" -- 28 years ago.
It has created every ad Cover Girl has ever run, along with scores of ads for Noxzema and other Noxell products. 

Yet now, the agency appears to be in jeopardy of losing the entire account, with billings of more than $50 million.
The problem arose Friday when Procter & Gamble announced its agreement to buy Noxell in a $1.3 billion stock swap -- a move that abruptly would make Lintas a Procter agency.
But Lintas's largest client by far is Unilever, one of Procter's fiercest rivals.
Procter and Unilever have never stood for sharing an agency yet, and are unlikely to become bedfellows now. 

William Weithas, Lintas's chairman and chief executive officer, is trying to be optimistic. "You can bet your life I'm going to try" to convince both clients to co-exist, he said in an interview Friday.
He said he had spoken to Noxell's president, Marvin L. Hathaway, who had assured him that Lintas "is an integral part of our success." 

But Mr. Weithas added, "We're all realistic.
We've got to sit down and have discussions with all involved.
This is really in the clients' hands, not in our hands." 

The loss of the Noxell account would be an especially bitter blow to Lintas.
Apart from its considerable size, the account is one of Lintas's showcase clients.
It was the agency's first U.S. client.
Its Cover Girl line, which Lintas suggested and helped develop, is now the largest-selling cosmetics line in the country.
Lintas uses the brand's success story to pitch prospective business. 

Yet Noxell, as a Procter unit, wouldn't stand a chance against Unilever.
Unilever bills more than $500 million world-wide at Lintas, accounting for a sizable chunk of the agency's total $3.59 billion in 1988 billings.
Lintas was in fact founded as Unilever's in-house agency, and Unilever retained a stake in it until about a decade ago.
While Unilever no longer has any financial interest in the agency, it is far and away Lintas's largest, and longest-standing, client. 

Spokeswomen at Noxell and at Procter said it was too early to comment on whether conflicts existed, or how conflicts might be resolved.
Both said, however, that no immediate changes are planned for Noxell's advertising.
Noxell shareholders won't vote on the proposed acquisition until November, and the transaction probably won't close until near year-end. 

Still, the latest turn of events is yet another sign of how consolidations among both agencies and clients are making it increasingly difficult to avoid client conflicts.
If Procter must choose another agency for Noxell -- either because it pulls the account or Unilever pressures Lintas into resigning the account -- it will find its choice extremely limited, as most major agencies not working for Procter are working for its competitors.
Noxell uses a second major agency, Chicago-based Leo Burnett, for its Clarion line; Burnett is already a Procter agency and could be considered for future assignments. 

Meanwhile, industry executives already have begun speculating that Lintas might take on another cosmetics line, such as Maybelline, a unit of Schering-Plough.
Gary Mulloy, a Maybelline executive vice president, said there was "no truth at all" to the speculation, and that Maybelline is "very happy" with its two agencies, Omnicom's DDB Needham, and Bloom. 

Lintas's Mr. Weithas didn't comment specifically on other potential cosmetics clients. "We love our client Noxell," he said. "But the fact of the matter is, {if it leaves}, its potential isn't going to sit around and not be utilized." 

Ad Notes. . . . 

NEW ACCOUNT: Worthington Foods of Worthington, Ohio, named New York-based Partners & Shevack Inc., a unit of Mickelberry Corp., to handle advertising for its Morningstar Farms brand of vegetable-protein meat substitutes and cholesterol-free eggs.
Billings are estimated at $2 to $5 million.
The account was previously with Fahlgren & Swink's Dublin, Ohio, office. 

SPLIT-UP: DDB Needham Worldwide announced it and its client, the Nashville Network, have "mutually agreed to terminate their relationship" as of Jan. 1.
Billings on the account were $2.2 million.
DDB Needham had handled the cable network's account since 1984. 

WHO'S NEWS: Sean Driscoll, 39, has been hired by Whittle Communications L.P. of Knoxville, Tenn., as an executive vice president and senior partner in the company's health and education media.
He was previously group senior vice president of business development at Warwick Advertising, New York. 

BARKER SELL-OFFS: N W Ayer said it acquired all of Ayer Barker, a London-based consumer ad agency in which it held a 25% stake, from Charles Barker PLC in a stock swap.
At the same time, Barker sold its public relations businesses to London-based Corporate Communications PLC for about $15 million.
Barker retains its human resources, recruitment and consultancy, and regional communications businesses. 

RAX ACCOUNT: Ailing Rax Restaurants Inc. has hired Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey & Strauss Inc. to launch an $8 million marketing campaign.
The fast-food chain, which suffered losses throughout this year, will drop several local agencies and consolidate its marketing operations with the New York firm.
The campaign will include regional television and radio ads, employee-incentive programs and tie-ins with local retailers and schools. 

