.START 

Takeovers and restructurings were still the rage in the third quarter, but investors may soon get a chance to make use of some rusty analytical tools. 

Price-boosting corporate actions -- such as share buy-backs, restructurings and takeovers -- pumped up many of the winning stocks in the third quarter and for the year so far.
The losers' list, not surprisingly, is ridden with bankruptcies and troubled thrifts. 

Investment funds specializing in stocks of single countries also were among the third-quarter superstars, fueled by a sudden burst of Japanese buying.
But of the 15 common stocks that have risen the most in percentage terms on the New York Stock Exchange for the quarter, eight were energized by specific corporate actions.
For the nine months, seven of the Big Board's top 15 were stocks of companies that have been raided or restructured. 

Takeovers even propelled entire industry groups.
Airlines soared 32% in the third quarter and 84% in the nine months. 

The takeover trend will hold for the fourth quarter, predicts Michael Metz, Oppenheimer's market strategist, but with a new emphasis.
Campeau Corp. 's debt troubles will shift mergers from transactions based on financial smoke and mirrors to those growing out of business strategies. 

"I think we are going to see a whole new wave of strategic acquisitions starting immediately, particularly in the basic industry sector," Mr. Metz says.
One example is the agreement for a Japanese semiconductor concern, Kyocera, to acquire AVX, a U.S. electronics materials firm. 

Because strategic buy-outs focus on how two businesses fit together rather than financial wheeling and dealing, they may be better understood -- and perhaps anticipated -- by individual investors, some analysts say. "It coincides with the kind of approach the small investor has taken to the market," says Jack Conlon Jr., director of equity trading at Nikko Securities. "The small investor typically invests strategically." 

The trend toward strategic mergers has tremendous implications for the stock market.
It marks a move away from the view that stocks are commodities bought for short-term price moves.
Instead, strategic investing focuses on companies' longer-term business prospects and the positions they occupy in their industries. 

One approach to strategic buying is essentially a takeover bet: finding growth industries in which consolidations are likely.
The second approach is to hunt for stocks in lagging industry groups that will deliver some positive earnings surprises.
Analysts see both possibilities in the months ahead for many stocks among the Dow Jones Industry Groups that have walked or crawled to the third quarter's finish line. 

Media companies, an industry group that gained a poor 2.3% for the quarter, could go through more consolidation, following the lead of the Time-Warner merger, analysts say. "In one fell swoop you see your competitors become twice as big as you are, and you begin to wonder if you should do the same thing," says Les Werkstell, director of research at First Manhattan. 

Joseph McAlinden, director of equity research at Dillon Read, predicts industrial companies, which put in an average performance for the quarter, are in for a period of consolidation.
The combined companies will have increased production capacity. 

"You will start to see {strategic} deals in the cyclical areas," such as industrial materials and capital goods, Mr. McAlinden says.
He likes Caterpillar, and Harnischfeger Industries, another heavy equipment concern, on the basis of good earnings and possible consolidations in their industry.
The heavy machinery group, by the way, grew a sluggish 6.5% for the quarter -- compared with nearly 8% for the Dow Jones Equity Market Index, which comprises all industry groups -- and 8.1% for the nine months. 

Aside from mergers, Mr. McAlinden thinks that some stellar earnings stories will top the winners list in the fourth quarter. "The {winning} fourth-quarter names are going to be earnings and performance driven," he says. 

Perhaps it is already beginning.
Strong-earnings stories account for five of the top 15 stocks for the nine months: L.A. Gear, Federal National Mortgage Association, Claire's Stores, Craig Corp., and Tonka. 

Among those industries that could perform better in the next quarter, Mr. McAlinden picks natural gas.
Gas utilities gained a meager 6.6% in the third quarter and 24% in the nine months.
His picks for a strong fourth-quarter performance: Burlington Resources and Oryx Energy. 

Ronald Sloan, executive vice president at Siebel Capital Management, says investors can hit a "home run" in the fourth quarter by looking at industries first, rather than the overall market. "I am a bull on sectors of the market, not indexes in general," he says. 

Companies with large portions of revenue and earnings from exports will produce strong profit gains, offsetting slower growth in the U.S., he predicts. 

His picks are in the technology, capital goods, and basic industry sectors, which had few representatives among the top 15 stocks.
The computer sector lost 2.87% for the quarter, and a crushing 8.22% for the nine months.
Software companies did better, rising 14.75% for the quarter and about 30% for three quarters.
Mr. Sloan is confident, however, that Sun Microsystems can deliver a hefty earnings increase in the months ahead.
He also likes Informix, a software concern. 

In capital goods, Mr. Sloan likes Stewart & Stevenson, a provider of gas turbine equipment, and Cascade, a supplier to forklift manufacturers.
His basic industry pick: Nu-West Industries, a maker of fertilizer. 

Not everybody recommends betting on strategic mergers, of course. "Unless you feel that you have special expertise for knowing when there are synergies, how are you going to beat the overall market?" says Frederic Mishkin, professor of economics and finance at Columbia University Business School. "The average Joe won't be able to pick out these situations." Prof.
Mishkin thinks investors are better off investing in a fund that tracks an index.
That view has held up so far this year.
Broad market averages rose about 25%. 

The following lists include common stocks that began their respective periods at prices above $2 a share.
Warrants and preferred issues are excluded; prices are adjusted for stock splits.
Over-the-counter listings include Nasdaq National Market System stocks only. 

Friday's Market Activity 

The third quarter ended on a flat note, as program trading took a final swipe at stock prices in the last half hour of trading and left the market mixed. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average, which was more than 12 points higher earlier in the session, finished 2.09 lower at 2692.82.
The broader market closed narrowly higher.
Standard & Poor's 500-stock index added 0.55 to 349.15.
For the week, the industrial average gained 11.21 points, or 0.4%.
The S&P 500 added 0.6%.
The industrial average has gained 24.3% so far this year, while the S&P 500 is up 25.7%. 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich plunged 4 1/8 to 12 1/8, on volume of more than 3.5 million shares, making it Friday's most active issue on the New York Stock Exchange.
Anheuser-Busch announced an agreement to buy Harcourt's six theme parks and other real estate for $1.1 billion, a price that was less than some analysts had predicted.
Anheuser-Busch gained 1 1/8 to 43 3/8. 

AMR, parent of American Airlines, added 2 3/4 to 86 1/2.
Trading in the stock was delayed in the morning because of an order imbalance.
Friday's rise was attributed in part to reports that Donald Trump increased his stake in the company.
AMR and Trump aides declined to comment.
AMR said Friday that it asked the Securities and Exchange Commission and the New York Stock Exchange to investigate recent Dow Jones News Service reports on the company. 

Chevron was the strongest of the blue chips, gaining 2 7/8 to 61.
The company was cited in the most recent issue of Business Week as vulnerable to a takeover because of the gap between Chevron's value and the underlying stock price. 

