.START 

The hole in the Earth's ozone concentration in the stratosphere over Antarctica could get worse, scientists said. 

Scientists at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md., said ozone levels over Antarctica have been decreasing by about 1.5% a day through September.
A week ago, the ozone concentration had decreased by about 30% from the beginning of the month, officials said. 

Arlin Krueger of NASA said the rate of decrease in ozone is almost equal to the rate in 1987, when a record ozone depletion was observed Oct. 5.
He said, "The ultimate depth of this year's ozone hole will depend on how long the current rate of decrease is maintained." 

Officials said a powerful polar vortex formed over Antarctica in August, with extremely cold temperatures.
These conditions are ideal, according to current theory, for the formation of polar stratospheric clouds, which are thought to increase the depletion of ozone. 

Holes in the ozone above the Antarctic develop only during the winter months when conditions are right.
Depletions also have been detected over the Arctic region during the cold season, but they generally are less severe.
Normal levels of ozone seem to restore themselves with the change of season. 

Ozone in the stratosphere forms a protective layer against the sun's ultraviolet rays.
Excess exposure to ultraviolet radiation is thought to be a major cause of skin cancer.
Some studies indicate an increase in ultraviolet radiation can harm many plants and can depress the immune system in some animals, including humans. 

NASA scientists have been monitoring ozone levels over the Southern Hemisphere using an instrument on board the Nimbus-7 satellite for more than 10 years. 

Earlier studies have indicated that stratospheric ozone can be broken down through a chemical action initiated by some man-made chemicals, principally cholorfluorocarbons.
These compounds, called CFCs, are used for refrigeration and for making some plastics products.
At one time, CFCs were used in the U.S. as a propellant in aerosol products.
That use continues in some countries. 

Some U.S. makers and users of CFCs have announced plans to stop making the chemical compound or to guard against releasing the chemicals to the atmosphere. 

Ozone, a major component of smog, is an atmospheric pollutant at ground level, but it forms an important part of the radiation-protection belt surrounding the Earth in the stratosphere, which begins about 9 1/2 miles above the Earth and extends upward to about 39 miles. 

Ozone is a substance composed of three atoms of oxygen.
It is created naturally during thunderstorms.
Common atmospheric oxygen is composed of two atoms. 

