.START 

Having cast his net across much of Western Europe, Carlo De Benedetti is now looking east. 

The Italian financier is close to announcing that he's setting up a holding company to buy controlling stakes in Hungarian companies, according to Hungarian sources.
The venture could be unveiled in a few weeks, once Mr. De Benedetti has lined up partners.
Financial sources said that, to their knowledge, it would be the first venture of its type in Eastern Europe. 

The launch of the holding company by one of Europe's most flamboyant capitalists would be the most spectacular sign yet of a growing interest by Western businesses in Hungary, the Eastern European country that is regarded as having moved the furthest toward a market economy. 

In the past couple of years, Hungary, seeking to attract Western capital to combat an economic crisis, has opened a stock market, passed laws to encourage corporate activity and outlined plans to sell about 50 state-run companies. 

But apart from the creation of a few country investment funds such as the $1.8 billion Quantum Fund -- run by George Soros, a Hungarian-born money manager in New York -- and a few foreign investments such as a recent buy-out of a small paper company organized by Citicorp, there has been more talk than action. 

Mr. De Benedetti has long advocated a kind of "Marshall Plan for Eastern Europe." He is said to feel that there are fewer obstacles to doing business in Hungary than in other Eastern European countries.
The forint, Hungary's currency, isn't convertible, but Hungary allows Western companies to repatriate profit in foreign currency at the official rate, which is only about 10% lower than the black market rate.
The venture would fit into Mr. De Benedetti's strategy of getting in on the ground floor in emerging markets.
After becoming a significant operator on the Italian and French markets through his three major holding companies, Cir, Cofide and Cerus, Mr. De Benedetti has set up investment vehicles in Spain, Portugal and Greece and also hopes to set up shop in Turkey. 

"The guy who arrives first has more room to maneuver than the others," said one financial source familiar with the project. "The logic of the Hungarian operation is the same that underpinned the Spanish, Portuguese and Greek ventures: Invest in countries that will provide a good return on investment and whose companies could benefit from {Mr.
De Benedetti's} management experience." 

As with his other holding companies, the Hungarian venture would be likely to focus on taking stakes that give it management control of companies, rather than simply making investments.
Cerus, Mr. De Benedetti's Paris-based holding company that serves as his international expansion arm, is expected to be the dominant shareholder in the new Hungarian venture.
But sources say Mr. De Benedetti is seeking to line up both international and Hungarian partners. 

