.START 

"I want my people to destroy our competitors, I want them to kill and crush them," barks Thomas Peterson, a BankAmerica Corp. executive vice president and chief of its far-flung branch network. 

Standing in a 43rd-floor conference area in BankAmerica's downtown tower, the former Army sergeant adds, "This is the war room." Charts bearing zigzagging red and blue lines compare BankAmerica's performance with those of its main California rivals, Wells Fargo & Co., Security Pacific Corp. and First Interstate Bancorp.
On one wall hangs a cartoonlike painting of BankAmerica executives riding in a tank and waving a banner reading "Annihilate the competition." 

These days, a retail-banking war is rumbling with the big talk and loud hype more traditional on a used-car lot.
Recent months have seen the rise of late-night banking, Saturday banking, Sunday banking, 24-hour-a-day loan-by-phone dial-a-banker banking, African-safari sweepstakes banking.
BankAmerica has been leading the pack, handing out free checking accounts and pushing credit lines with no up-front charges.
Its Seattle-based Seafirst Corp. unit is offering five bucks to any customer who has to wait in line more than five minutes (it's paid out about $2,000 so far). 

This "combat banking," as some at BankAmerica call it, has played a key role in the biggest turnaround in U.S. banking history.
A little more than two years ago, BankAmerica's survival was in doubt; now, largely on the strength of retail profits and remarkably low domestic loan losses, its net income is up 114% for the 1989 first half, to $579 million, or $2.88 a share.
After losing $1.8 billion from 1985 through 1987, BankAmerica is expected this year to post record net income of more than $1 billion. 

Of course, lifting its loan-loss reserves for Third World debt, as several other money-center banks have done in recent days, could wipe out much of that anticipated profit.
BankAmerica's reserves now stand at about 37% of its $7.4 billion of non-trade foreign debt.
By comparison, Chase Manhattan Corp. has increased its reserves on nontrade debt to 46%, and J.P. Morgan & Co. has gone up to about 100%.
BankAmerica won't comment on its plans.
But despite its Third World problems, its stock has jumped nearly fivefold, from a 1987 low of $6.875 to Friday's close of $35.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Last week it traded as high as $36.125, an all-time peak. 

Much of the credit for the company's turnaround is going to Richard M. Rosenberg.
He joined the bank in April 1987 and now heads its California banking group, which includes the booming retail business.
Mr. Rosenberg is the frontrunner to succeed the 66-year-old chairman and chief executive, A.W. "Tom" Clausen, who was brought out of retirement by BankAmerica's board in the dark days of late 1986 and is expected to retire again in a year or two. 

An acknowledged retail-banking whiz, Mr. Rosenberg, 59, is the foremost member of a cadre of former Wells Fargo executives (Mr.
Peterson is another) brought to BankAmerica when it was at low ebb.
Even with an 850-branch network that is the envy of its rivals, BankAmerica's retail operations had been stagnant for years.
Mr. Rosenberg's plan for revitalizing the bank through retail operations, a former executive recalls, boiled down to "sell and sell and cut and cut." 

In an interview in his office, Mr. Rosenberg puts it more diplomatically. "We had to win back the confidence of the market and of our own people," he says.
He is truly a marketing man: Hanging on the wall behind his desk is a framed, poster-sized reproduction of a BankAmerica ad. "Morale was bad.
Expenses were bad," he adds. "We needed something to show the world out there that we had a lot to offer." 

What Mr. Rosenberg offered is a mix of product doodads, marketing hype and cost cutting.
He came up with Alpha, a package linking checking and savings accounts with a credit line that kicks in when customers' accounts are overdrawn -- and carries a 16.8% charge.
Alpha has helped reverse a disconcerting slide in deposits. 

Mr. Rosenberg offered home-equity loans with no up-front charges; that helped increase consumer loans outstanding to $16.2 billion, up 29% from year-earlier levels.
Mortgage loans, aggressively priced by BankAmerica for the first time in years, have mushroomed 28%. 

Meanwhile, costs as a percentage of revenues have been slashed 21% since 1986, transforming an expense structure that had been obese into one that's merely plump. 

BankAmerica's efforts mirror a national trend, behind which lies a fundamental truth: "Wholesale banking stinks," says John Lyons, a New York banking consultant.
Deregulation and global economic developments have made lending to big companies and countries a low-profit or no-profit proposition. 

That leaves the retail market -- credit cards, auto loans and other loans and services for individuals -- as the chief source of loan growth, cheap deposits and bank profits.
Since 1985, U.S. banks' consumer loans have swollen 50% to $677.9 billion, almost double the rate of growth for commercial and industrial loans.
Last year, for the first time in memory, U.S. banks had more loans outstanding to consumers than to businesses.
Commercial and industrial loans currently total about $622.5 billion. 

For consumers, this isn't entirely a blessing.
While competition is driving down rates on some loans, banks are often accused of gouging consumers on credit cards, deposit fees and wherever else the banks think consumer apathy lets them raise their charges without driving customers away. 

And despite the high margins, banks themselves face numerous pitfalls: Consumer bankruptcy filings have doubled in the past four years and would undoubtedly explode in a recession.
Furthermore, so many banks are racing so furiously after the same customers that they inevitably crash into each other, resulting in pricing pressure and losses. 

Still, so far so good for BankAmerica.
Alpha was one of its major opening salvos in the marketing war.
Mr. Rosenberg pushed the credit-line link and the bank in general with a multimillion-dollar marketing blitz -- billboards, television spots, direct mail pitches.
He met with BankAmerica's longtime advertising firm, Grey Advertising, bluntly criticized BankAmerica's ads and laid out the objective for future marketing campaigns: "Show people that it's not stupid to bank here and that it is stupid not to." Alpha was pitched as the "first step in simplified banking" -- one-stop shopping for bank customers. 

Alpha and other products got a big boost last May 6, BankAmerica's annual "Founder's Day" honoring A.P. Giannini, the bank's immigrant founder.
BankAmerica combined the celebration with offers of checking accounts that are free for the first three years.
BankAmerica opened 40,000 accounts that day, a Saturday. 

"I'm forced to admit that it was a very clever marketing double-whammy," says one marketing executive at a sizable competitor. "They hyped product and they hyped Saturday banking." 

Since introducing Alpha accounts in mid-1988, BankAmerica has opened more than 500,000 of them.
Its share of the California deposit pie, which had plummeted to an estimated 35% in 1987 from 44% two years earlier, edged up to 36% by mid-1988 and is believed to be higher now. 

People at the bank now rhapsodize about the flowering "sales culture" -- a buzzword for an atmosphere in which bankers are sent out to hawk products.
Such a transformation, if true, would be amazing: Even some of BankAmerica's own executives have compared its traditional culture to a listless, bloated Third World ministry.
By contrast, Wells Fargo is known for some of the most aggressive efficiency in the business. 

At BankAmerica barbecues throughout the state, Ex-Wells Fargo executives Rosenberg and Peterson have pounded home the notion that the main job of BankAmerica employees is to sell.
Lending officers are ordered to call clients with long lists of questions designed to ferret out their other credit relationships.
The idea is to "cross sell" existing customers services that they never dreamed they needed. 

Competitive fires are stoked by publicly listing each branch's results -- and ranking each employee as well. "If you're in the cellar, you'll work your tail off to get out," Mr. Peterson explains.
At newly instituted weekly sales meetings, managers and employees swap stories and hand out awards for "sales of the week." 

Isn't some of this silly? "Of course, a lot of this stuff is hokey," concedes Martha Monroe, assistant manager of BankAmerica's branch in Novato, as she stands beneath lavender and turquoise banners promoting Alpha accounts.
But, she says, "Hokey works." 

The hokey often seems balanced by judicious use of terror.
After a quick tour of one branch, a disgusted Mr. Peterson began lecturing the manager on the shabby condition of the place.
At one point, he grabbed a handful of BankAmerica brochures and used them to swab down a grimy automated teller machine as the manager looked on with a stricken expression. "The place looked like a dump," Mr. Peterson recalls. 

Asked about the key to transforming work-a-day bankers into sales dynamos, Frank Schultz, a senior vice president who heads BankAmerica's residential-real-estate operations, responds: "Greed." He elaborates: "You tell them they'll make a lot of money if they perform and they'll have serious problems if they don't." 

One of the first things the new regime did was to freeze salaries of branch managers and many other employees and set up incentive-pay programs that compensate managers largely on the basis of production -- new accounts opened, consumer loans generated, transactions processed.
Production targets are set for each branch, and branch managers that don't measure up don't last.
A former branch manager recalls a friend, also a branch manager, who was busted down to a simple loan-officer status for failing to achieve quotas. "He had some bad quarters and, whammo, they dunked him," the former manager recounts. 

Though such cutthroat practices appall some people, they clearly produce results.
One example: Mr. Schultz's real-estate operation.
BankAmerica got burned by making fixed-rate mortgage loans in the 1970s and had largely avoided home loans of any kind for a long while.
At the end of 1987, it ranked 21st in California in real-estate loan originations.
Shortly thereafter, Mr. Schultz hired a battalion of more than 100 sales people -- some had sold cars and computers -- put them on commission and unleashed them on California's torrid housing market. 

Now, BankAmerica ranks third in California, having blown by all its bank rivals and trailing only two giant thrift holding companies, H.F. Ahmanson & Co. and Great Western Financial Corp. Lately, BankAmerica has been making over $1.5 billion in mortgage loans a month; it has $11.5 billion in residential-real-estate loans outstanding.
Much of the lending is in adjustable-rate mortgages that limit the bank's exposure to interest-rate swings.
Despite the explosive growth, Mr. Schultz says, BankAmerica's delinquency rate is only 1.2%, less than half the California average and even further below the 4.6% nationwide rate. 

BankAmerica also has begun charging for more and more services it used to give away.
Its automated-teller-machine transactions, once free, now cost customers 30 cents a pop.
Subpoenas for customer records, formerly handled in the branches, now are processed by a central office -- for a fee that depends on how quickly they are needed. 

But selling is only half the battle in retail banking; driving down expenses is also crucial.
Retail operations are inherently expensive because servicing accounts costs a lot, but BankAmerica's expenses had ballooned by the mid-1980s.
That partly reflected a paternalistic attitude fostered by Mr. Giannini; the founder had coddled his employees and basically gave them jobs for life.
As recently as three years ago, BankAmerica bragged that it rarely fired anyone. 

That attitude is gone.
Since 1984, BankAmerica has trimmed about 33,000 workers off its payroll, reducing employment to about 54,700 world-wide.
Most of that cutback has come on the international and wholesale sides of the bank through divestitures, but some 5,000 people have been cut from its retail division just since 1987. 

The branch network's costly structure has been overhauled.
Its 62 "area management groups," clusters of branches, were cut to 31.
The four regional managers, each of whom formerly had staffs of about 40 people, now have 10 apiece. 

Cost cutters identified 90 functions performed by each branch, everything from making loans to returning hot checks. "We discovered that we had 850 branches doing the same things 850 different ways," says Larry McNabb, executive vice president for operations in the California banking group.
Of those 90 functions, 80 are now handled by factory-like processing centers. 

The cutbacks have been rough on employees.
Mr. Rosenberg, Mr. Peterson and other executives have given soothing speeches, and internal surveys find that morale has improved.
But many employees still grumble. "B of A is making money now, but the pressure to cut and cut and cut is still horribly demoralizing," says one former branch manager who recently quit. 

And the ascendency of the Wells Fargo expatriates continues to gall some employees, especially old-timers. "We've viewed Wells as the evil empire forever," one says, adding that Wells Fargo's approach to banking -- its ferocious cost control -- "is sort of heartless." Many BankAmerica employees now ruefully call their bank "Wells of America." 

Nonetheless, the cutting and whipcracking have been vital to turning BankAmerica around.
Its spending to earn one dollar of revenue has been slashed to about 64 cents -- still high compared to Wells Fargo, where the ratio is 52 cents to the dollar -- but a big improvement from the roughly 80 cents that BankAmerica was spending in 1985.
Its return on assets climbed to a robust 1.26% at June 30 from a mediocre 0.69% a year earlier.
Its net interest margin -- the difference between its cost of funds and what it receives on loans -- has risen to 4.74% from 3.79% a year ago, largely because of the high-yielding consumer loans. 

However, not everything has gone well on the retail side.
BankAmerica's credit card loans of roughly $4.4 billion have been pretty much stagnant over the past several years; credit cards are one of retail banking's most lucrative areas, and competitors such as Citicorp have vastly expanded their card operations.
One BankAmerica credit card promotion, under which consumers piled up points that later could be swapped for catalog gifts, got out of hand.
BankAmerica drastically underestimated how many gifts it would have to give away, a mistake that cost the bank $11 million, according to former executives. 

Moreover, many observers believe that BankAmerica's forced retreat from wholesale and international operations -- and the overhang of dubious foreign loans -- will permanently hobble its ability to compete with global financial powers such as Japan's giant banks and even U.S. internationals. 

That possibility is known to trouble Mr. Clausen.
Before retiring the first time, he served as the bank's chief executive from 1970 to 1981 and oversaw the vast expansion of its international operations and other activities that badly damaged it after he left.
Yet he clearly feels vindicated by the bank's turnaround. 

"When I came back, people said, 'My God, they've brought that fool Clausen back, he caused all these problems in the first place. . . . The board must be crazy, '" he muses in an interview. "Well, we've come a fur piece.
Maybe I'm not as dumb as people thought." 

But friends say Mr. Clausen still sees BankAmerica as a global bank and worries that the emphasis on retail banking may jeopardize that.
They add that he is occasionally peeved at the seeming glee that some retail executives take in slashing costs.
A former executive tells of a meeting at which Mr. Peterson's enthusiastic description of how he was saving money by making tellers part-timers and stripping them of some benefits prompted Mr. Clausen to snap: "Let me remind you that I started as a teller." (Mr.
Peterson, who also worked once as a teller, says Mr. Clausen meant it as a joke.) 

These issues weigh on Mr. Clausen as he considers whom to anoint as his successor.
Mr. Rosenberg is the clear leader because he has engineered the most visible aspect of the turnaround.
But he has scant international experience.
Furthermore, a clause in his contract pays him roughly $800,000 if he quits before 1990 or if he is fired for any reason other than being fired for gross misconduct. 

"Dick is 59 himself, and if Clausen dithers, he may just take the money and go run something else," a former executive says. 

In any event, Mr. Clausen doesn't seem in any hurry to go. "The job isn't done yet," he says.
He won't speculate on how much longer he will stay.
As for Mr. Rosenberg, he still has plenty of work to do in his present job.
He notes that, considering bank documents and customer forms, certain BankAmerica real estate loans require 98 different pieces of paper. 

"We intend to cut that by 65%" he says, waving a stack of pie charts and graphs. "Thirty-four {forms} ain't great, either, but it's progress." 

