.START 

Last week's "education summit" in Charlottesville, Va., was a remarkably amicable affair for a gathering of Democratic and Republican politicians.
The nation's governors and their White House host were chipper in part because there now is a consensus on how to improve schools.
Five years ago, then-Secretary of Education William Bennett said the key to reform was dissolving "the blob," the massive bureaucracy of professional educrats.
Mr. Bennett's critique is now the conventional wisdom. 

Consider, for instance, that Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers, recently wrote a column in which he declared: "It's time to admit that public education operates like a planned economy, a bureaucratic system in which everybody's role is spelled out in advance and there are few incentives for innovation and productivity.
It's no surprise that our school system doesn't improve: It more resembles the communist economy than our own market economy." 

Thus, the eagerness of President Bush and the assembled governors to perform "perestroika" on the nation's school systems.
Federal and state dollars, they said, should arrive at local schools with fewer strings attached.
They endorsed the idea that the authority of principals and teachers should rise, and that of central bureaucrats should fall. 

Most important, the "choice" bandwagon continued to roll.
More governors are proposing plans that would expose local schools to the tempering fires of competition. 

The Bush administration was delighted with the summit.
Even the National Education Association, the teachers union that is as responsible as any group for the "blob" that smothered American education, found it wise to get onboard. 

All the good will wafting around the summit is being taken as a positive sign, but the fact is that the so-called "education crisis" is fraught with irony.
For starters, many people don't want to admit that their school may be part of the crisis.
Nearly every state and locality reports in surveys that its own students are "above the national average," which of course isn't possible.
Some 92% of teachers think their schools are doing a good or excellent job, and 91% of mothers say the same thing. 

Yet critics point to international comparison tests which indicate that American students come in last against other industrialized nations in mathematical ability.
What pressure does exist for change comes mostly from businessmen whose middle- and lower-level employees often fall below minimal levels of acceptable competence.
Business in turn finally has convinced most politicians that the continued success of an increasingly sophisticated U.S. economy is at some peril if the work force doesn't improve. 

Against this backdrop, the summit's main accomplishment seems to have been a commitment to create national performance goals, particularly in math and science.
Properly, implementation will be left to the states and localities.
But if we are going to shake up the U.S. school system, we will have discord and turf battles with bureaucratic warlords.
Are the summiteers up to this? 

They'll have to ensure that the people now running education are held accountable; that means, for example, firing inept teachers and principals who have tenure.
It may require someone in authority to face down the educational theorists who deride rote learning in some subject areas, such as spelling ("yours truley"), grammar ("Sorry, we don't got that brand.") and arithmetic. 

Still, if slovenliness is rampant in American education, even the eminent men and women gathered in Charlottesville for their "education summit" may be part of the problem. "Education" ain't an adjective.
More important, it doesn't sound as if it ever should be. 

