.START 

Milk prices received by dairy farmers in September soared to their highest level in four and a half years, foreshadowing a rise in retail prices for all dairy products, the Agriculture Department reported. 

Milk prices averaged $13.70 per hundred pounds, a 50-cent jump from August.
Increased milk demand from makers of ice cream and cheese, and reduced production in drought-stricken areas, tightened the nation's milk supply. 

Overall farm prices slipped 0.7% in September, however, with slumping hog and cattle prices more than offsetting price gains for milk and fruit, according to the department's monthly agricultural price report. 

Milk prices have risen for four consecutive months.
They're up $1.30 from September 1988 and stand at their highest level since February 1985. 

The dairy industry expects the trend to continue until early next year.
Raw milk prices are projected to increase 10% by the end of December, while retail prices for cheese, butter and ice cream, as well as bottled milk, are projected to rise 3% to 5% by the end of the year, according to the National Milk Industry Foundation, a trade group representing major dairy processors. 

But the retail price increases are likely to be far steeper in the upper Midwest, where milk for cheese production is in great demand, and in the Northeast, where milk supplies are particularly tight. "We are still getting the effects of the drought," said Linwood Tipton, president of the industry group. "Cows are still on pasture." Production will increase as dairy farmers put their herds on feed grain later this fall. 

Beef cattle prices averaged $67.50 per hundred pounds, down $2.20 from August, while calf prices averaged $91.40 per hundred pounds, down $2.80, the department said. 

On the hog markets, barrow and gilt prices fell $3.60 per hundred pounds in September to $43.40, while sow prices rose $1.20 to $36.10 per hundred pounds, the department said.
Fruit prices climbed 22% in September, as oranges soared $1.71 to $5.62 per box and apples rose 3 cents to 19 cents per pound, the department reported.
Commercial vegetables dropped 10% from August. 

Prices for potatoes averaged $6.21 per hundred pounds in September, down $1.36 from August, while soybeans averaged $5.89 per bushel, down 18 cents, according to the department. 

In another report, the department estimated the nation's inventory of hogs and pigs on Sept. 1 at 58.4 million, slightly above a year ago.
The inventory of breeding animals slipped 3% to 7.02 million, while the market-hog inventory edged up 1% to 51.4 million.
The pig crop in June, July and August totaled 23.8 million, 1% larger than the same period last year. 

Hog producers intend to have 2.9 million sows produce litters during September, October and November, 1% fewer than the actual farrowings during the same period last year, the department said. 

