.START 

As the economy's long expansion rolls on, so does the game of guessing when it will end.
Sooner or later, most forecasters agree, rising business activity will bump against constraints to further growth and a recession will develop.
A few months ago, the prevailing sentiment was that this would occur late this year or in 1990.
But recently the consensus has shifted to the view that the expansion has a good deal longer to run. 

This shift reflects, in large part, recent reports of waning inflation.
In August, the latest month available, the consumer price index was flat and producer prices fell for the third month in a row -- all encouraging news for the many analysts who believe that, for a recession to occur, the economy must first encounter inflationary pressures severe enough to warrant highly restrictive policies in Washington. 

But this may be a somewhat simplistic view. 

There is no question that inflation and subsequent restrictive economic policies have ushered in all recent recessions.
The onset of the latest slump, which began in mid-1981 and lasted 16 months, was accompanied by annual inflation rates in the double-digit range, as well as a pronounced tightening of monetary policy.
Similar patterns marked the onset of the three other recessions of the past two decades -- in 1969-70, in 1973-75 and in 1980. 

It is hardly surprising, in light of this record, that a notion -- unfortunately mistaken -- has taken hold that, if only inflationary pressures can be held in check, the economy will move indefinitely along an expansionary path. 

One has only to go back to the early 1960s to find a slump -- the recession of 1960-61 -- that developed despite negligible inflation.
In the six months prior to that recession's start in the spring of 1960, the consumer price index was flat. 

And this was no isolated episode.
Consumer prices were actually falling at the onset of the 1948-49 recession.
And similar patterns occurred in the pre-World War II years.
No inflation preceded the severe downturn of 1929-33, which ushered in the Great Depression.
The economy began to slump in August 1929, though consumer prices had changed little in several years. 

The message, clearly, is that inflation is by no means a prerequisite for a recession.
And so, it follows, the recent evidence of abating price pressure hardly constitutes a sound basis for assuming that the current outlook is necessarily recession-free. 

Many things, from oil shortages to trade wars, can serve to stifle economic growth.
But a common underlying element, the record shows, is a prolonged reining in of the money supply. 

While inflation remained dormant in the months before the 1960-61 recession, monetary policy grew tighter.
The money supply had been edging lower since the summer of 1959, eight months before the recession struck.
In the same period, corporate profits eroded, as productivity slumped and labor costs climbed.
In terms of sales, profits fell by about one-quarter. 

As the experience of 1948-49 shows, recessions can develop even when prices are dropping.
The consumer price index had risen sharply early in 1948, when the economy was still expanding.
But by September 1948, after nearly a year of monetary restraint, inflation finally had subsided; in fact, prices were falling.
Even so, a recession set in two months later and lasted for 11 inflation-free months. 

Inflation was dormant for many months before the downturn of 1929-33.
Nonetheless, monetary policy had turned restrictive.
The money supply rose fairly steadily from early 1927 to the end of 1928.
But this expansionary policy gave way in early 1929 to a more restrictive course.
By August, when the economy began to contract, the money supply was below the level of the previous December. 

Plainly, there are similarities between recent developments and these earlier episodes.
Gauged by the money supply, a highly restrictive policy has been in place for more than two years.
Inflation, severe early in the decade, has abated.
Profits have recently edged down. 

Yet, the economy continues to expand and most forecasters, heartened by the recent price reports, look for sustained, if modest, growth ahead. 

However, with the money supply having been held in such tight check for so long, such estimates may prove overly optimistic.
A very recent easing notwithstanding, such prolonged monetary tightness typically precedes a recession -- whatever the price trend. 

Forecasters who nonetheless doubt a recession in coming months maintain that monetary policy in reality has been far less stringent than money-supply data suggest.
They argue that investment inflows from abroad have assumed a larger, expansionary role and investors have tended to hold more of their assets in financial instruments not generally considered a part of the money supply.
These include Treasury bills, commercial paper and, most importantly, holdings in Keogh and individual retirement accounts, which are deemed -- rightly or wrongly -- too illiquid to be counted. 

If there really is more to the money supply than meets the eye -- and the answer is by no means clear -- this is likely to have far more to do with whether the expansion keeps rolling than any letup in the rise of prices. 

