.START 

Scores of Valdez, Alaska, tourist businesses lost substantial revenue as a result of the March 24 Exxon Valdez oil spill, an Alaska legislative report has concluded. 

The finding contradicts some predictions that the 260,000-barrel spill by the Exxon Corp. tanker, which made headlines around the world, would provide a short-term boost to the tourist economy of the scenic port on Prince William Sound. 

The report concludes that instead of being attracted by the spill, many potential visitors shied away from the town because of misconceptions that Valdez was "awash in oil." Thus, while hotels, campgrounds and restaurants overflowed with workers arriving to clean up the spill, other traditional tourism indicators, including excursion boats, tour guides and museums, experienced declines in customers of between 33% and 75%, the report said. 

Valdez, population 3,600, is accessible by highway from both Anchorage and Fairbanks, the state's two major cities.
Yet drive-in traffic to the Valdez musuem, for example, slumped from to 25,000 visitors this summer season from 38,000 visitors in 1988's.
And while the town attracted 39 cruise ships to its port -- 10 more than in 1988 -- only 13,000 cruise passengers visited the museum this summer, down from 19,500 such visitors in 1988.
The slump is an indication that "far fewer passengers disembarked" from the ships this summer, according to the report. 

Even in cases where advanced bookings meant business as usual, the spill often disrupted normal tourist services and may negatively affect future bookings, the report went on.
Jim and Nancy Lethcoe, operators of a sailing charter service, told legislative investigators that they were unable to use 75% of their traditional anchorages in remote areas of Prince William Sound because of oily conditions or oil-spill treatment activities. 

"Usually isolated locations were disturbed by aircraft and people" while "noise pollution" on marine band radios from spill cleanup activities made monitoring marine channels difficult and unpleasant, the report stated. 

