.START 

Investors in Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. still appear worried about the publishing giant's long-term prospects, despite the $1.1 billion the company will receive from the sale of its six theme parks. 

The company's stock plunged $4.125 a share Friday in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, closing at $12.125.
The sell-off came 24 hours after the company announced it would sell its Sea World and other theme parks to Anheuser Busch Cos. 

The $1.1 billion price tag was "disappointing," according to one institutional investor.
In June, when Harcourt disclosed its plan to sell the parks, many analysts suggested the assets would bring at least $1.5 billion. 

The lower-than-expected sale price, analysts said, likely will force Harcourt to sell other assets, particularly its insurance business, to further reduce its debt load. 

Harcourt "bought time" with the theme-park sale, said Bert Boksen, an analyst with Raymond James & Associates in St. Petersburg, Fla.
But "I think they'll ultimately have to sell the insurance company." 

In an interview after the sale announcement Thursday, John Berardi, senior vice president and treasurer of Harcourt, said the company's insurance business is profitable and that Harcourt has no plans to sell it. 

Harcourt said Thursday that it would use $930 million of initial net proceeds from the theme-park sale to reduce its $1.12 billion in long-term bank debt.
But the company still owes about $1.6 billion of junk-bond debt, which carries an interest rate of about 14%.
The heavy debt load stems from 1987, when Harcourt fended off a hostile takeover bid by British publisher Robert Maxwell.
William Jovanovich, Harcourt's chairman, engineered a $2.9 billion recapitalization by borrowing more than $2 billion. 

Harcourt officials didn't return phone calls Friday.
But a person close to the company said Harcourt is "comfortable" with the high-yield debt.
The company, he said, has good cash flow from its publishing and insurance operations. 

For Anheuser-Busch, the theme-park pact carries a risk to its credit ratings.
Moody's Investors Service said Friday that it is considering whether to downgrade about $1.76 billion of the brewer's long-term debt.
Anheuser-Busch's purchase of the six parks would increase its debt and interest expense, the rating agency said. 

The ratings under review include the double-A-3 rating on Anheuser-Busch's Eurobonds, Euromarket notes, sinking-fund debentures, New Zealand dollar notes, medium-term notes and industrial development revenue bonds. 

