.START 

A federal appeals court ordered a judge to fine former Attorney General Ramsey Clark and another lawyer for filing a frivolous suit seeking payment for damages caused by the 1986 U.S. bombing raid on Libya. 

The three-judge panel in the District of Columbia said a federal district judge, who dismissed the suit, was wrong not to impose a fine on Mr. Clark, currently a New York lawyer, and Lawrence Schilling, with whom he works. 

Mr. Clark filed the suit last year on behalf of 55 Libyans who claimed they were injured and their property damaged by the bombing raid.
They sued President Reagan, and also named Great Britain and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher as defendants for allowing U.S. bombers to use British air bases. 

In dismissing the suit, U.S. District Court Judge Thomas Jackson said Mr. Clark knew the case "offered no hope whatsoever of success." But the court refused to impose a fine for a frivolous suit, concluding that courts may sometimes serve as a forum for public protests. 

But the appeals court said, "We do not conceive it a proper function of a federal court to serve as a forum for protests, to the detriment of parties with serious disputes waiting to be heard." 

The opinion was signed by all three judges, James Buckley, Douglas Ginsburg and David Sentelle. 

The appeals court also ordered Mr. Clark to pay the fees for the lawyers who handled the appeal for Great Britain and Mrs. Thatcher. 

The amount of the fine for the frivolous lawsuits will be determined by the district court; the amount of the fees will be based on a bill submitted by the lawyers.
Mr. Clark couldn't be reached for comment. 

ACCOUNTANTS IN FLORIDA can solicit clients. 

Richard Rampell, 37 years old, chief executive officer of the West Palm Beach, Fla., accounting firm Rampell & Rampell, won his three-year crusade to overturn two Florida laws prohibiting the state's more than 16,000 accountants from pitching for business and telling prospective clients how much they charge. 

Only three other states, Georgia, Texas and Louisiana, ban uninvited soliticitations from accountants.
No other states have laws forbidding accountants from telling prospective clients how much they bill. 

U.S. District Court Judge Edward Rodgers Thursday struck down the two laws as unconstitutional because they violated accountants' free-speech rights.
Florida failed to show that the government's interest was served by prohibiting the accountants' from soliciting and bidding for business, the judge ruled. 

Florida probably will appeal the decision, says state Assistant Attorney General John Rimes, who said he hadn't read the opinion. "Historically, when a state statute has been declared unconstitutional, usually an appeal has been taken," he said. 

Mr. Rampell says he was on the phone drumming up business less than an hour after his lawyer read him the decision. 

He has a target list of 50 potential clients and hopes to land 15% of those clients within a year. "They've taken the handcuffs off," Mr. Rampell says. 

THE SEC filed a civil suit against two defendants who pleaded guilty to insider-trading charges. 

The Securities and Exchange Commission is seeking disgorgement of a total of $167,070 in alleged illegal profits from Morton Shapiro and Daniel J. Silverman, who pleaded guilty in the 1986 "Yuppie Five" case.
The civil suit, filed in federal court in New York, also seeks a penalty of $501,210 under the Insider Trading Sanctions Act. 

In 1987, Mr. Shapiro, a former stockbroker, was sentenced to two months in prison and fined $25,000.
Mr. Silverman, Mr. Shapiro's former client, was given a suspended sentence, fined $25,000 and placed on three years' probation. 

The case was known as the "Yuppie Five" case because it involved five young professionals and investors on Wall Street. 

Mr. Shapiro, 27, who now lives in Boston, and Mr. Silverman, 26, of Providence, R.I., couldn't be reached for comment. 

The other three defendants, who also pleaded guilty to charges related to insider trading, previously settled with the SEC. 

Robert Blackburn, an SEC lawyer, said the suit was filed last week because the two men had been unwilling to settle the disgorgement matter at an amount the SEC considered appropriate. 

HENRY A. KISSINGER loses battle to block court appearance in libel suit. 

While visiting Chicago to address a meeting of the Council on Foreign Relations, the former secretary of state was slapped with a subpoena to testify in a libel suit against author Seymour Hersh. 

The suit, in federal court in Chicago, was brought by Morarji Desai, the former prime minister of India.
Mr. Hersh reported in a book about Mr. Kissinger that Mr. Desai sold Indian state secrets to the Central Intelligence Agency. 

In papers submitted to the court, Mr. Kissinger said attending the trial would disrupt his business schedule.
He said it would also give Mr. Hersh, whom he calls a "self-proclaimed antagonist," further opportunity to harass him. 

Mr. Kissinger sat for two pretrial fact-finding interviews in 1984 after being promised by plaintiff's lawyers that he wouldn't have to testify at trial, says Judson H. Miner, Mr. Kissinger's lawyer at Davis, Barnhill & Galland, a Chicago firm.
But U.S. District Judge Charles R. Norgle last week ruled Mr. Kissinger still had to testify.
He is expected to take the stand today. 

Mr. Desai's lawyer says he regrets violating the agreement with Mr. Kissinger.
But the judge's decision to prevent key portions of Mr. Kissinger's pretrial interviews from being read at trial left him no choice, says the lawyer, Cyriac D. Kappil. 

"We consider him important to our case, otherwise we wouldn't have bothered him," Mr. Kappil says. 

Mr. Kissinger doesn't share that view.
He told the court he had no knowledge that Mr. Desai was a paid CIA informant. 

"Of course Mr. Kissinger has his own personal views about the lawsuit," says his lawyer. "But that's not really relevant." 

THE FORMER managing partner of Myerson & Kuhn's Washington office, is joining the Washington office of Windels, Marx, Davies & Ives, a New York law firm.
Michael J. Horowitz, 51, is the former general counsel of the Office of Management and Budget. 

