.START 

The Agriculture Department will require corn and other feed-grain producers participating in its farm-subsidy program to set aside 10% of their land next year. 

For President Bush's farm-policy makers, the so-called set-aside was one of the most important decisions of the year.
They are trying to rebuild U.S. corn stockpiles after two years of drought without spurring overproduction and a return to the price-depressing surpluses of the early 1980s.
At the same time, the department is trying to hold down projected increases in feed-grain subsidies in fiscal 1990, which began yesterday, the officials said. 

The department set the 1990 target prices for corn at $2.75 a bushel, for barley at $2.36 a bushel and for sorghum at $2.61 per 100 pounds.
If market prices fall below those targets, the government will make up the difference with so-called deficiency payments, or subsidies.
Currently, corn growers are getting $2.29 a bushel, down from $2.60 a year ago, and department analysts believe corn prices could fall as low as $1.85 a bushel next year. 

The department paid corn growers $3.7 billion in subsidies in the fiscal year just ended, and analysts project that subsidies will hit $6.3 billion in fiscal 1990. 

Michael Hall, a Washington-based farm-policy analyst, said he expects maximum participation in the farm-subsidy program next year as farmers seek protection from falling market prices. 

Even if the Soviets, who have bought more than 16 million metric tons of corn this year, resume their heavy buying early in 1990, those purchases may not be enough to prop up a weakening market, Mr. Hall said. 

The 10% set-aside requirement for next year will be the same as this year's. "This will give you roughly the same supply-and-demand balance as we had this year, with perhaps a slight increase in carryover {corn} stocks," said Keith Collins, a department analyst.
He expects the nation's corn stockpiles as of Sept. 1, 1991, to come close to the target of two billion bushels.
Last Sept. 1, corn stockpiles totaled 1.93 billion bushels. 

The department decided to keep the set-aside requirement for oat growers at 5% of their acreage next year.
Oats production fell to a post-Civil War low as a result of the drought of 1988, forcing food processors to rely heavily on oat imports.
Department officials have been putting incentives in the farm program to spur oat production. 

Looking ahead to commodity markets this week: 

Livestock And Meats 

A quarterly government hog inventory report released after the close of trading Friday is likely to be relatively bullish for hog futures prices, says Thomas Morgan, president of Sterling Research Corp., Arlington Heights, Ill.
The most positive number released was on hog breeding stock, which showed current levels at 97% of a year ago, below the average figure expected by analysts, he said.
The quarterly inventory of all hogs was at 100% of a year ago, in line with market expectations, while the number of hogs going to market was at 101% of a year ago. 

Energy 

Traders and analysts will continue trying to sort out the results of last week's meeting of oil ministers from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. 

Although OPEC agreed to increase its production ceiling by one million barrels to 20.5 million barrels of crude oil a day, it didn't address the issue of its quota system.
And many members, dissatisfied with their official allocations, are expected to continue to pump oil well in excess of their assigned quotas.
The resulting production presumably will send OPEC's already above-ceiling recent production figures of 22 million barrels a day or more still higher. 

But petroleum futures prices have held firm and are expected to continue to do so, buoyed by strong world-wide demand.
Market watchers will closely scrutinize inventory statistics such as the American Petroleum Institute's weekly report on petroleum stocks to gauge whether demand holds.
The U.S. benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude begins the week above the psychologically important level of $20 a barrel for November delivery. 

Precious Metals 

Traders will watch to see whether prices continue declining.
On Friday, December gold fell 80 cents an ounce and silver slid four cents, despite life-of-contract highs in petroleum futures and another plunge in the dollar under massive central bank selling.
The dollar broke below some key support levels against the yen and the mark. 

Normally, a rise in petroleum prices would be regarded as inflationary and helpful to precious metals, and a drop in the dollar usually creates strength in the metals. 

A major depressant, according to William O'Neill, vice president of research for Elders Futures Inc., New York, could have been a decline in prices of short-term interest rate futures. "That could portend a rise in interest rates," he said. 

Higher interest rates hurt precious metals because the metals aren't interest-bearing investments and must generate price gains to match increases in interest rates, he said. 

It may be that gold is ending its "parasitic relationship with the dollar," Mr. O'Neill said. "It's too soon to determine that, but historically we have seen numerous occasions during which the dollar and precious metals have been independent of each other." 

