.START 

It's hard being an institution. 

Just ask Daniel Yankelovich, whose last name has been synonymous with market research since 1958, when he founded one of the pioneer market-research firms. 

Federal Judge John F. Keenan has ruled that Mr. Yankelovich can no longer name market-research services after himself.
The judge found that, as far as trade names go, Yankelovich belongs to Saatchi & Saatchi Co., the London-based advertising giant.
In 1984, Saatchi acquired Yankelovich, Skelly & White Inc., which Mr. Yankelovich helped found. 

"A good name is better than great riches," the judge said in his opinion, quoting from Cervantes' "Don Quixote." But his ruling was based on a federal appeals court decision that New York's Taylor wine family couldn't use the family name to promote wines after selling Taylor Wine Co. to Coca-Cola Co. 

"As both parties are acutely aware," the judge said, "in the competitive field of marketing research, a good name is critical to prosperity." He granted a preliminary injunction preventing Mr. Yankelovich from using the name without a prominent disclaimer and ordered a hearing to determine the appropriate disclaimer. 

The conflict arose in 1987, when Mr. Yankelovich, Arthur White and Florence Skelly formed a new company: White, Yankelovich, Skelly Consulting Group Inc. Saatchi sued, and Mr. Yankelovich's company changed its name to WSY Consulting Group Inc. -- but it continued to offer market-research products with names like the Yankelovich Environmental Scan and the Yankelovich Attribute Demand Model. 

Mr. Yankelovich contended he had the right to the unrestricted use of his name if it didn't confuse customers.
But Judge Keenan said the court record included a "litany of actual confusion." 

Mr. Yankelovich said he won't comment until he sees the judge's opinion.
Philip H. Schaeffer, an attorney for the Saatchi unit, also argued that Mr. Yankelovich's use of his name could damage Saatchi's reputation. "He was using the name for products that our client believes were inferior," the lawyer said. 

But Judge Keenan disputed that idea.
There was no evidence to suggest "an appreciable difference in the quality of services offered by the parties," he ruled. 

