.START 

As it marks its 75th birthday in its usual understated style, the Federal Reserve will soon find itself the focus of unwanted attention: Congress is gearing up for unusually close scrutiny of the powerful institution. 

Hearings will be held on two bills that would crimp the Fed's fierce independence in quite different ways, with both measures sponsored by congressmen who insist the Fed's recent record is superb.
Although these bills aren't given much chance of passing, they are bound to leave an imprint.
Their sponsors intend to use the hearings to beam a spotlight on a corner of the government that generally hides from public view and, in the process, to influence future Fed policy. 

One bill would require the Fed to eliminate inflation, now in the 4 1/2%-5% range, by 1994.
The other would add the Treasury secretary to the autonomous 12-member Fed committee that manipulates short-term interest rates. 

Criticism of the Fed always appeals to the populist streak in the U.S. Rep. Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.), sponsor of the second bill, insists he isn't out to hurt the Fed, only to help it better coordinate policy with the administration.
But he traces his interest in reforming the Fed to complaints from constituents during the deep recession of the early 1980s. "They say, 'I don't like what the Fed does. ' I say, 'The Congress doesn't really control the Fed. ' They say, 'Who does? ' I say, 'Well, nobody does. '" 

One of the Fed's best friends in Congress, Rep. Stephen Neal (D., N.C.), will oversee the hearings and prevent them from turning into unrestrained Fed-bashing.
Rep. Neal, chairman of the House monetary-policy subcommittee, acknowledges that his no-inflation bill serves as a useful counterweight to proposals less friendly to the Fed. 

Aides to Banking Committee Chairman Henry Gonzalez (D., Texas) -- who once called for abolishing the Fed -- say he no longer plans to hold hearings of his own on the Fed this year, but he's certain to participate actively in the subcommittee hearings.
And he also has commissioned a staff study of the Fed's structure and ways to rein it in. 

At the Fed, veterans recall that stormy hearings conducted 25 years ago by the late Wright Patman when he was chairman of the House Banking Committee didn't produce any significant legislation.
The prospect of a new round of hearings is seen more as a nuisance than a threat. 

The deceptively simple proposal advanced by Rep. Neal would write into law that the Fed's chief mission is to eliminate inflation.
This, he argues, would yield the maximum rate of economic growth in the long run.
Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan basically agrees.
Rep. Neal would try to make him deliver, although his bill doesn't include any penalties should the Fed fail to eliminate inflation. 

Current law instructs the Fed "to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates." It says nothing about the trade-offs among those objectives.
In fact, it's so broad that Rep. Neal complains the Fed can honestly claim to be fulfilling the will of Congress, regardless of what policy the central bank happens to be pursuing. 

He also figures that reducing inflation would be almost painless.
The Fed might have to raise short-term interest rates for a while to yank down the inflation rate, he concedes.
But he claims that that would be offset by an almost immediate drop in interest rates once financial markets understood that Congress and the Fed were serious about eradicating inflation. 

That isn't the view of many economists -- or of other members of Congress. "It's not hard to hit zero inflation," says Rep. Hamilton, chairman of the Joint Economic Committee. "But it hurts to do it." By raising interest rates high enough, he suggests, the Fed could cause a recession and bring down inflation as it did in the early 1980s. 

"The Fed itself would welcome the no-inflation goal, accustomed as it is to politicians calling for easier credit policy rather than a tough, anti-inflation stance.
Indeed, Chairman Greenspan last week gave his support to Rep. Neal's bill, after convincing him to make some changes. 

Rep. Neal's original legislation had a rigid formula, calling on the Fed to reduce inflation by "one percent a year" until it had reached "zero." The new version, introduced last week, simply calls for the "elimination" of inflation in five years.
And it paraphrases language used by Mr. Greenspan in congresssional testimony, saying that "inflation will be deemed to be eliminated when the expected rate of change of the general level of prices ceases to be a factor in individual and business decision making." 

Former Senate Banking Committee Chairman William Proxmire, though sympathetic to Rep. Neal's objectives, says: "It's best to leave the Fed alone.
I don't think there should be more administration and congressional influence.
I think there should be less." 

The Fed and its friends are distinctly unhappy with the bill offered by Rep. Hamilton and Rep. Byron Dorgan (D., N.D.) that would restore the Treasury secretary to the Fed's policy-making Open Market Committee.
The Treasury secretary was booted off in a 1936 New Deal restructuring of the Fed, and subsequent efforts to restore his seat or otherwise reshape the Fed have gone nowhere. 

To central bankers, the ideal is a Fed that plots its course with no interference from elected officials. "We're all in favor of accountability," says Anthony Solomon, who has served as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and undersecretary of the Treasury. "These proposals really represent a political intrusion into the Fed rather than accountability." 

Mr. Proxmire calls the Hamilton proposal "the most dangerous economic legislation before Congress." Politicians always favor easy money and low interest rates, and that means more inflation, he reasons. "You need the discipline of people who can take the long-term view," he insists. 

Rep. Hamilton argues that his bill is far more modest than the reaction suggests. "I'm not out to gut the independence of the Fed," he says. "But putting the secretary of the Treasury on the open-market committee, you certainly don't hand over control of monetary policy to the president." 

"The Fed," he says, "doesn't fit the usual rules of accountability that we have in a democratic society." The Fed's budget isn't subject to congressional scrutiny; his bill would alter that.
Monetary policy is set by seven Fed governors appointed by the president for 14-year terms and the presidents of five regional Fed banks who are appointed by boards composed of businessmen and bankers.
Rep. Hamilton would give each president the power to name a new Fed chairman. 

Rep. Hamilton met with Chairman Greenspan recently to discuss his bill.
He won't talk about the meeting, but he says that while some people see his bill "as a threat to the independence of the Fed and to monetary policy, I don't intend it to be either.
I'm not trying to bring down the Fed.
I'm not a Fed basher." The Fed, Mr. Hamilton says, has been doing "a very good job" managing the economy. 

But he asks: "Does everything have to be broken before we try to improve it?" 

Alan Murray contributed to this article. 

