.START 

Spelling Entertainment Inc., which in its heyday produced a gaggle of highly rated but often critically panned series such as "Charlie's Angels," "Love Boat," and "Dynasty," has put itself on the block. 

Spelling said it retained Merrill Lynch & Co. 's Merrill Lynch Capital Markets unit and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. to look into "various strategic alternatives for enhancing shareholder value, including the possible sale of the company." Producer and founder Aaron Spelling, in a release, spoke of "recent expressions of interest in the company," and Ronald Lightstone, executive vice president, said several companies had inquired about a possible bid but wouldn't specify if an offer is actually on the table. 

The "For Sale" sign on the entertainment production and distribution company came just six months after control of the firm switched to Cincinnati investor Carl Lindner from Mr. Spelling.
The move also comes amid pending ownership changes for two larger entertainment concerns, Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. which is being purchased by Japan's Sony Corp., and MGM/UA Communications Co., about to be acquired by Australia-based Qintex Entertainment Inc. 

Analysts immediately speculated that Spelling might also be acquired by a foreign concern.
Since its inception in 1965 Spelling has been one of the largest and most successful producers of popular programming, especially when it had a long-term exclusive agreement to provide all its programming to the ABC Network unit of Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
But it currently has no new series on the air.
It's last major show, "Dynasty," aired for nine years but was canceled last spring. 

Spelling, however, won its first television "Emmy" award recently for a made-for-TV movie, "Day One," about the making of the atomic bomb.
The company also produced the critically acclaimed series "Family." 

One analyst, Jeffrey Logsdon with Crowell Weedon & Co., said he thinks Spelling could fetch as much as $18 a share, or $595 million, largely because of its library of shows for syndication to independent television stations in the U.S. and abroad, and the relationships and connections Mr. Spelling and the company have built up in the entertainment industry.
Also important, he said, is the company's $40 million in annual cash flow and relatively low $55 million in debt. 

But two other analysts termed that estimate high, and one, Alan Kassan of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., said he believed the company would fetch only $9 to $12 a share, or between $297 million and $397 million for its 33.1 million common shares outstanding.
Lee Isgur, an entertainment analyst with Paine Webber Inc., agreed. "I don't think the company is that attractive," he said. "What sort of ongoing programming do they have?
None." 

Trading in Spelling Entertainment shares was halted with news pending at $8.25, down 25 cents, on the American Stock Exchange Friday. 

Analysts said that among the companies that might be interested in Spelling are two Japanese concerns, C. Itoh & Co. and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. C. Itoh was one of many companies that talked about buying at least an equity interest in MGM/UA; JVC/Victor Co. of Japan, which is 50% owned by Matsushita, recently agreed to invest more than $100 million in a joint venture with independent Hollywood producer Larry Gordon to produce and finance motion pictures. 

In a separate but apparently related announcement, Mr. Lindner's Great American Communications Co., which controls 49% of Spelling, said it will sell its insurance unit, Mid-Continent Casualty Co., to American Financial Corp., a private company owned by Mr. Lindner and his family, for $80 million.
Cincinnati-based Great American said it also will sell about $30 million of its real-estate assets. 

