.START 

British entrepreneur Richard Branson plans to take on a Japanese partner in a venture to expand the international operations of his Virgin Music Group recording business. 

At a news conference today, the flamboyant Mr. Branson is expected to announce a Japanese investment of more than #100 million ($161 million) in Virgin Music, the world's sixth-biggest recording company.
A spokesman for the unit of closely held Virgin Group PLC confirmed that a Japanese partnership is planned, but declined to identify the investor group or to provide further details. 

A spokesman for a major Japanese record company, Pony Canyon Inc., said the company is among a consortium of companies acquiring Virgin stock.
Pony Canyon purchased the stock last week.
The spokesman declined to comment further. 

The partnership is Mr. Branson's long-awaited response to a merger wave sweeping the world recording industry that threatens Virgin's continued prosperity. 

Since January, several "independent" record labels have been snatched up by industry giants racing each other for global market share.
Thorn-EMI PLC bought 50% of rival Chrysalis Records for #46.2 million.
Motown Records went for $61 million to a group including MCA Inc. N.V. Philips's PolyGram unit swallowed up reggae-and-rock producer Island Records for roughly $300 million.
PolyGram is also negotiating to buy A&M Records at a price analysts expect to be around $500 million.
Behind these mergers has been the big companies' growing need to stoke their tape, record and compact-disk factories with a steady stream of hits. 

In this industry mating dance, Mr. Branson had hitherto been the most prominent wallflower.
His music business, with sales of approximately $400 million in the year ended last July 31, is considered by industry analysts as too small to continue competing alone against the industry's bigger giants.
But Virgin Music, begun in 1970, is the oldest and largest part of the diversified airline, entertainment and retailing empire that Mr. Branson has gradually assembled and that he has said he intends to keep independent. 

Mr. Branson apparently sees a Japanese partner as a way to tap more cash without ceding complete management control. "We don't want to link up with the Big Five {in recording}, but we also want to be in a position not to be squeezed by the Big Five," one Virgin source said.
The world's five largest recording companies are Warner Communications Inc., recently merged with Time Inc.; Sony Corp. 's CBS Records; Philips's PolyGram; Bertelsmann AG's RCA Records; and Thorn-EMI.
Sony, the source indicated, isn't Virgin's unnamed Japanese partner. 

A Japanese partnership will strengthen Mr. Branson's rapidly growing ties to that country.
His Virgin Atlantic Airways flies between London's Gatwick Airport and Tokyo.
Virgin Music sells its Western pop and rock recordings in Japan and also records some Japanese musicians.
Another Virgin unit distributes Japanese home video games in Britain. 

The Japanese investment also represents the biggest change in Mr. Branson's capital structure since he retreated from London's Stock Exchange. 

