.START 

Despite the stock market's steady climb this year, including the record high for the Dow Jones Industrial Average, bonds have taken center stage as the only securities with a robust new-issue market. 

As interest rates fell about a percentage point during the first nine months of this year, issuers took advantage of lower financing costs and sold a record $193.9 billion of debt securities to the public, up from $181.4 billion in the same period last year.
Corporations issued $99.5 billion of debt securities, or 9.4% more than they did during the same period last year. 

The volume of new high-yield, high-risk "junk" bonds rose 4.5% to $20.2 billion.
The volume of new mortgage and asset-backed bonds climbed 5% to $88.7 billion, according to Securities Data Co. 

In contrast, common stock offerings over the first nine months tumbled 37.1% to $15 billion, a five-year low.
Initial public stock offerings fell 48.7% to $9.8 billion during the first nine months.
Only the new-issue market for bonds convertible into equity showed vitality as offerings over the nine-month period rose to $3.4 billion from $2.2 billion. 

"The U.S. capital market is seeing some major cross-currents," says Gregory E. Sacco, director of global finance at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. "By and large, corporate America is retiring equity through leveraged buy-outs, cash tenders for its own stock, mergers and employee stock ownership plans.
The extraction of equity from the market has overwhelmed the issuance of new equity." 

So why is the market for new stock issues so depressed?
For one thing, the relatively strong economy has kept many businesses flush with cash, and corporate treasurers generally are reluctant to put more cash on their balance sheets.
In addition, many corporate treasurers consider their stocks undervalued because the price-earnings multiples on many stocks still are lower than the multiples before the 1987 stock market crash. 

"Another 10% to 20% increase in the Dow Jones Industrial Average could prompt a lot of companies to issue equity," says Mr. Sacco of Shearson. "But it remains to be seen when the new-issue equity market revives." Some securities industry professionals say the recent tailspin in the junk bond market could come to be seen as a turning point away from debt and towards equity. 

In the meantime, junk bonds remain the most profitable part of the debt market and an increasingly competitive sector, despite the perennial dominance of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. Fee income from junk bond and common stock underwriting together accounted for $1.5 billion of the $2.1 billion of fees earned by Wall Street during the first nine months. 

Although Drexel remains the runaway leader in the junk market, both the number of issues and the dollar amount of junk bonds it has sold during the first nine months has declined from the same period last year.
Drexel sold 38 new offerings so far this year totaling $8.6 billion, down from 60 offerings totaling $9.4 billion.
Drexel's market share also declined in the period to 42.7% from 49%. 

In the third quarter, Drexel's market share dropped to 33.1% from 55.5%.
Asked about its slippage in the rankings, Drexel released the following statement: "Market cycles are not new and will continue." A spokesman said there was no additional comment. 

Elsewhere in the bond market, Goldman, Sachs & Co. was the leader in mortgage and asset-backed bond underwriting.
In the third quarter, Goldman Sachs underwrote 57% of the total nine-month volume of $11.8 billion.
In the municipal bond market, the new-issue volume for the nine months rose 1% over the same period last year to $83.7 billion; Goldman also was No. 1 there with $10.5 billion of new offerings, or 12.5% market share. 

