.START 

TRW Inc. received $132.1 million in contracts for Air Force missile support and Army prototype communication equipment. 

General Dynamics Corp. received $100.2 million in contracts for Army missiles and Air Force aircraft and support spare parts. 

General Electric Co. received $83.6 million in contracts for Army and Air Force engine parts and base support. 

Ford Aerospace & Communications Corp., a unit of Ford Motor Co., received a $75 million Air Force contract for satellite control network operations. 

Serve-Air Inc. received a $70 million Army contract for operating an ammunition plant. 

International Business Machines Corp. received a $61.6 million Navy contract for electronics equipment. 

Lear Siegler Management Services Corp., a unit of Lear Siegler Diversified Holdings Corp., received a $46.7 million Air Force contract for weapons-systems support. 

Lockheed Corp. received a $46.7 million Air Force contract for weapons-systems support. 

Dyncorp Aerospace Operations, a unit of Dyncorp, received a $46.7 million Air Force contract for weapons-systems support. 

McDonnell Douglas Corp. received contracts worth $39.3 million for Air Force aircraft parts and Navy aircraft electronics. 

Martin Marietta Corp. received a $36.9 million Air Force contract for aircraft electronics. 

Curtiss-Wright Flight System Inc., a unit of Curtiss-Wright Corp., received a $31.6 million Air Force contract for F-16 aircraft parts. 

Magnavox Electronic Systems Co. received a $29.1 million Air Force contract for air control radios. 

Cessna Aircraft Co. received a $23.3 million Navy contract for flight training. 

Allied-Signal Inc. received contracts worth $22.8 million for Army rocket components and Air Force F-15 parts. 

Link Training Services Corp. received a $21.4 million Air Force contract for F-4 aircraft support. 

Sanders Associates Inc. received an $18.1 million Army contract for electronic countermeasures sets. 

E-Systems Inc. received a $17.7 million Air Force contract for special air mission aircraft support. 

Rockwell International Corp. received a $17.4 million Air Force contract for Minuteman Missile support. 

Science Applications International Corp. received a $16.2 million Navy contract for communication systems. 

CAE-Link Corp. received a $15.9 million Navy contract for training simulators. 

Northrop Corp. received a $13.4 million Air Force contract for aircraft components. 

Unisys Corp. received a $10 million Army contract for computer equipment. 

