.START 

The Soviets' latest concessions on arms control are being hailed as positive steps that will help pave the way for a historic strategic-arms agreement.
But they also pose two serious problems for President Bush that don't get as much attention. 

First, the president now will have trouble stopping arms-control fever from once again overshadowing the U.S.-Soviet agenda.
Mr. Bush and his aides have vowed repeatedly to avoid falling into that trap. 

Second, the administration will find it extremely difficult -- perhaps impossible -- to keep the Strategic Defense Initiative alive over the long haul.
The space-based defense program has been endangered by a clever Soviet ploy: The Soviets agreed to put aside their complaints about it for now, but they warned that further work on it could sabotage a completed treaty later. 

Congress would be very reluctant to approve funds in the future for testing or deployment of space weapons if doing so might destroy a completed, history-making arms treaty.
That's one reason Rep. Les Aspin (D., Wis.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, has called the Soviets' new position "a Trojan horse" that could "cause a lot of mischief" later. 

There isn't any doubt that the Soviets' shifts in position, unveiled earlier this month in meetings between Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze and Secretary of State James Baker, have brought a strategic arms reduction treaty, or START, closer to fruition.
Specifically, Mr. Shevardnadze declared that the Soviets are ready to finish a treaty cutting the superpowers' arsenals of long-range nuclear weapons by 50% -- even if the treaty doesn't include any limits on the strategic defense program.
Instead, the Soviets would simply declare that they reserve the right to withdraw from a START treaty later if they think American testing or deployment of SDI components violates the existing Anti-Ballistic-Missile treaty. 

The Soviets also agreed to set aside their attempts to put limits on sea-launched cruise missiles, a particularly nettlesome category of arms that the U.S. has been reluctant to curb.
Moscow now is willing to deal with those missiles later. 

These advances immediately propelled the START negotiations back to the center of the superpower relationship -- and of the world stage.
The Baker-Shevardnadze session "refocused world attention on strategic issues as the central issue in U.S.-Soviet relations," declared Spurgeon Keeny, president of the Arms Control Association. 

But the Bush administration has been insisting that superpower diplomacy shouldn't be focused so heavily on strategic arms control.
An underlying premise of its foreign policy is that other issues -- conventional arms reduction, elimination of chemical weapons, even environmental issues -- deserve as much attention. 

Nevertheless, President Bush himself fed the START fever last week by declaring that there's a "good likelihood" a strategic arms pact will be finished before he meets Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev in late spring or early summer. 

It may be even harder to contain the long-term damage to SDI's prospects.
The administration probably didn't have much choice but to hail the Soviet decision to break the direct link between SDI and completion of a START treaty.
After all, the U.S. has been pressing for the Soviets to drop their insistence on including curbs on defenses in a strategic arms treaty. 

That's why the Soviet move is so clever: It defers the problem to the future while offering a prize so tantalizing that it can't be turned down. "It's a far smarter position than the Soviets took" when they were demanding direct limits on SDI, said Kenneth Adelman, who was director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in the Reagan administration. "I see a problem down the road, and it's a terrible problem, but I don't see how the Soviets can be stopped now." 

As one sign of the problems facing SDI, Brent Scowcroft, President Bush's national security adviser, had to lobby hard last week to persuade the Senate to approve even a nominal increase in SDI spending.
The administration believes Senate negotiations with the House, which earlier voted a big cut, will result at best in a spending level of about $3.7 billion, equal to the current year's spending plus inflation. 

The White House is arguing that the new Soviet arms proposals should make it easier for lawmakers to approve funds for SDI because the Soviets have declared that the defense program won't stop a treaty from being completed.
But that argument won't carry much weight later if it appears that a vote for SDI could imperil the completed treaty. 

