.START 

There's nothing like a snake or two slithering around a moviegoer's feet to put a crimp in box office sales. 

Such are the guerrilla tactics of a movie-distribution war in South Korea.
But they haven't stopped Mike S. Pae. 

Mr. Pae is the general manager in Korea for United International Pictures, a joint venture of Paramount Communications Inc., MCA Inc. 's Universal Studios and MGM/UA Communications Co. that directly distributes the studios' movies abroad. 

Selling U.S. movies in South Korea looked like it would be relatively easy.
The studios were offering a popular product that consumers wanted, and the government was promising to finally remove barriers. 

But beginning with the first exhibits last year, South Korean theaters that dared to show United International releases such as "Fatal Attraction" and "Rain Man" were met by picketers and signs declaring "Yankee Go Home" and "Stop Cultural Invasion." Protesters released snakes inside the movie houses, sending audiences fleeing.
In theaters not adhering to a boycott of the venture's films, tear gas bombs were set off and screens were vandalized.
One theater was firebombed last month. 

The dispute has little to do with anti-Americanism.
It boils down to money.
Mr. Pae's work was disrupting the cozy cartel of producers and directors that for almost two decades had a government-sanctioned lock on the distribution of foreign films. "They were making tons of money," he explains. "Now they aren't." 

Mr. Pae, a burly Korean-American who fancies Italian-cut suits, has met the intimidation squarely. 

Thanks in large measure to Mr. Pae's persistence, the Hollywood studios are making headway against protests and wedging into the South Korean movie market, which has potential to grow far beyond its $120 million in ticket sales a year.
Theater owners who once opposed the newcomers -- out of both loyalty to and fear of the cartel -- are showing the films.
U.S. movies are flowing in.
Twentieth Century Fox recently opened an office, and other major studios are expected to follow.
Theaters are being built or renovated to meet growing demand.
South Korean newspapers have lifted their ban on United International's ads.
And the police have started arresting those allegedly involved in intimidating theater owners and audiences. 

Mr. Pae "made things happen," a U.S. official says. 

In fact, how Mr. Pae is getting U.S. movies shown may provide lessons for other businesses facing tough times in South Korea.
Increasingly, local businesses -- such as farmers, bankers and the government cigarette maker -- have been wrapping themselves in a cloak of anti-American rhetoric to keep U.S. business out.
Mr. Pae's difference wasn't so much in what he did as in what he didn't do: He didn't run. 

U.S. movies have never been banned in South Korea, a fact that blows a hole in the protesters' argument. "The cultural invasion argument doesn't make sense.
Koreans have been importing American movies all along," says Chung Jin Woo, a well-known movie producer/director who now exhibits United International films. "There is no difference between Koreans doing it and Americans doing it." 

Except for who makes the profit.
As recently as 1987, only about two dozen foreign movies were allowed into South Korea annually, and then only through the cartel.
A cartel member could buy the rights for a major movie such as "Jaws II" for as little as $300,000.
The movie, which could easily sell $2 million of tickets, would then be auctioned off to a theater. 

The producers were supposed to plow the profits from the U.S. movies back into South Korea's embryonic film industry.
But profits were often put into real estate or other ventures. 

"In 20 years, the quality of Korean movies never improved," says Jo Young Taek, a food company salesman and movie fan who had just taken his family to see "Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade," a United International release. 

U.S. studios tried and failed to get a foot in South Korea in 1971.
Then in 1985, the Reagan administration made movies a trade issue.
It wasn't until Washington threatened retaliatory tariffs on South Korean videocassette recorders that the Seoul government promised to open the market to the Hollywood studios. 

In 1987, United International set up an office in South Korea and hired the gravel-voiced Mr. Pae, who had a good perspective on the cartel: He had been part of it, negotiating film rights for members. "I know them well," he says. "These are my friends." 

He also understood the U.S. and loved its movies.
The 50-year-old had moved to the U.S. as a student in 1961, later working as a film editor for Paramount and MGM.
A U.S. citizen since 1972, he also dabbled in the video-rental business in California. 

As Mr. Pae saw it, the way to break the boycott was to convince theater owners that they could make more money through United International.
Theaters often couldn't recoup the money paid to the cartel for prize U.S. exhibition rights.
Thus, many movie houses often got by with low-grossing Israeli beach-party movies or kung-fu flicks from Hong Kong. 

Rather than charge for rights, Mr. Pae offered to split the box office take, with theaters getting 40%.
Even so, recruits at first were hard to come by.
The cartel allegedly was threatening to blackmail some theater owners, mostly over past tax evasion, if they signed with Mr. Pae. 

Mr. Pae, whose favorite movie is "The Godfather," played tough.
His staff videotaped the protests.
He met repeatedly with newspapers that had refused to take his movie ads.
He went to the Economic Planning Board, the powerful haven of the nation's technocrats, and to the police, who used trade, anti-extortion and other laws against the cartel. 

The cartel and leaders of the boycott haven't admitted using threats, snakes or attacks and have refused repeated requests for interviews.
Several cartel members are hiding from the police. 

Meanwhile, some opponents say Mr. Pae employed the same dubious tactics.
There are allegations, which the police and Mr. Pae call false, that United International was behind the theater firebombing and the beating of a protest ringleader. "We haven't done any retaliatory action or anything," says Mr. Pae. "We are just here to do business." 

Oddly enough, he says he's still friendly with his former employers. "When we get together we have drinks, conversations, nice times," Mr. Pae says. "But when it comes to business, it is different." Asked whether he would use snakes and similar tactics on United International if he still worked for the cartel, he replies, "No comment." 

Because the market is open now, the cartel's future is uncertain.
Individual members still import movies on their own, particularly from Hong Kong, which has 40% of the foreign-movie market.
Meanwhile, the boycott is fading and protests have died down since last month, although Mr. Pae fears a resurgence. 

It's been worth the trouble.
Under the old system, rights to "Rain Man," for instance, would have sold for about $750,000.
With United International, the studio's share was about $2 million.
Still, there's one movie that Mr. Pae is reluctant to bring to South Korea: the controversial "Last Temptation of Christ." He says, "I've had enough protests as it is." 

