.START 

John F. Sandner received investment income from one of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange's most active broker groups while serving on a "blue-ribbon" panel that was convened this year to recommend rule changes affecting Merc floor broker groups and others. 

Mr. Sandner, a six-time former chairman of the Merc, currently holds the title of senior policy adviser at the exchange.
He was one of nine people the Merc appointed in late January to review possible rule changes in the wake of the federal investigation of Chicago's trading pits, including possible steps to curtail activities of broker groups. 

Nevertheless, just a few weeks later, Mr. Sandner elected to begin receiving payments in connection with an investment in the broker group ABS Partners.
A Merc member familiar with ABS Partners estimated Mr. Sandner's income from the group at between $50,000 and $100,000 annually. 

Four members of ABS were widely known among Merc members to be targets of the federal investigation of futures trading in March, when Mr. Sandner decided to begin receiving income from the group.
The four were indicted in August on criminal fraud charges and subsequently pleaded innocent. 

The apparent conflict between Mr. Sandner's investment and his role on the special panel could stir controversy.
The Merc set up the panel to head off outside reform efforts.
But if the panel's findings are impugned, regulators could take a tougher stance. 

The disclosure of Mr. Sandner's investment also highlights the potential for conflict between self-regulation in the futures industry and the self-interest of prominent members. 

Commodity Futures Trading Commission member Fowler West declined to comment on Mr. Sandner but said: "It's in the interest of the self-regulator to avoid even the appearance of impropriety." The CFTC is the federal regulator of the futures markets. 

Mr. Sandner, who also sits on the executive committee of the Merc's board, confirmed his investment in ABS but denied any conflict.
In an interview, he described his decision in March to take his share of the ABS profit as a "good business decision" while maintaining that his portion of the group's income was "negligible." He declined to elaborate. 

Merc Senior Vice President Gerald Beyer said the exchange didn't see anything wrong with Mr. Sandner receiving income from ABS Partners while serving on the committee that would make recommendations to the full board. "A conflict of interest standard for a committee giving us advice isn't a relevant standard," he said. 

Mr. Beyer said he became aware of Mr. Sandner's interest in ABS shortly after it was included in Merc regulatory filings March 13. 

When the special panel reported its recommendations April 19, some in the industry expressed surprise that tougher restrictions against broker groups weren't included.
The Merc board later approved the panel's findings. 

Broker groups began forming rapidly on the floors of futures exchanges in the early 1980s.
Most groups allow members to share certain profits and expenses as well as to pool the risk of trading losses caused by the increasing volume of orders and price volatility in financial futures markets. 

The federal investigation of futures trading fraud, which so far has led to fraud charges against 45 traders and one clerk on the Merc and the Chicago Board of Trade, has led industry critics here and on Capitol Hill to call for tougher oversight of the lightly regulated futures industry. 

Mr. Sandner is president of RB&H Inc., a Merc clearing member firm that receives thousands of dollars monthly for processing trades for a number of brokers in ABS Partners.
He is also a friend of James Kaulentis and Maury Kravitz, two Merc members who own 51% of ABS Partners.
Mr. Kravitz rents office space from Mr. Sandner and is a former officer of RB&H.
Mr. Kaulentis a few years ago pledged to pay $350,000 for a house in a Chicago suburb that Mr. Sandner was having trouble selling. 

In the interview, Mr. Sandner confirmed that the company that owns RB&H, an Arizona holding company controlled by Phoenix investor F. Michael Geddes, bought 20% of ABS Partners in early 1988.
Mr. Sandner in turn owns 10% of Mr. Geddes's company. 

Mr. Sandner said he initially decided not to receive any income from the company's investment in the broker group.
A year later, he had a change of heart. "Eventually, I looked at the numbers from ABS.
I told myself, 'I'm only not doing this because of what someone might say about me, '" he said. 

His 1988 indirect interest in ABS wasn't disclosed in Merc regulatory filings.
He appeared as an ABS investor for the first time in March, when he started receiving income. 

Mr. Sandner receives $150,000 annually for being Merc senior policy adviser.
His RB&H compensation isn't disclosed. 

Mr. Sandner denied that his decision in March to start receiving profit from ABS Partners affected his thinking about broker groups. 

"I would never allow any interest I have to influence my thinking on an issue," he said.
He also said that testimony before the Merc panel last spring from futures industry members was "overwhelmingly positive for broker groups." 

Proponents of broker groups argue that they are better able than independent brokers to serve big institutional customers that trade in several futures contracts a day.
Critics say the broker groups have too much control over the flow of orders in certain Merc trading pits.
Current Merc rules restrict the amount of trading that group members can do with each other. 

Most of the major recommendations from the Merc panel -- such as limits on dual trading by brokers for their own and customers' accounts, having non-members serve on exchange disciplinary committees and toughening exchange sanctions -- were adopted or slightly modified and approved by the Merc board in August.
But they aren't likely to take effect until two bills in Congress regarding the reauthorization of the CFTC are passed. 

In addition to Mr. Sandner, the Merc panel comprised Leo Melamed, chairman of the Merc's executive committee; John T. Geldermann, Merc chairman; William Brodsky, president of the Merc; Susan Phillips, a Merc governor and former CFTC chairman; Thomas F. Eagleton, a former U.S. senator from Missouri and a Merc director; Louis Margolis, managing director of Salomon Brothers Inc. and an exchange governor; Donald Butler, governor and former president of the National Cattlemen's Association; and John A. Wing, president and chief executive officer of Chicago Corp. 

This isn't the first time that Mr. Sandner has found himself at the center of controversy.
While he was head of the central region's business conduct committee of the National Futures Association, an industry group overseeing sales practices, Mr. Sandner's firm hired a dozen salesmen from First Commodity Corp. of Boston; First Commodity's Boston headquarters had been raided by the FBI in late 1986 during Mr. Sandner's tenure as Merc chairman. 

Mr. Sandner folded his retail operation in early January of this year.
Less than two weeks later, 16 former First Commodity salesmen, including some who had worked for Mr. Sandner, were indicted here on federal fraud charges related to activities at First Commodity.
They pleaded not guilty; their case hasn't gone to trial.
Mr. Sandner wasn't implicated in the federal charges. 

In 1987, Mr. Sandner's firm allowed two salesmen to become affiliated with it who had been accused of fraudulent trading.
Last year, the CFTC filed charges against the salesmen, their former employer GNP Commodities Inc. and its chairman, Brian Monieson -- also a former Merc chairman -- related to the fraud allegations.
Those CFTC charges are still pending. 

Shortly after folding the retail operation, Mr. Sandner said he regretted not being more involved in hiring and reviewing his salesmen's activities. 

