.START 

Chevrolet has a pickup truck it wants to sell as, pardon the expression, a sports car.
Chrysler Corp. is spiffing up its practical minivan with "more leather than a limousine." Nissan Motor Co. promises to give consumers "something you've always wanted in a performance car -- your family." 

Such blurring of once-distinct market segments will be a hallmark of the 1990 model year, which technically started yesterday, as auto makers increasingly seek incremental sales in a proliferating number of slender niches. 

Chevrolet's 454 SS pickup, Chrysler's Town and Country minivan and, at least initially, Nissan's new-generation Stanza compact car aren't expected to sell in large numbers.
But they are part of an effort to create vehicles for every viable market, some tiny.
A luxury minivan may represent "a few thousand {sales}, or double that, I don't know," says Ronald R. Boltz, a Chrysler vice president.
But, he adds with a smile, "it's profitable." 

One way to lure niche dwellers is with exotic -- and sometimes quixotic -- features.
West Germany's Daimler-Benz AG is targeting the hay-fever set by equipping its new two-seat Mercedes-Benz convertibles, the 300SL and 500SL, with electrostatic filters in the ventilation system.
The filters, most functional when the top is up, will cleanse interior air of pollen and dust. 

Mercedes-Benz has also equipped the convertibles with a padded roll bar that pops up, James Bond style, "just before it is needed . . . to provide increased occupant protection in a rollover accident," the company says.
The computer-controlled system also automatically locks safety belts and unlocks (but doesn't unlatch) doors "to facilitate rescue efforts if needed," Mercedes-Benz adds. 

On a more mundane note, General Motors Corp. 's Pontiac division is adding a "brake feel improvement package" to some LeMans subcompacts, following customer complaints that the brakes didn't respond as drivers expected.
Does this mean the old brakes didn't work right? "Oh, no, the braking was adequate," says a spokeswoman. "We just enhanced the feel of it." 

Such efforts, marginal as they may seem, are important at a time when some industry officials forecast that 1990 model year sales will fall 5% to 14.2 million vehicles.
Sales for the 1989 model year, to be released Wednesday, are expected to total 15 million cars and trucks. 

But for most auto makers, low-volume products with high-profile features must be balanced by more broadly adaptable, core vehicles.
In the 1990 model year, almost a dozen makers will introduce new bread-and-butter small and midsized cars, including a next-generation Escort from Ford Motor Co., Honda Motor Co. 's new Accord, four-door models of GM's midsized GM-10 family cars -- the Buick Regal, Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme and Pontiac Grand Prix -- and Passat, the largest car Volkswagen has ever sold. 

All this will make 1990 "definitely" harder for auto makers, says George Peterson, president of AutoPacific Group, a Newport Beach, Calif., market research firm. "It's going to be tough for these guys to get enough attention to sell the kinds of volume they've come to expect." 

Families in particular will be bombarded with sales pitches from import and domestic manufacturers promising value for price and room for at least four people in everything from new vans to quasisports cars.
GM will generate the biggest barrage as it finally unveils the four-door GM-10s, along with variations of its plastic-body minivan for Chevrolet, Oldsmobile and Pontiac. 

The two-door GM-10s haven't sold up to expectations, so the success of GM's $5 billion investment in the cars rests with the sedans, which carry the same names as their coupe counterparts. 

Success won't come easily, and not just because of the challenge from Honda's new, larger Accord sedan.
Smaller families can choose from many redesigned subcompact and compact cars, including the 323 and Protege from Mazda Motor Corp. and Excel from Hyundai Motor Co. 

Nissan is trying to distinguish the next-generation Stanza compact from its slow-selling forebear -- and from the rest of the pack -- by offering more power for less money.
Nissan cut Stanza's base price to $11,450 from more than $12,000 and added a four-cylinder, 12-valve engine that generates 138 horsepower, up from 94 horsepower for the old standard engine. 

Buyers who prefer domestic nameplates and who aren't in a hurry can wait until spring, when Ford will introduce its new Escort.
The car isn't all-American, however: Mazda, of which Ford owns 25%, did much of the engineering on the vehicle. 

The most widely publicized luxury cars of the new model year are clearly Nissan's Infiniti line, which goes on sale Nov. 8, and Toyota's Lexus cars, which have been available since August.
But Chrysler, with the Imperial, and Ford, with the redesigned Lincoln Town Car, also are introducing important upscale models.
Chrysler has taken a conservative approach to Imperial's styling, partly because it shares many parts and features with the boxy New Yorker.
But Chrysler's Mr. Boltz says this is also because Imperial was consciously fashioned for older buyers, many of whom now own Chrysler cars or want to stick with a U.S.-made product.
Thus, rather than join European auto makers in what many analysts see as a dogfight for market share with Lexus and Infiniti, Chrysler decided to "first serve our existing owner base," Mr. Boltz adds. "Over time, we will offer other entries that will appeal to younger {luxury-car} buyers," which Lexus and Infiniti are expected to attract. 

Still, Chrysler isn't ignoring the competition.
Imperial ads will compare the car's features -- favorably, of course -- to those of Cadillacs, Jaguars and BMWs. 

Ford will also emphasize features in its Town Car ads.
The Town Car has been one of Ford's most profitable vehicles, so Ford wants to reassure owners that the "traditional luxury cues of size, luggage capacity and ride" haven't disappeared beneath the new, rounder skin designed to broaden the Town Car's appeal, says Ross H. Roberts, Lincoln-Mercury general manager. 

Thus, Town Car ads will show how roomy the trunk is and how luxurious the interior remains. "It's a very delicate balancing act," says Ian G. McAllister, the division's marketing manager. 

Competition in the luxury segment is expected to be so fierce that several companies are offering new, "entry-level" models in hopes of attracting more buyers.
BMW has revived the 318 name for its new 318is two-door, 16-valve car, which it will begin selling next May for about $22,000.
BMW's current prices range from almost $25,000 to $70,000.
Jaguar removed the sunroof, special suspension system and real wood interior trim from its $44,000 XJ6 sedan to come up with a "base" model that will retail for $39,700. 

Sports cars are getting lots of attention, some of which Chevy would like to grab for its 454 SS pickup.
The full-sized, limited-edition model has a 230-horsepower V-8 engine and a "performance handling package" with special shock absorbers, front stabilizer bar and "heavy-duty jounce bumpers." 

Chevrolet expects the 454 SS to attract mainly men of "moderate" education in their early to mid-40s who long for the American-made muscle cars of their youth, says Frank F. Raine, marketing manager for Chevrolet trucks. "No Harvard professors," he adds. 

Those who want their sports cars in more traditional guises can choose from a growing number of other two-seaters from makers including Mercedes-Benz and Honda.
Mercedes-Benz's offerings are among the priciest, with the six-cylinder engine 300SL and the V-8 engine 500SL expected to go on sale Nov. 1 for roughly $70,000 and $80,000.
Honda's offering, a mid-engine teardrop Acura model code-named NS-X, won't be available until the middle of next year and will likely cost $50,000 to $60,000. 

The new entries mean more choices for consumers but possible headaches for manufacturers. "I don't think the market for two-seat sports cars is infinitely expandable," says Robert A. Lutz, president of Chrysler Motors.
But his company is hard at work figuring out how to turn its two-seat Viper from concept car to reality. 

pressuring Chrysler, which dominates the minivan market with its regular and extended-body Caravans and Voyagers. standards, manufacturers continue to stuff their products with bigger engines, including Cadillac, Chrysler and Audi, which gets its first V-8 in the Quattro. for the first time with the 300E 4Matic sedan and 300TE 4Matic station wagon.
A safety feature as well as a profitable option, four-wheel drive expends to other models including the Mitsubishi Galant and Chevrolet and GMC minivans. virtually every car sold in the U.S. this year, due to government mandate.
Some cars with air bags carry warnings that drivers should continue to buckle up.
But automatic belts also aren't completely automatic: Most systems lock in shoulder, but not lap, belts. 

