.START 

Senate leaders who tried to stop a capital-gains tax cut by replacing it with an expansion of the individual retirement account deduction now face the prospect of getting both. 

Chairman Lloyd Bentsen of the Senate Finance Committee has included an enhanced IRA proposal in a package of tax changes that he intends to present to the panel today.
The package would raise more than $5.4 billion in fiscal 1990 without increasing the top individual tax rate.
Committee members who saw the package late last week generally approved of it, and the IRA proposal in particular was greeted enthusiastically. 

Capital gains, however, remain the major unresolved issue.
The Texas Democrat's package doesn't contain a capital gains component, but behind-the-scenes pressure has been intense to add a provision that cuts that tax rate.
The 20-member Finance Committee is evenly split on the question, but a majority in the Senate appears to favor some sort of capital gains tax reduction. 

Sen. Bentsen said he expects drafting of his tax plan to be "difficult." 

Last week, the House approved a gains-tax cut over the objections of its Democratic leaders.
In the Senate, the next stop for the legislation, Democratic leaders again are opposed.
But as in the House, the Senate has a sizable minority of Democrats and near-solid block of Republicans who favor some sort of reduction, which has been a priority of President Bush.
On NBC News's "Meet the Press" yesterday, Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) declared that the capital-gains plan approved by the House "will not be enacted in the Senate." But Mr. Mitchell for the first time acknowledged that a capital-gains proposal could pass the Senate.
He said the outcome of any alternative proposal "will depend on the nature of the plan, and I think the vote there will be very close." 

The House plan would cut the capital gains tax rate for 2 1/2 years to 19.6% from the current maximum of 33%.
Afterward, the rate would be 28%, with gains from newly acquired assets indexed to inflation. 

As the House debated its capital gains provision, several Democratic senators met in the office of Florida Sen. Bob Graham to discuss their common interest in cutting the capital gains tax rate.
Since then, Sen. David Boren (D., Okla.), a conservative member of the tax-writing Finance Committee, has undertaken the chore of devising a plan that meets their widely varied interests. 

On Friday, Sen. Boren told a meeting of the Democratic committee members that he intends to offer an amendment to Sen. Bentsen's proposal that would reduce the capital gains rate. "We've got to come up with something that accepts the IRA proposal, but also does something on capital gains," he said afterward. 

In an interview, Sen. Boren said he dislikes the House version of the capital gains cut, which would produce a "fire sale of assets" by reducing the rate for 2 1/2 years and then increasing it.
He said he favors a permanent tax cut that helps start-up companies and encourages long-term investment.
He spoke highly of plans that remove from taxation gains that are attributable to inflation and that mostly benefit newly acquired assets.
His biggest challenge, he said, is financing the proposal. 

The proponents of a gains-tax cut Sen. Boren hopes to satisfy are a diverse lot, ranging from liberal Sens.
Alan Cranston of California and John Kerry of Massachusetts, who represent states with high-technology industries, to Sens.
Sam Nunn of Georgia and Dale Bumpers of Arkansas, whose states have large timber interests.
High-tech companies need capital, while timber sales would receive the preferential tax treatment of capital gains.
Freshmen senators such as Charles Robb of Virginia and Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut also have expressed interest. 

All told, perhaps 15 Democratic senators favor a cut in the capital gains tax, more than enough to produce a majority in the Senate, which has 55 Democrats and 45 Republicans. 

Still, Sen. Bentsen holds out the hope that the Boren amendment on capital gains could fail narrowly in his committee, and that his package could be sent to the floor without much change.
Once there, Senate rules might make it hard to add a capital-gains proposal.
Sen. Bentsen argues that it would be too costly to approve both a capital gains tax cut and an enhanced IRA deduction.
His plan would give a 50% deduction for up to $2,000 of IRA contributions made by people who currently don't qualify.
It also would allow penalty-free withdrawals for retirement, higher education or the purchase of a first home. 

As a possible fallback position, Sen. Bentsen is watching efforts by committee member David Pryor (D., Ark.).
Sen. Pryor, with leadership encouragement, is trying to see what, short of a capital gains tax cut, is acceptable to fellow timber-state senators.
So far, he has come up with income averaging, a plan that would spread gains over a number of years.
But it isn't clear that the plan would help fledgling high-tech companies. 

Separately, Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady urged the Senate to go beyond the House proposal and approve a permanent capital-gains differential.
He also said Sen. Bentsen's IRA proposal was "too expensive at a time when reaching Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction targets is our first concern." 

Mr. Brady's comments Friday about IRAs came only 2 1/2 weeks after he announced that a team of Treasury officials was studying ways to bolster the nation's savings rate through tax incentives, including new deductions for IRAs.
He retreated from his earlier remarks, saying "there is no firm consensus over whether IRAs" are effective in stimulating savings. 

Hilary Stout contributed to this article. 

