.START 

Where's the small-stock rally? 

For months now, boosters of the issues have been predicting their resurgence; so far, they've been wrong. 

"The process is taking a bit longer than we expected," concedes Richard Bernstein, a quantitative analyst at Merrill Lynch. 

Adds L. Keith Mullins, small-stock analyst at Morgan Stanley, "the third quarter wasn't very positive for the group." 

Indeed, since their energetic performance in the first quarter, stocks with market values below $400 million have turned lethargic.
During the third quarter, small-stock barometers trailed those of larger issues.
The Nasdaq Composite Index of over-the-counter stocks rose 8.64% and the Russell 2000 Index of small stocks improved only 6.44%.
By comparison, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has gained 10.36% and the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index 9.80% since June 30. 

If there is any doubt that investors still prefer larger stocks, consider this: The 200 largest OTC issues, which have market values of more than $500 million, also kept pace with Big Board stocks.
Specifically, the Nasdaq 100 Index of industrial stocks surged 12.17% during the latest three months.
Its counterpart, the Nasdaq Financials, grew 12.60%. 

Analysts insist that the small-stock revival is just around the corner.
But the issues apparently are having trouble negotiating the turn.
Mostly, that's because investors have found all sorts of reasons not to buy small stocks. 

At first, investors were trying to figure out whether the economy would have a soft landing when it slowed, or slide into a recession, and they didn't buy much of anything.
It didn't help either when cash-laden money managers, who panicked about missing the stock market rally and embarked on a spring buying spree, didn't put small stocks on their shopping lists.
Not even the euphoria over the Nasdaq Composite and the Dow industrials setting all-time highs has altered investors' caution toward small stocks.
And analysts say that foreign investors, who have shown more interest in U.S. stocks lately, still won't go near smaller issues because the stocks are harder to buy and sell quickly. 

Some of the blame also goes to program trading -- the computer-driven buying and selling of stocks that is tied to movements in certain stock indexes.
Portfolio managers and analysts claim that small stocks can't keep up with larger ones when program buying dominates trading, as it has for much of the summer. 

"When program trading has influence, (big) stocks tend to be involved and the small caps aren't," says Richard Freeman, a portfolio manager at Shearson Asset Management, a money management unit of Shearson Lehman Hutton. 

Small-stock analysts continue to put their faith in the fact that small stocks have outperformed the broader market over the past 62 years.
Small-stock booms usually come at five-year intervals.
Smaller issues beat larger ones in 1988, after lagging since 1983. 

Some brokers now report that investors are beginning to shop among smaller issues because their earnings-growth prospects are more attractive now than most larger stocks.
Of course, such expectations have come back to haunt small stocks in the past.
Investors habitually punish stocks when company earnings don't live up to expectations. 

Nevertheless, small-stock boosters say, the group still is relatively cheap, and investors won't ignore the issues forever. 

"The time is ripe for rotation into smaller stocks," contends Joseph McAlinden, director of research at Dillon Read.
From now until the end of the year, investors will look for buying opportunities among segments that haven't advanced a lot. "Since Nasdaq and small stocks have lagged, that's where the money will flow," he says. 

Sometimes the small stocks' surge begins during a market correction in which those issues don't suffer as much as bigger stocks do, says James Manley, a portfolio manager at Chase Investors Management.
Investors who take note of the group snap the issues up, causing small stocks to outperform larger issues when the market rebounds, he says. 

There are signs that such a cycle might be under way.
While the Dow lost almost 3% and the S&P dropped 2% during September, the Nasdaq Composite eased only 0.3% and the Russell 2000 was down 1%. 

Although Mr. Manley thinks small stocks will rally eventually, he doesn't expect it to happen soon. "If the market took off now, I doubt that small stocks would outperform bigger issues," he says. "We need more of a correction before they can assume leadership." 

Friday's Market Activity 

Over-the-counter stocks finished the final session of the third quarter with a modest advance.
The Nasdaq Composite Index closed up 1.78, or 0.38%, at 472.92.
For the week, the Nasdaq Composite gained 4.85 points, or about 1%.
For the third quarter the index gained 24.76%, about even with gains in listed stocks. 

Corporate Software dropped 4 3/4 to 9 1/2, a 33% loss.
After the market close Friday, the company said that it expects to post third-quarter earnings in the range of six cents to 10 cents a share, lower than analysts' expectations of 16 to 20 cents.
In the year-ago quarter profit was 15 cents a share.
Corporate Software attributed the disappointing estimate in part to softness in the personal computer market. 

Surgical Laser Technology was the most active Nasdaq issue, was unchangedat 15 1/2 on volume of 2,458,700.
The initial offering of 1.6 million shares came to market Thursday at $12.50 a share. 

Valley Federal Savings & Loan shed 3 to close at 6 1/2 after it reported that Citadel Holding's board had decided not to pursue an acquisition of Valley.
Valley said it would continue to pursue a restructuring. 

Flight International Group lost 1 3/4 to close at 7.
The company said it has withdrawn its previously published financial statements for fiscal 1989, which ended April 30, because of an accounting error, and said it was considering options to meet liquidity problems.
The company said the accounting error could affect the results for the first quarter, ended July 31, which have yet to be released. 

Gradco Systems jumped 7/8 to 18 3/8 after Keith B. Stewart, its chief executive officer and founder, said he was actively pursuing a possible management-led buy-out of the company.
Thursday, Gradco gained 1 1/8. 

First Executive common gained 3/4 to 11 5/8 on heavy volume of 1,531,200 shares.
Thursday, Rosewood Financial said it was interested in acquiring the 20% stake of First Executive now held by I.C.H. Corp. 

McCaw Cellular Communications added 2 to 38 and LIN Broadcasting added 1 1/8 to 110 7/8.
McCaw has been rumored as prepared to sweeten its $110-a-share offer for LIN, which currently is in an agreement with BellSouth to merge their cellular operations and spin off LIN's television stations. 

Cooper Development lost 5/8 to 5 after it reaffirmed its interest in acquiring Cooper Life in a stock-swap transaction. 

