.START 

While millions of viewers tune in "NBC Nightly News" every weekday, select NBC News officials have been viewing another version of the half-hour newscast they've produced in secret. 

The new so-called pilot broadcasts have featured re-edited, shortened pieces that appeared on the "Nightly News," as well as specially written introductions by the show's anchor, Tom Brokaw. "We wanted the pieces faster and tighter," says one person close to the project. "The whole idea is to keep the broadcast moving.
More, shorter pieces on breaking news of the day and longer pieces on other areas, such as the environment, medicine and sports." 

Separately, NBC News is considering a proposal to its 200-plus affiliates that would expand the two-hour morning broadcast of "Today" to three hours, from 7 a.m. to 10 a.m. Eastern time.
An individual familiar with the plan says it is in the early stages. "We haven't even had a meeting on it yet," says the official, who didn't want to be identified. 

The mission of the secret "Nightly News" project is to experiment with and fine-tune a sluggish night-time network news broadcast that, until two weeks ago, has on average been rated No. 3 by A.C. Nielson Co., behind the nightly news broadcasts of CBS, No. 1, and ABC, No. 2.
For the past two weeks, NBC has been in second place, although last week it was tied with ABC.
The poor performance of the NBC network's signature newscast has been a problem for National Broadcasting Co., a unit of General Electric Co. NBC is No. 1 in virtually every other programming area, including early morning, prime time and late night. 

The program plans to "slowly introduce new elements" to the "Nightly News," says its executive producer Bill Wheatley.
Those elements include a piece at the end of each broadcast "that is not necessarily connected to the hardest news," including lighthearted feature stories by such correspondents as "Today" contributor Mike Leonard. 

Mr. Wheatley says NBC News President Michael G. Gartner approached him and Mr. Brokaw recently and said he had some ideas for the program, which had been in third place for about 18 months.
One of the ideas included establishing a foreign desk that would be anchored by Garrick Utley, a co-anchor of "Sunday Today." Mr. Brokaw rejected the proposal and declined to appear in a rehearsal with Mr. Utley. 

Mr. Wheatley dismisses any notion that "Nightly News" would start placing an emphasis on departmentalizing the news. 

"The changes will be evolutionary, not revolutionary," says Mr. Wheatley. "It's not like you're going to tune in Monday and see a radically different broadcast.
A large part of our meetings have been designed to figure how we could use our people, correspondents and producers more efficiently." 

The moves come as the news divisions at each network continue an attempt to distinguish their evening broadcasts from local newscasts.
The ability of local news, as well as Cable News Network, a unit of Turner Broadcasting System Inc., to present world news before the network newscasts has forced the three major networks to "reinvent ourselves," says an NBC News official, who didn't want to be identified.
For instance, ABC News's "World News Tonight" this year added a frequent segment called "American Agenda," a series of in-depth reports on the family, education, health and other topics. 

Mr. Brokaw declined to comment on specifics of the NBC project, saying he was in a period of "self-enforced silence." He only acknowledges the experimental newscasts took place.
Mr. Gartner didn't return a telephone call to his office. 

Concerning expanding "Today" by an hour, the official familiar with the proposal says the third hour could be offered as an "optional hour" to NBC stations, which could air it instead of syndicated shows or locally originated programs. 

But some stations reject the idea. "It's a revenue-producing time period, so why would we give that time back to the network?" says Amy S. McCombs, general manager of KRON, the NBC affiliate in San Francisco. 

NBC's rationale is that local stations have to pay for syndicated programs that may fail in the ratings. "Today" is a proven commodity.
But local stations can keep almost all of the advertising revenue with a syndicated show and not share it with the network. 

"Local stations may resist this," says Mitchell Praver, vice president and director of programming at Katz Continental Television, a station consultant. "If the local station has a successful program at 9 o'clock, it could be a significant ratings source." 

John Spinola, general manager of NBC affiliate WBZ in Boston, says the network would have to offer stations monetary inducements to air a third hour of the show. "Maybe they could start 'Today' at eight o'clock and give me a chance to expand my local early news," Mr. Spinola says. "That I wouldn't mind." 

