.START 

BENTSEN WILL PROPOSE a package of tax changes today to raise more than $5.4 billion in fiscal 1990 without increasing the top individual tax rate.
The package includes an enhanced IRA proposal but no capital-gains tax cut.
A majority of the Senate appears to favor some type of capital-gains tax reduction. 

Skinner said he wasn't setting a new policy on foreign ownership of U.S. airlines by forcing KLM to reduce its role in NWA Inc. Meanwhile, NWA's new owner is trying to draft new compensation packages to avert more top management defections. 

Merrill Lynch maintained its position as top underwriter of stocks and bonds in the third quarter, but a paucity of underwritings continued to depress profits in the industry. 

The SEC should have more authority to monitor brokerage-firm debt levels, Bush's nominee to head the agency said.
Richard Breeden is especially worried about bridge loans used to aid in leveraged buy-outs. 

Leading economic indicators rose 0.3% in August, their best showing since April, indicating the economy's slow growth is likely to continue.
But some economists believe the threat of a recession still exists. 

AMR Corp. asked for investigations into recent Dow Jones wire service reports about its stock, which has been buffeted by rumors following bids for two other big airlines. 

Spelling Entertainment retained two investment firms to look into the possible sale of the company. 

Sony's efforts to hire Peter Guber to head Columbia Pictures may hinge on negotiations this week to get him out of a five-year contract to produce movies for Warner Bros. 

IBM has begun its third early-retirement program in as many years, a move that is expected to trim the computer giant's work force by as many as 1,000 employees. 

Control Data's chairman plans to step down soon as chief executive.
The computer firm raised eyebrows by saying it plans a search for a successor, even though it said its president is the leading candidate. 

Mutual fund net sales rose $4.2 billion in August, highest in two years, led by bond and income funds. 

McKinsey & Co. is close to an agreement to acquire an affiliate of Saatchi & Saatchi in what would be an agressive expansion by McKinsey, a major consulting firm. 

Chemical bank is examining possible problems in its interest-rate options business, including allegations that the unit's head and a trader accepted gratuities from a broker. 

The Agriculture Department will require feed-grain producers in its farm-subsidy program to set aside 10% of their land next year. 

Harcourt Brace's prospects for the long term still appear to be worrying the publishing firm's investors, despite the $1.1 billion it will receive from the sale of six theme parks. 

Markets -- 

Stocks: Volume 155,300,000 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 2692.82, off 2.09; transportation 1450.04, up 11.92; utilities 216.17, off 0.38. 

Bonds: Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3293.27, up 

Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 130.92, up 0.46; spot index 129.42, up 0.50. 

Dollar: 139.00 yen, off 1.65; 1.8713 marks, off 0.0110. 

