.START 

When the Supreme Court opens its new term this morning, abortion will once again top the agenda, but the debate may lack the suspenseful tone of last spring. 

Unlike last term's Missouri case, none of the parties in three new abortion cases that the court will decide has asked the justices to overturn the 1973 Roe vs.
Wade decision that recognized the right to abortion.
Moreover, in the Missouri case, decided in July, five of the nine justices signaled a willingness to give states more room to regulate or restrict abortion services. 

The likely result, says Professor Anita Allen of Georgetown University Law Center, is that "the court will find arguments to place more restrictions on abortion." 

The abortion cases may be symbolic of the term as a whole.
With almost half of the high court's 152 hours of oral argument already filled, the docket for the new term presents the justices with only a handful of entirely new problems and a long agenda of more familiar issues. 

"Last term is a hard act to follow," says Alan Slobodin of the conservative Washington Legal Foundation. 

For business, there are few major disputes on the agenda thus far, although lawyers are actively looking for new appeals to challenge the constitutionality of punitive damage awards in civil cases and to limit the use of the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law.
Of the business cases the court has already agreed to hear, antitrust issues dominate by far. 

The justices who will confront these issues remain a comparatively healthy lot, despite persistent rumors last spring that at least one and perhaps several retirements were in the offing at the end of last term. 

Here are highlights of the issues that the high court has already agreed to decide: 

Antitrust 

-- Does federal antitrust law prohibit a manufacturer from selling goods at a discount to wholesalers while denying retailers the same discount? (Texaco Inc. vs.
Hasbrouck) 

-- May a competitor sue over lost sales and profits that it claims were caused by another company setting prices at below market levels? (Atlantic Richfield Co. vs.
USA Petroleum Co.) 

-- What antitrust standards govern the attorney general's review of the proposed merger of Detroit's two daily newspapers? (Michigan Citizens for an Independent Press vs.
Thornburgh) 

-- Did a strike for higher pay by criminal defense lawyers in Washington who represent poor defendants violate antitrust law, or was their action protected by the First Amendment? (Federal Trade Commission vs.
Superior Court Trial Lawyers Association) 

Taxation 

-- May foreign corporations sue in federal court to challenge the legality of state taxes on their U.S. subsidiaries? (Franchise Tax Board of California vs.
Alcan Aluminium Ltd.) 

-- When must states make retroactive refunds of collected taxes that are later found to unconstitutionally interfere with interstate commerce?
These cases are being argued for the second time. (American Trucking Associations vs.
Smith; McKesson Corp. vs.
Division of Alcoholic Beverages) 

Privacy 

-- May Illinois license and impose tough standards on abortion clinics equivalent to regulations set for outpatient surgical facilities? (Turnock vs.
Ragsdale) 

-- May Minnesota require that both parents of a minor be notified 48 hours before she has an abortion, unless a state court has authorized the abortion? (Hodgson vs.
Minnesota) 

-- May Ohio require doctors to notify parents of minors before performing abortions, and establish difficult procedures for girls who seek to avoid parental notification by obtaining a judge's approval? (Ohio vs.
Akron Center for Reproductive Health) 

-- May the family of a person who is in what doctors say is a persistent vegetative condition insist that artificial feeding and hydration be stopped? (Cruzan vs.
Missouri Department of Health) Religion 

-- Does a 1984 federal law that requires public high schools to provide religious clubs equal access to school facilities violate the First Amendment separation of church and state? (Board of Education of Westside Community Schools vs.
Mergens) 

-- Does the Constitution encompass the right to use the drug peyote as part of a religious practice by members of the Native American Church? (Employment Division vs.
Smith) 

Property 

-- Does a federal law allowing use of abandoned rail lines as bicycle and nature trails deprive landowners of their right to compensation for the government taking their property? (Preseault vs.
Interstate Commerce Commission) 

