.START 

The New York Stock Exchange said seven issues began trading last week and another will begin today. 

Colonial InterMarket Income Trust I, Boston, listed shares of beneficial interest under the symbol CMK. Colonial InterMarket is a closed-end investment company that was sold as an initial public offering. 

Putnam Diversified Premium Income Trust, Boston, started trading with the symbol PDN.
It is also a closed-end investment company that trades shares of beneficial interest and had an initial public offering last week. 

American Opportunity Income Fund, Minneapolis, listed common stock with the symbol OIF.
It is a closed-end management investment company that was also an IPO. 

Kaneb Pipeline Partners Limited Partners, Richardson, Texas, owns and operates the petroleum products pipeline system of Kaneb Pipeline Co., a subsidiary of Kaneb Services Inc.
The new stock is an initial public offering and Kaneb Services, through a subsidiary, will hold 67%.
The symbol is 

Chile Fund Inc., New York, a country fund, was listed with the symbol CH after its initial public offering. 

Allstate Municipal Income Trust III, New York, a closed-end management investment company, was listed with the symbol ALL after its initial offering. 

Cable & Wireless PLC, London, listed American depositary shares with the symbol CWP.
It is a telecommunications services provider.
The offering was an initial public offering.
Its stock continues to trade on other exchanges outside the U.S., including London's Stock Exchange, the Tokyo Stock Exchange and the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
LSI Logic Corp., a Milpitas, Calif.-based maker of integrated circuits and provider of design and technology services, will list shares today with the symbol LSI.
It has traded over-the-counter. 

Two stocks were listed on the American Stock Exchange and another will join this week; all are over-the-counter market transfers. 

Allou Health & Beauty Care Inc., Brentwood, N.Y., started trading with the symbol ALU.
It is a health and beauty aid, fragrance and cosmetic products distribution company. 

Health Concepts IV Inc., Tulsa, Okla., started trading with the symbol HCF.
It operates alcohol and substance abuse facilities.
The company continues to trade on the Boston Stock Exchange. 

Bradley Real Estate Trust, Boston, will begin trading shares of beneficial interest under the symbol BTR.
It is a real-estate investment trust that has traded over-the-counter. 

The Philadelphia Stock Exchange listed shares of one new issue. 

Aviation Education Systems Inc., Melville, N.Y., started trading with the symbol AES.
It conducts air traffic controller training courses. 

Separately, on the AMEX, put and call options on common stock of Boca Raton, Fla.-based Office Depot Inc., operator of office supplies stores, began trading. 

