.START 

An exodus of investors alarmed by Finland's rapidly deteriorating economy sent share prices plummeting on the Helsinki Stock Exchange last week. 

The Helsinki market's Unitas Index rebounded Thursday and Friday, but ended the week down 3.4% at 697.
And traders attributed the bounce to technical factors and buying by banks and other institutional investors anxious to boost share prices on the last day of the third quarter. 

"It's terrible.
Big institutional investors aren't buying and foreigners already have got out of Finland," said Thomas Procepe, head of research at Helsinki-based ABB Aros Securities.
And gloomy market analysts don't expect much improvement anytime soon. 

Market fundamentals remain weak and investors are bracing for more volatility.
Foreign exchange traders said the Finnish central bank continued heavy interventions in currency markets on Friday to stabilize the markka. 

Helsinki economists expect the Finnish markka to be allowed to ease further in coming weeks.
But most played down recent speculation about a possible currency devaluation and suggested that a stable markka would remain the central bank's top policy priority. 

Interest rates climbed further.
The so-called "Helibor" benchmark three-month lending rate ended the week at 13.67%, up 0.55 percentage point for the week and more than 2.5 percentage points since mid-August.
Most market analysts expect rates to continue rising, perhaps to 15% by year end. 

Last week's market tumult was triggered by an embarrassing admission by the state-run Bureau of Statistics.
On Monday, the agency conceded that its latest report had understated the deficit in Finland's foreign-trade balance for this year's first eight months. 

As a result, the statistics bureau said that the payments deficit totaled about 14 billion markka ($3.24 billion) between January and August, rather than the previously reported FM9.4 billion ($2.18 billion). 

Economists now estimate that the full-year payments deficit will exceed FM21 billion -- widening from a FM12.6 billion deficit last year.
The projected 1989 payments gap represents about 4% of gross national product -- the highest figure for Finland in more than a decade, economists said. 

Naturally, investors were miffed about the statistical error. "Nobody can understand how such a big miscalculation can be possible," said Mr. Procepe.
But he and other analysts agreed the impact was heightened because markets were already reeling from several recent examples of apparent economic mismanagement. 

Two weeks ago, Finland's shaky coalition government jolted financial markets by unveiling a lax 1990 budget calling for an 8% increase in outlays.
Economists had been expecting a much tighter fiscal policy to help cool the overheated economy. 

Criticism mounted further when a group of parliamentary supervisors rejected the central bank's request to raise Finland's base lending rate.
The base rate no longer steers market interest rates, but it still governs mortgage loans and other types of consumer credit.
The central bank argued that a base rate increase was urgently needed to stanch spiraling credit-financed private consumption. 

Kalevi Kosonen, chief economist at Union Bank of Finland, expects the threat of the widening payments gap to force major changes in the budget -- and drastic tightening, probably through a bigger increase in the value-added tax than previously planned. 

Politicians will probably also have to give in on base rates. "A two-percentage-point rise to 9.5% is quite probable within a month," Mr. Kosonen said. 

Such a move could be a mixed blessing for stocks.
Most analysts agree that the economy is the market's biggest problem -- and a tougher line by economic policymakers would help shift investors' attention back to bullish factors such as continued buoyant corporate profits.
Finland's biggest bank, Kansallis Osake Pankki, expects corporate profits before tax to rise about 20% this year -- with the 20 biggest blue-chip concerns rising 34%. 

But the recent decline in share prices has prompted Finnish institutional investors to shift funds out of equities into bonds, where real, or inflation-adjusted, yields of more than 7% beckon.
And relaxation this year of long-standing foreign-exchange controls has fueled a rapid rise in purchases of foreign equities by Finnish investors. 

Friday's Market Activity 

Tokyo stocks fell back Friday from a record-breaking high Thursday, as investors cashed profits and stepped to the sidelines after a relatively active trading week. 

There were substantial amounts of investment trust fund and arbitrage buying, but early gains were pressured down by profit takers and dealers clearing away stocks they have held for their own account at the end of the month.
The market, which opened the day higher, declined in the afternoon, though it rebounded from an intraday low helped by index-linked investment trust funds buying at day's end, traders said. 

The Nikkei index of 225 selected issues was down 53.22 points at 35636.76.
The index gained 319.41 points Thursday. 

In early trading in Tokyo Monday, the Nikkei index rose 110.35 points to 35747.11. 

London share prices closed modestly higher Friday on a flurry of new trading-account buying and the retreat of worries over an imminent boost in U.K. interest rates. 

The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index settled 7.7 points higher at 2299.4, the day's high.
Early in the session, when rumors of a rate boost swept the market, the index dropped to its session low of 2278.3. 

The narrower Financial Times 30-share index finished 9.5 points higher at 1885.7. 

Shares began their modest recovery in early afternoon action after the U.K. Treasury signaled that a base rate move wasn't imminent. 

Elsewhere, share prices closed higher in Paris, Copenhagen and Stockholm and lower in Milan, Oslo, Brussels, Zurich, Frankfurt, Amsterdam, Madrid and Johannesburg.
South African golds closed lower. 

Stocks closed higher in Sydney, Singapore and Seoul, were mixed in Hong Kong and lower in Taipei, Wellington and Manila. 

Here are price trends on the world's major stock markets, as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective, Geneva.
To make them directly comparable, each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100.
The percentage change is since year-end. 

