.START 

Sony Corp. 's effort to hire Peter Guber as chairman of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. hangs on some complex legal negotiations this week aimed at disentangling the Hollywood producer from a five-year contract with Warner Communications Inc. 

Sony last week agreed to acquire Columbia Pictures for $3.4 billion and subsequently made a $200 million offer for Guber-Peters Entertainment Co., a Los Angeles-based film and TV production company where Mr. Peters is co-chief executive with partner Jon Peters.
Sony said the offer for Guber-Peters, however, is contingent on the "modification" of the Warner agreement "on terms satisfactory to Sony." 

Guber-Peters representatives are scheduled to meet today with Warner to try to hammer out a settlement.
Warner, for its part, maintains that "we have a binding contract." Warner advisers Friday said the company is prepared to take legal action to protect its interests and has already notified Sony that it may consider a suit against the Japanese electronics giant for inducing a breach of contract between Mr. Guber and Warner.
Among other things, Warner is likely to seek a hefty financial settlement for the loss of Mr. Guber's services and for any damages from his withdrawal as a producer on a number of Warner movies. 

"Warner had made it clear that it is going to assert its rights and, if Sony wants these guys, they are going to have to come to terms with Warner," said a Warner adviser.
The Guber-Peters team produced, among other things, Warner's blockbuster hit "Batman" and is deeply involved in future Warner projects that include sequels to that film. 

Meanwhile, Sony said, "we are hopeful that Peter Guber and Jon Peters can work out their problems with Warner in a satisfactory manner." Sony officials indicated they weren't concerned about threats of a breach of contract suit by New York-based Warner.
At issue in the battle between Mr. Guber and Warner, which is in the process of being acquired by Time Warner Inc., is the five-year contract, signed one month ago, that provides that Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters will produce movies exclusively for the Warner Bros. studio.
The contract extends an agreement originally signed by Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters in 

Terry Christensen, whose Los Angeles-based Christensen, White, Miller, Fink & Jacobs is outside counsel for Guber-Peters, said a combination of oral agreements between Warner and the producers and certain language in the new contract clearly allow for the two producers to extricate themselves from the Warner agreement should the opportunity to own or run a major studio come up. 

Warner officials have declined to discuss specifics of the contract, but Mr. Christensen said Warner has previously consented to release Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters from their obligation: once last year when the two launched a failed bid to buy a stake in MGM/UA Entertainment Co. and once in 1987, when the duo was having exploratory talks with New York-based Columbia.
The new five-year contract with Warner actually omitted language that prohibited Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters from working "in any other capacity in the motion picture industry," while keeping a provision that they not serve as producer or executive producer on any film other than one for Warner, Mr. Christensen said. 

In a business where relationships are key, executives of rival Hollywood studios said Mr. Guber made a serious tactical error in negotiating with Sony without discussing the plan with Warner first.
But Mr. Christensen said Warner has long been aware of the efforts of Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters to own or run a major studio and was aware at least a month ago that discussions with Sony had occurred. "Warner has known for two years that this is a goal and a plan of Jon Peters and Peter Guber," he said. "It's all been very open and honest and public." 

Mr. Christensen said Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters are prepared to give up substantial financial benefits to settle the Warner contract, including rights to participate in sequels to "Batman" and fees from past and future movies, as well as rights to various scripts and projects they have acquired on behalf of Warner. "Jon and Peter would give up 10 to 15 years of rolling inventory at Warner," Mr. Christensen said. "It's a considerable financial sacrifice." Among other things, Guber-Peters is producing movie versions of the best sellers "Bonfire of the Vanities," "A Bright and Shining Lie" and "Contact" for Warner. 

"Everybody will benefit if this is resolved quickly and in a dignified manner," Mr. Christensen said. "But if we have to litigate it, we will." 

