.START 

NWA Inc. 's new owner Alfred Checchi is scrambling to revamp compensation packages to avert further defections by remaining top management at the holding company of Northwest Airlines, according to company executives. 

The sources added that last week's resignations of Chairman Steven Rothmeier and four other NWA executives partly reflected dissatisfaction with the new operating style imposed by Mr. Checchi after his investor group took control of St. Paul, Minn.-based NWA in August. 

Among other things, the departing executives are understood to have been displeased with the change from a comparatively debt-free public company that sought to build value for shareholders to a company dominated by a private owner and the dictates of a huge debt load. 

"I felt like a pawn that could just be pushed around on the chess board," said Benjamin G. Griggs Jr., executive vice president of NWA Cos., a unit, who handed in his resignation to Mr. Rothmeier last Wednesday morning. "I felt the business had a noose around its neck," he said in an interview over the weekend.
Mr. Rothmeier, whom associates said was hunting, couldn't be reached. 

Mr. Checchi wasn't available immediately for comment. 

While resignations by top officers of an acquired company aren't unusual, some Wall Street analysts had thought Mr. Checchi would try to retain the NWA team for at least a longer transition period.
The resignations of Mr. Rothmeier and the other executives will become effective Oct. 15. 

The Los Angeles investor and former Marriott Corp. executive doesn't have any experience running a major passenger airline, and top airline managers are scarce. 

Indeed, Mr. Checchi, who named himself NWA chairman last week in the wake of the resignations, initially had praised Mr. Rothmeier's management.
The executives, in turn, had supported Mr. Checchi's $3.65 billion takeover. 

Now, it isn't clear how many experienced hands Mr. Checchi can retain.
Among other things, he faces the task of convincing them that they aren't lame ducks and that he isn't burdening the carrier with too much debt from the acquisition. 

Some NWA executives, for instance, were recently piqued to learn that the company was forced to lease an expensive airplane simulator -- rather than pay cash for it as the financially conservative company would have done in the past. 

"It used to be that we could decide as a management that we needed this or needed that," Mr. Griggs said. "Now you have to get approval." 

Some also said they were kept in the dark about discussions with labor leaders, which were discovered when an executive listened to a toll-free phone recording operated by the airline's flight attendants union. 

Another signal came when a Sept. 15 deadline passed for Mr. Checchi to act on a compensation package proposed by Mr. Rothmeier for his management team.
That day Mr. Rothmeier told about 35 officers that he would understand if they began looking for jobs elsewhere. 

"He said, 'Don't stay out of loyalty for me.
I can't have you wait indefinitely, '" said an NWA executive who attended the meeting. "Checchi had a lot of slogans and promises but nothing with dollar signs in front of them," the executive said. 

Many of the officers interpreted the lack of any response by Mr. Checchi as a signal that he didn't have long-term plans for them. 

The compensation package was an issue because before the buy-out it had included publicly-traded stock, which was used to reward executives who met certain goals.
With the acquisition, the executives cashed in their stock. 

Also, before the buy-out, NWA directors had promised top management that compensation packages would be sweetened if the carrier's on-time and service performances improved. 

Terms of the compensation packages are under negotiation and details weren't available. 

