.START 

Merrill Lynch & Co. maintained a hammerlock on its position as the top underwriter of stocks and bonds in the third quarter, but a paucity of lucrative underwritings continued to depress profits in the securities industry. 

Despite a big drop in interest rates and the Dow Jones Industrial Average's rise to record levels during the quarter, Wall Street still hasn't recovered from the shakeout sparked by the October 1987 stock market crash.
Disclosed fees from new securities offerings plummeted $830 million, or 28%, to $2.1 billion in the first nine months of 1989. 

Equity financings, the traditional money-maker for brokerage firms, fell 37% in the three quarters, and only $15 billion has been raised with stock so far this year, compared with $23.8 billion a year earlier.
The volume of initial public stock offerings declined 48% to $9.8 billion from last year's relatively anemic $19 billion; and 151 companies have gone public so far this year, compared with 210 in the first three quarters of 1988. 

Fees from common stock offerings fell about $640 million in the first nine months to $868 million from $1.5 billion.
Not since 1984 have investment bankers made less money from underwriting common, according to Securities Data Co. 

Even at Merrill Lynch, the top U.S. underwriter for seven consecutive quarters, competitors as well as analysts say its growing market share hasn't resulted in significantly greater profitability. "The general problem continues to be that securities firms have allocated too many resources to businesses that aren't particularly profitable," says Lawrence Eckenfelder, securities industry analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. 

For instance, Merrill has made its biggest push in the market for investment-grade corporate bonds.
As interest rates declined, Merrill raised its market share more than four percentage points to 21.5%.
Merrill is the only firm that has increased its market share and new-issue volume for four consecutive years in the investment-grade bond market. 

But underwriting investment-grade corporate bonds has been among the least profitable activities on Wall Street in recent years. "Profit margins haven't been good for some time and aren't likely to get better," says Perin Long, a securities industry analyst at Lipper Analytical Securities Corp. People at Merrill say much of its net income last year and so far this year was generated by its merchant banking division, which includes high-yield junk bonds. 

Edson V. Mitchell, a senior managing director responsible for orchestrating Merrill's rise to No. 1, concedes that increased competition has made the traditional underwriting business -- buying securities from corporations and reselling them -- tougher. 

"When you integrate the new-issue effort with secondary market trading, you can be profitable," he says. "We believe we have the best fixed-income distribution system in the world," and that's what he says will make money in the long run. 

Whatever the case, the 36-year-old Mr. Mitchell, who is described by colleagues as tough and humorless, is a rising star at Merrill.
He ousted several New York and London colleagues who questioned his often-repeated assertion that rising market share and greater profitability in corporate bond underwriting are compatible.
Thanks to Mr. Mitchell's efforts, Merrill also seems to be getting business that would have been unlikely a year ago. 

In August, Canada's Export Development Corp. and Procter & Gamble Co., traditional clients of Goldman, Sachs & Co., selected Merrill to arrange large U.S. bond offerings.
The same month, British Gas PLC selected Merrill to sell its first offering in the Eurobond market.
Merrill also has been the most active underwriter of new preferred stock issues this year. 

In the first nine months, Merrill expanded its share of the U.S. debt and equity underwriting market to 16.5% from 14% over the same period last year.
Goldman Sachs, which ranked No. 2, had 13.6% of the market, while Salomon Brothers Inc., First Boston Corp. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. had 11%, 10.9% and 8.9%, respectively, according to Securities Data.
World-wide, Merrill also was No. 1, with a market share of 15.4%. 

Overall, the volume of new U.S. issues of debt and equity totaled $214.5 billion in the first nine months, just above 1988's new-issue volume of $210.4 billion in the like period.
A one percentage-point drop in interest rates this year helped raise the volume of new debt securities to a record $193.9 billion from $181.4 billion a year earlier. 

Elsewhere in the U.S. capital markets, mortgage and asset-backed bonds issued in the first three quarters totaled $88.7 billion, or 41% of the U.S. debt and equity new-issue market.
Investment-grade corporate bonds totaled $79.3 billion, or 37%.
High-yield junk bonds totaled $20.2 billion, or 9.4%. 

Initial public stock offerings amounted to $9.8 billion, or 4.6% of the market; secondary common offerings, $5.2 billion, or 2.4%; convertible bonds, $3.4 billion, or 1.6%; preferred stock issues, $5.6 billion, or 2.6%; and taxable municipal bonds totaled $2.3 billion, or 1%. 

Overseas, the volume of international debt and equity securities offerings climbed to a record $186.2 billion during the first nine months from $159 billion in the 1988 period.
Japanese-based Nomura Securities Co., Nikko Securities Co., Daiwa Securities Co. and Yamaichi Securities Co. dominated the Eurobond market, where corporations and governments issue securities outside their home markets. 

