.START 

A big drop in new stock offerings, traditionally a major source of revenue for securities firms, helped depress Wall Street's fees from underwriting stocks and bonds in the first nine months of the year. 

New issues of high-yield, high-risk junk bonds, the only other highly profitable underwriting business, remained active in the third quarter.
But last month's precipitous decline in junk bond prices could offset some of the profitability from selling new issues, industry officials say.
As a result, unsold inventories of new issues could swell. 

During the first three quarters, disclosed fees from securities underwriting plummeted to $2.1 billion from $2.9 billion in the first nine months of 1988, according to Securities Data Co.
Once again, the biggest losers were underwriters of common stock offerings, which declined 37% to $15 billion.
Initial public stock offerings tumbled 49% to $9.8 billion.
All told, fees from underwriting equity in the first nine months fell to $868.3 million from $1.5 billion at this point last year. 

Merrill Lynch & Co., which underwrote more securities issues in the first three quarters than its closest two competitors combined, was the leader in fee income.
The firm earned $332.2 million from underwriting 182 offerings. 

No. 2 Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. earned $313.8 million from 49 offerings, largely on the back of its perennial dominance of the junk bond market.
During the first nine months, Drexel arranged 38 junk bond offerings, more than its four closest competitors combined. 

The relatively small difference in fee income between Drexel and Merrill is another indication of the erosion in profits in underwriting investment-grade securities.
Merrill, which was the leading domestic and global underwriter in the first three quarters because of its growing share of investment-grade debt offerings, posted only slightly higher fee income than Drexel, even though Merrill arranged more than three times as many securities offerings as Drexel and more than twice the dollar amount of Drexel-managed issues. 

Both Drexel and Merrill received their biggest boosts from underwriting a $4 billion junk bond offering that helped finance Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. 's $25 billion takeover of RJR Nabisco Inc. Underwriting fees for that transaction totaled well over $100 million, with Drexel receiving the lion's share. 

In the junk bond new issue market, Drexel's earnings dwarfed those of its rivals.
The firm received $299.6 million in fees.
Goldman, Sachs & Co., CS First Boston Inc. 's First Boston unit, Merrill, Salomon Inc. and Morgan Stanley & Co. received $74.3 million, $66.8 million, $47.5 million, $33.8 million and $29.1 million, respectively. 

In the market for new stock offerings, Goldman was the top earner of fees, with $135.5 million from 20 offerings.
Merrill earned $111.7 million from 29 offerings, Alex.
Brown & Sons received $86.8 million from 26 offerings, Prudential Insurance Co. of America's Prudential-Bache Securities earned $81.5 million from 12 offerings, and PaineWebber Inc. earned $72.2 million from 18 offerings. 

