.START 

The Federal Reserve's apparent success in engineering a "soft landing" for the economy caused the bond market to skid off the runway in the third quarter. 

Investors who bought long-term Treasury bonds at the start of the quarter lost ground, posting a negative total return of 0.06% through Sept. 30, according to Merrill Lynch Capital Markets.
Municipal bonds did even worse, with 20-year general obligation bonds posting a 2.5% negative total return (price changes plus interest payments.) 

Bonds that are convertible into stock were the top performers in the quarter.
They were up 3.8%, primarily on the strength of the stock market. 

But for many bonds, "we had a dismal quarter, especially when you view the third quarter" compared with the prior three months, said Chet Ragavan, a vice president in fixed-income research at Merrill Lynch & Co.
In the second quarter, long-term Treasury bonds were up 12.45%. 

The bond market started to falter in August in response to growing evidence that the Federal Reserve's soft-landing approach was working.
By lowering interest rates just enough to keep the economy growing at a moderate pace without accelerating inflation, the Fed was attempting to steer the economy toward its eighth year of economic expansion. 

For the bond market, the results were frenetic.
The market soared on speculation that interest rates would continue to fall.
But when it became clear that rates had stabilized and that the Fed's credit-easing policy was on hold, bond yields jumped and prices tumbled. 

As the bond market was whipsawed, trading activity "was among the lowest that I can remember" and many investors avoided bonds altogether, says Barbara Kenworthy, a portfolio manager at Dreyfus Corp. "A lot of people were sincerely confused; they didn't know whether to buy or sell, so they did nothing.
The market dropped so violently that even bottom-fishers were scared off." 

For the year to date, the results are more respectable.
Thanks to the big bondmarket rally in the second quarter, longterm Treasury bonds produced a sparkling 13.5% return for the nine months ended Sept. 30, municipals were up 7.0% and convertibles rose 15.0%. 

The year-to-date figures pale in comparison to this year's stock market performance.
Fixed-income money managers are thankful nonetheless. 

"If you rack up a double-digit return for the year, that's very good," says Thomas Urmstom, a managing director at Freedom Capital Management Corp. 

Such strong gains, of course, may not happen if the economy suddenly picks up strength or if interest rates rise.
But that is unlikely, according to economists and money managers.
In fact, most economists expect slower growth in the fourth quarter and many still expect the Federal Reserve to eventually allow rates to move lower. 

Donald Fine, chief market analyst at Chase Manhattan Bank, expects the interest rate on federal funds to fall to about 8.5% by year-end from its current target level of about 9%.
The federal funds rate, which banks charge each other on overnight loans, is watched by market analysts because the Fed often uses it as a signal for credit-policy changes.
The rate was as high as 9.75% at the beginning of June but has declined twice since then. 

"I think the economy will falter in the fourth quarter, even though we won't get a recession," said Mr. Fine.
As economic growth slows, he expects inflation to continue to abate.
And when that happens, real interest rates (rates adjusted for inflation) will appear higher. "The Fed will have to soften nominal rates just to keep real rates unchanged," said Mr. Fine. 

Money managers are especially optimistic about the prospects for municipal bonds, which were hurt in the third quarter by a flood of new supply and heavy selling on the part of insurance companies that lost some favorable tax treatment.
Individual investors have balked at buying municipal bonds since mid-June, when long-term yields slid below 7% to their lowest levels in two years. 

But some money managers say small investors may be hesitating at the wrong time. "I view this as a good buying opportunity," said Bruce Whiteford, manager of the fixed-income department in the private banking division at Chase Manhattan Bank. "The supply problem is an aberration." He says that tax-exempt bonds will rebound in the coming months as the barrage of new issues slows down. 

High-yield "junk" bonds also were a big disappointment last quarter, but their performance was better than some managers had expected. "I thought they would have had negative returns, considering all the problems," says Ms. Kenworthy.
In fact, high-yield bonds eked out a positive return of 0.01%.
For the year to date, however, they came in dead last with a total return of 5.76%. 

The 779 junk bonds that comprise the Merrill Lynch high-yield bond index have an average maturity of 10 years and a market value of about $97.7 billion.
Included are all public, nonconvertible high-yield debt securities except zero-coupon, floating-rate and defaulted bonds. 

The $200 billion junk bond market has been down before and always managed a strong comeback.
The market survived the Ivan Boesky scandal and the stock market crash of 1987.
Many junk bond defenders say the market is poised for yet another rebound. 

"You get one or two years where high-yield bonds outperform high-grade, and then one or two years" where they flip-flop positions, says Robert Dow, director of fixed-income investments at Lord Abbett & Co., which manages about $10 billion in fixed-income investments. "The fact is, we're not going into a depression.
And all these (highly leveraged) companies are not going into bankruptcy." 

Friday's Market Activity 

Bond prices ended unchanged to modestly higher Friday, primarily on the strength of professional traders rushing to square their portfolios ahead of this week's economic reports. 

Two of the economic reports due out this week -- today's report by the purchasing managers and Friday's employment report -- have occasionally caused wild swings in the market when the results were unexpected.
Both reports provide the first glimpse of how the economy fared in September. 

The benchmark 30-year bond rose nearly a quarter-point, or $2.50 for each $1,000 face amount, while its yield eased to 8.23% from 8.25% Thursday.
The benchmark's price was quoted late Friday at a price of 98 22/32 compared with 98 15/32.
The latest 10-year bond was quoted at a price of 97 31/32 to yield 8.28%, compared with a price of 97 26/32 to yield 8.31% Thursday.
Two-year notes were unchanged at a price of 99 26/32 to yield 8.45%. 

Economists polled by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report expect, on average, that the September index of the National Association of Purchasing Management rose 46.3% from 45.2% in August and 46% in July.
The index, which gives an early look at the nation's manufacturing pace, generally indicates a declining economy if the reading is below 50% and an expanding economy if the reading is above 50%. 

In the corporate bond market, weaker-than-expected demand forced J&L Specialty Products Corp. to scale down its junk bond offering. 

The Pittsburgh-based stainless steel maker tapped the new-issue market offering investors $200 million in senior subordinated notes, down from an originally planned offering of $250 million.
The notes were priced at par to yield 14%, according to underwriter Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
Although Drexel declined to comment on why the size of the issue had been reduced, analysts and traders said the issue was too large for the market to absorb at a time when investors were skittish about junk bonds.
One analyst said projections of the company's operating performance suggested that J&L already had hit its peak.
Prospects of slower U.S. economic growth and the mounting number of junk bond defaults have made some investors nervous about buying the issue. 

In other markets: 

-- Municipal bonds finished 1/8 to 1/4 point firmer after tracking the moves of Treasury issues.
Concerns about excess supply lightened considerably, now that a flood of new issues is out of the way, traders say.
But a number of deals are slated for pricing next week, including Illinois' $200 million college savings general obligation bonds.
A First Chicago Capital Markets Inc. group plans to price the issue. 

-- Mortgage-backed securities were narrowly mixed.
Government National Mortgage Association 9% securities for October delivery finished at 96 21/32, up 1/32, and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. 9% securities ended at 95 30/32, down 2/32.
In derivative markets, the Federal National Mortgage Association made the first REMIC offering backed by principal-only securities in three months.
The $200 million issue, backed by 9 1/2% principal-only securities, was underwritten by Drexel Burnham Lambert. 

Total returns (price and income) for the periods ending Sept. 30: 

