.START 

Protracted negotiations on three municipal bond issues from Arizona totaling $368.4 million have produced a settlement with the Internal Revenue Service, according to persons involved in the matter. 

Under the accord, these people said, the Internal Revenue Service is recovering $6.6 million and is agreeing in return not to tax bondholders.
The three bond issues were sold in early 1985 as tax-exempt securities by authorities in Chandler, South Tucson and El Mirage, Ariz.
The IRS this year said the bonds weren't tax exempt. 

"The deal is closed and the money is supposed to be paid" today, said Robert DuComb, president of the Chandler Industrial Development Authority.
He said the Chandler City Council and the authority approved the settlement and that he signed settlement documents on behalf of the authority.
He said he's "delighted" the so-called closing agreement is finally in hand. 

Dan Stoops, a lawyer for El Mirage, said he has approved the settlement on behalf of El Mirage.
He said he understands the IRS will get its money today.
Representatives of the South Tucson authority, which sold the largest of the three bond issues, $178.4 million, couldn't be reached for comment.
But Messrs.
DuComb and Stoops said all three authorities are included in the package settlement. 

The IRS declined to comment on the matter, citing a prohibition against discussing taxpayer-related questions. 

The IRS notified the authorities in letters dated March 29, 1989, that the bond transactions violated tax rules designed to prevent arbitrage abuses in municipal bonds.
Arbitrage is earned by investing bond proceeds in higher-yielding instruments. 

The bonds were sold for housing projects that weren't built.
The IRS concluded the projects weren't realistic in the first place.
They produced about $20 million in arbitrage profits. 

The three companion bond issues were underwritten by Birr, Wilson & Co., which went out of business last year and isn't part of the settlement. 

According to Messrs.
DuComb and Stoops, the IRS agreed not to take any further action against participants in the settlements.
A tax interpretation in a new congressional report holds that municipal bonds are covered by federal tax penalties for promoting abusive tax shelters. 

