.START 

For days, U.S. newspapers had been predicting a Sony Corp. takeover of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc.
But here in Tokyo, Sony had declined to comment or to make executives available for interviews. 

Then, last Wednesday night, Sony confirmed the $3.4 billion deal.
But the consumer-electronics concern did so in a fashion that could hardly have been more ironic.
Here was Japan's most internationalized company making the largest overseas acquisition by a Japanese company to date -- and announcing it in a news conference for Japanese journalists only. 

For almost an hour, Norio Ohga, Sony's president, described Sony's hopes for getting "synergy" out of Columbia Pictures and CBS Records, a previous Sony U.S. acquisition. 

But only the briefest reference to all this appeared in the one-page news release Sony later faxed to foreign reporters.
Two foreigners heard about the news conference by coincidence (one from a Sony competitor) and managed to crash it despite being told that foreigners weren't welcome.
But on most of the foreign media, Mr. Ohga's words were lost. 

At the time Sony held the news conference and faxed the news release, both the Tokyo Stock Exchange and the New York Stock Exchange were closed.
While the company's disclosure method may not have violated stock-exchange or government rules, it did underscore a problem that could grow more serious as Japanese companies make more and more acquisitions abroad: Japan's "kisha club" system and how it limits foreign access to news. 

Kisha is the Japanese word for reporter, but a kisha club is more like a news cartel than a reporters' club.
It's a device for limiting access to news briefings to representatives of the major Japanese daily newspapers, wire services and the like.
Those who aren't members of the kisha club covering a particular government agency or industry -- most Japanese magazine reporters, for example -- can't attend the briefings. 

The kisha-club system shares points in common with some of the "structural barriers" to imported goods and services about which foreign governments have been complaining to Japan.
It wasn't initially aimed at keeping out foreigners, although it has that effect.
It reflects a strong Japanese preference for order and harmony over unbridled competition.
And the situation is, from a foreign viewpoint, improving. 

Many Japanese kisha clubs, led by the one covering the Foreign Ministry, are now letting foreign reporters sit in on briefings, and some are even allowing foreigners to ask questions at them. 

But other briefings with government officials are still closed.
During last year's Recruit scandal, the Tokyo prosecutor's office not only barred foreign reporters from briefings but even refused to confirm information it had given to its kisha club.
And some of the kisha clubs covering private industries adamantly continue to reject foreigners. 

As a result, when Japanese companies do deals with foreign companies, the Japanese press frequently has access to information from both sides, while the foreign press doesn't.
Take, for example, Dai Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. 's recent agreement to purchase 4.9% of Manufacturers Hanover Corp. and 60% of Manufacturers' CIT Group Inc. for $1.4 billion.
Manufacturers Hanover announced the deal at a New York news conference that was open to all reporters.
A few hours later, Dai Ichi Kangyo held its own news conference in Tokyo -- for Japanese reporters only. 

"Progress has been made in general, but it's two steps forward and one step back, constantly," says Mike Tharp, president of the Foreign Correspondents Club of Japan and Tokyo bureau chief of U.S. News & World Report. 

On the surface, Sony ought to have been the least likely Japanese company to play ball with the exclusionary kisha-club system.
While "internationalization" is just a buzzword for many Japanese companies, Sony built its first plant in California in the early 1970s, long before most other Japanese companies began manufacturing abroad.
Unlike many other Japanese companies, Sony has run its overseas operations with foreign managers, and earlier this year Sony became the first Japanese company to put foreigners on its board of directors. 

Some Japanese companies privately fear that if they push their kisha clubs too hard to open up, the reporters could retaliate with negative articles.
Sony doesn't admit to such fears, but it clearly is sensitive to its treatment by the Japanese press.
Founded after World War II, Sony is a relative newcomer to the Japanese corporate world, and it's still regarded as something of an outsider.
It doesn't have the extensive retail-distribution network in Japan that its more-entrenched consumer-electronics competitors have, nor does it have domestically the premium-brand image that it has overseas. 

Sony spokesman Haruyuki Machida does admit to having been under a certain amount of pressure from the Japanese press before Mr. Ohga's news conference.
The pressure was especially intense, Mr. Machida says, because U.S. newspapers, including this one, had been so full of "leaks and reports {from sources in the U.S.} that were so detailed, while I had to stick to a very strict guideline of 'no comment'" in dealing with the press in Tokyo. 

Mr. Machida says Sony was also squeezed by such considerations as the need to organize the briefing hastily and the lack of a room large enough to handle a big crowd of reporters.
He admits, however, that these sound like "excuses." 

"What I did was not the best choice, and I feel very sorry for that," says Mr. Machida, "but I hope you understand and appreciate that this was a very difficult issue." 

Marcus W. Brauchli contributed to this article. 

Sales of new cars in Europe rose a hearty 5% in August from a year earlier. 

The increase adds to the roller-coaster picture of European auto sales seen since the beginning of the second quarter.
Industry and government statistics from 12 countries that normally account for about 94% of noncommunist Europe's passenger car sales showed new car registrations rose to 1,149,341 in August, up 5% on the year and 22% from July. 

The figures were boosted by record August sales in the U.K. of 500,112.
That total reflects continuing strength in British consumer demand and aggressive incentive programs by many auto makers. 

While the latest month bettered most analysts' expectations, "the general opinion appears to be that the market will now cool off" over the next year and a half before entering another period of steady growth, said one industry observer. 

Edzard Reuter, the chairman of Daimler-Benz AG, said there are many potential buyers for parts of Daimler-Benz and Messerschmitt-Boelkow Blohm G.m.b.
H., or MBB. Daimler-Benz, a West German aerospace concern, plans to take over state-controlled MBB, but the government is making both companies first spin off certain defense technology activities.
Mr. Reuter also said that Airbus Industrie, owned by Aerospatiale SA of France, MBB, British Aerospace PLC and Construcciones Aeronauticas SA of Spain, should become fully privatized. "We will work decisively to see that it happens," he said.
While British Aerospace is already a private company, and MBB will soon be as well, the French and Spanish companies are state-owned. 

The British government postponed the sale of the state-owned electricity industry by up to six months; the $32 billion sale had been set to begin next January.
The delay was attacked by the opposition Labor Party and widely viewed as a setback to the government, whose ambitious plans to sell electricity and water suppliers to private investors have sparked sharp public criticism. 

Eugene Lapointe, secretary-general of the U.N.-sponsored Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species, said nations that manage elephant herds well should be allowed to continue selling ivory for financial reasons.
But he was immediately challenged.
Philippe Roch of the World Wide Fund for Nature said a total ban was the only answer. "If people understand they cannot buy any ivory object, there will be a real decrease in ivory demand," he said. 

China ruled out higher grain imports or a return to Maoist collectives to feed its 1.1 billion people, saying more efficient family farms were the answer.
The People's Daily rejected the view that small-scale farming methods had reached the limit of their potential and that China would have to import grain for a long time.
Latest official estimates put the 1989 grain harvest at above last year's 394 million tons, but it may not reach the target of 410 million. 

South Africa's government expenditure is running far ahead of budget, the Reserve Bank said.
From April to July, the first four months of the current fiscal year, government expenditure rose 30.7% over the same period last year -- well above the budgeted increase of 15% for the fiscal year as a whole, the bank said.
But it said that government revenue had also run ahead of budget in the four months, mainly because of increases in the fuel levy, hikes in the surcharge on imports introduced last year and income from a higher general sales tax. 

Bertelsmann AG said its consolidation phase was about to end -- ahead of schedule. 

Chairman Mark Woessner said the West German publishing giant's past fiscal year, which ended June 30, "was much better than projected." He said Bertelsmann's group net income rose 16% to 420 million West German marks ($223.3 million) in fiscal 1989 from 362 million marks in the previous year. 

Mr. Woessner said such "excellent" results would help complete the period of consolidation by the end of next fiscal year instead of in three years, as had been planned.
This phase started in fiscal 1987 with the acquisition of Doubleday Inc. and RCA/Ariola Records of the U.S. 

Despite the near-completion of the consolidation, Bertelsmann will abstain from making any "spectacular" acquisitions in the near future, its chairman said. 

The Soviet Union dropped an atomic bomb near Soviet army units in 1954 to test the effects of the blast, said the armed forces daily Red Star.
The newspaper said the bomb was dropped in the south Urals, but it didn't report any casualties or address how the soldiers may have been affected. . . . An Israeli farm settlement in the Gaza Strip has found a way to grow bug-free lettuce in hothouses.
The Jerusalem Post said the discovery was a boon for Orthodox Jews who previously soaked lettuce in vinegar and washed it repeatedly to remove all insects, proscribed by dietary laws. 

