.START 

EAST GERMANS ARRIVED in the West after their government let them flee. 

More than 6,000 refugees traveled to West Germany aboard "freedom trains" that were provided by East Berlin in an arrangement under which the government formally expelled the emigres.
The deal was announced Saturday, a week before the Communist state marks its 40th anniversary.
The East German refugees journeyed from Bonn's embassies in Prague and Warsaw, where many had been staying for months, passing through the homeland they rejected before arriving in West Germany. 

The new arrivals followed more than 24,000 East Germans who have fled through Hungary since Sept. 10, when Budapest decided to open its borders. 

The Supreme Court opens its new term today.
The abortion issue will top the agenda, but none of the parties in the cases has asked that the Roe vs.
Wade decision be overturned.
The court also is to decide whether a U.S. judge in Missouri exceeded his authority by ordering a tax increase. 

Lebanese lawmakers argued over the presence of Syrian troops in Lebanon.
The legislative session in Saudi Arabia was aimed at debating political changes to end Lebanon's civil war.
In Beirut, the Christian military leader demanded a timetable for Damascus's pullout before agreeing to peace. 

The Senate approved the last of its fiscal 1990 spending bills-measures funding the Pentagon and State, Justice and Commerce departments.
The action cleared the way for negotiations with the House over the final shape of much of the budget and a gamut of other issues. 

Mexico's President Salinas arrived in Washington for an official visit that the Bush administration expects to reinforce improved U.S.-Mexican ties.
Seven agreements covering such issues as trade, the environment and law enforcement are to be signed during Salinas's five-day stay. 

A Panamanian opposition leader was arrested along with eight supporters, an opposition coalition said.
Ricardo Arias Calderon, head of the Christian Democratic Party, was arrested while campaigning in Veraguas for the ouster of military chief Noriega, the coalition said in a statement. 

China marked the 40th anniversary of its Communist revolution.
As senior leader Deng Xiaoping and other officials participated in the celebrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, police and troops staged what was considered their biggest security operation since the crushing of student-led pro-democracy demonstrations in June. 

Japan's ruling Liberal Democrats won a by-election victory when the LDP candidate captured a seat in the upper house of the Diet, or parliament.
The election was the first since the party lost its upper-house majority in July and was viewed as a test of public sentiment as Japan prepares for nationwide voting in the next seven months. 

Britain's Labor Party gathered in Brighton for an annual weeklong conference.
Public opinion polls showed the opposition party in its strongest position since losing power in 1979 to the Conservatives, and Labor leaders appear poised to push the socialist movement toward the center and scrap its doctrine of unilateral nuclear disarmament. 

Three Protestant clergymen disrupted a sermon by Anglican leader Robert Runcie, accusing the archbishop of Canterbury of betraying his faith by visiting the Vatican.
Runcie, who favors the eventual reunification of the Anglican and Roman Catholic churches, also attended a papal Mass.
He is on an official four-day trip to Rome. 

Federal authorities described the confiscation of 20 tons of cocaine Friday as the largest such seizure on record.
The cache was found in a Los Angeles warehouse.
About $10 million in cash also was seized. 

About 1,000 Marcos loyalists marched through Manila, demanding that the body of the ousted leader, who died Thursday in Honolulu at age 72, be allowed into the Philippines for burial.
President Aquino, who has blocked the return of Marcos's corpse because of possible civil unrest, said she would let the high court rule on her ban. 

Nicaraguans began registering to vote in February's national elections as U.S. congressmen and other observers watched for evidence of fraud.
Nearly 5,000 booths were opened to record an estimated 1.9 million voters.
President Ortega, who is seeking re-election, is to face opposition candidate Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, a publisher. 

Died: August A. Busch Jr., 90, retired chairman of brewer Anheuser-Busch Cos., Friday, in suburban St. Louis. . . . Virgil Thomson, 92, composer and music critic, Saturday, in New York City. 

