.START 

Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari is getting the red-carpet treatment during his coming state visit with President Bush.
He begins with a special visit to Camp David on Sunday and finishes up with an address to a joint session of Congress on Wednesday.
From the beginning, Mexico has received special attention from President Bush.
Mr. Salinas was one of the first foreign leaders received by Mr. Bush last November.
The positive character of that first meeting -- dubbed the "Spirit of Houston" -- continues to inspire a post-nuptial glow.
Similarly, Mexico was the first nation to receive help under the Brady Plan.
What gives here?
Tex-Mex presidential chemistry doesn't explain it all. 

In fact, the Bush-Salinas honeymoon is the tip of the iceberg.
Mr. Salinas is a man with a world view, a modern globalist.
He entertains U.S. presidents and Japanese prime ministers in an effort to insert Mexico advantageously in the world market.
As a consequence, U.S.-Mexican relations are on the verge of a profound reconceptualization -- from distant neighbors to global economic partners.
The partnership implies ever greater North American economic integration, propelled by the emergence of global trading blocs in Europe and the Pacific Basin.
Mexico will reap the benefits of proximity to the largest market in the world, and the U.S. will enhance its own competitiveness in global markets. 

Mr. Salinas has spent his first 10 months in office implementing his strategy.
Despite the noisy opposition of Mexico's anachronistic left, Mexico has instituted trade liberalization, new foreign-investment regulations, the deregulation of transportation, the announced sale of state enterprises (e.g., Mexicana Airline, Cananea Copper, Diesel National and Telefonos de Mexico), and a partial opening of Mexico's sacrosanct petroleum industry to private and foreign investment.
Mexico's domestic debt remains oppressive, and further privatizations in the steel, fertilizer and banking sectors would enhance investor confidence.
Nonetheless, Mr. Salinas is to be applauded as he coaxes a skittish private sector to jump through his window of opportunity. 

For veteran Mexico-watchers accustomed to conflict-ridden summits, the clear sailing is refreshing.
Instead of snarling over Central America and drugs, participants are placing economic policy considerations at the top of the summit's agenda.
In particular, the economic agenda of the summit will be paramount.
In particular, the economic discussions will be shaped by the fact that banks seem inclined to select the principal and interest reduction options of the Brady Plan, reducing the likelihood of large sums of fresh money flowing to Mexico.
This, in turn, pushes trade and investment to center stage. 

Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher can be expected to make final the details of his personal involvement in an investment-promotion program for Mexico, and U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills will push trade negotiations in the areas of autos, electronics, steel, textiles and intellectual property.
After his Washington meetings, Mr. Salinas will travel to promote his vision of the new Mexico before the New York business establishment, hoping to compensate with direct investment the anticipated shortage in fresh credit. 

The jarring note in this symphony is the sobering thought that Mexico's historic economic experiment rests on a fragile political base.
It is easy to forget that only 10 months ago, President Salinas took office amid massive demonstrations and cries of election fraud.
A worried U.S. contemplated possible political instability, anti-Yankee sentiment and resurgent populism as opposition leftists challenged the 60-year rule of the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI).
Mr. Salinas still faces a choir of leftist intellectuals who are wedded to revolutionary nostalgia, and Mexico's poor still reel from six years of no net economic growth.
These problems explain the hurried pace of this U.S.-Mexican honeymoon. 

Building stable democratic institutions after 60 years of authoritarian rule is reminiscent of Rumpelstiltskin's task of trying to spin a roomful of straw into golden threads.
Reptilian PRI hacks and wild-eyed populists compete with young PRI reformers and earnest conservative opposition-party democrats.
The young president has removed corrupt labor leaders, business scions, drug lords and government officials.
He also has accepted a historic first gubernatorial victory by an opposition party, the conservative party of National Action (PAN) in the state of Baja California.
However, Mr. Salinas has little time to spin his straw into gold. 

The Mexican political calendar places mid-term elections in 1991.
Thus, the summiteers are keeping one eye on the clock, eager to build on encouraging economic signs throughout 1990.
So far, the news has been good, as Mexican economic growth for the second semester of 1989 may surpass the 2.4% annualized rate achieved in the first half of the year.
However, if Mr. Salinas is unable to deliver real, sustained growth, Mexico could commit hara-kiri at the polls.
The historic experiment in economic partnership could end abruptly.
Trust a Texan president to realize that Mexico is critical to the stability of the U.S. southern frontier.
So, don't expect splashy agreements to emerge from this summit -- expect substance.
And don't underestimate the stakes involved in the first full-dress Bush-Salinas meeting. 

Ms. Baer, a fellow at the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies, also directs the center's Mexico Project. 

