.START 

Senate approval of the last of its fiscal 1990 spending bills clears the way for negotiations with the House over the final shape of much of the budget and a gamut of issues running from an airline smoking ban to the conduct of the coming census. 

Back-to-back measures funding the Pentagon and State, Justice and Commerce departments capped a rush of appropriations legislation ending Friday, and in private meetings, the Bush administration signaled new openness toward cuts from the Air Force's Advanced Tactical Fighter program to ease the military's budget problems. 

Separately, a House-Senate conference reached an accord on an estimated $11.8 billion natural resources bill.
But with the new fiscal year already under way, only three domestic departments -- Interior, Treasury and Energy -- have clear agreement on what appropriations levels to expect from Congress. 

The entire process remains strained by the pressure to finance increased spending for anti-drug programs, and to an extraordinary degree, lawmakers are staying within budget ceilings by shifting costs into the next fiscal year, 1991.
The estimated $288.1 billion Senate Pentagon bill adds nearly $8.5 billion beyond authorized limits for weapons purchases on the assumption that less than 10% of the cost will be borne in fiscal 1990, which began yesterday.
A similar strategy was employed to allow child care and environmental funding approved last week.
And after finding no money for payments this year, the Senate voted 74-22 to make reparations for Japanese-Americans held in internment camps in World War II an automatic entitlement in 1991. 

The entitlement provision is attached to an estimated $17.4 billion State, Justice and Commerce bill, which also carries a rider seeking to block the counting of illegal aliens in the 1990 census.
A similar provision was killed on procedural grounds after a seesaw battle in the House in August.
But pressure in the Senate now is certain to revive the issue, which pits lawmakers from older districts with declining populations against those from the burgeoning Southwest, where immigrants have added to the potential for seats in Congress. 

Separately, tobacco interests acknowledge they face a difficult fight against a Senate-backed provision permanently banning smoking on domestic airline flights.
The issue now goes to conference with the House as part of talks on a transportation bill totaling over $26 billion.
But the industry and its allies appear divided over how much political capital to invest at a time when many are more worried about potential cigarette-tax increases in coming years. 

The nearly $11.85 billion natural resources bill that emerged from negotiations Friday provides an estimated $5.3 billion for the Interior Department and assumes that the Energy Department will fill the Strategic Petroleum Reserve at a rate of 50,000 barrels of oil a day, or twice what the administration requested.
An estimated $450 million is allocated in new appropriations for clean coal technology in fiscal 1990, and total construction funds for the National Park and Fish and Wildlife services are increased by a third above the last fiscal year. 

More than ever, the underlying measure has been a battleground for not only environmental issues affecting logging and oil industries but for an array of legal questions concerning lobbyists and even the arts.
Far-reaching provisions governing the harvesting of old stands of timber in the Pacific Northwest were accepted in an effort to resolve lawsuits over the fate of the spotted owl, and the measure incorporates a new statutory standard prohibiting the national endowments for the arts and humanities from funding work or exhibits that may be considered obscene. 

The language is a partial concession to pressure from conservatives growing out of two cases this year when grants by the National Endowment for the Arts funded work many lawmakers viewed as sexually explicit and sacrilegious.
Depictions of "homoeroticism" or an "individual engaged in sex acts" are explicity listed as examples of what may be considered obscene.
But final judgment would be left to the endowments, and the compromise incorporates phrases from a 1973 Supreme Court decision imposing an additional condition that a work also be found to have no "serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value." 

Adoption of the compromise came after a prolonged debate in the Senate spilling over into Friday morning.
By almost 2-1 margins, the chamber twice rebuffed demands by Sen. Jesse Helms (R., N.C.) for stronger language, and many conservative Western senators will be anxious to end the fight because of their interest in funds attached to the underlying natural resources bill. 

Reflecting environmental pressures by constituents, the bill allows a 20% increase in federal funding for land acquisition for the Park and Fish and Wildlife services, and fiscal conservatives from Utah and Oklahoma came to the table to compete for construction funds.
Few match the power of the influential West Virginia, Louisiana and Pennsylvania delegations, which cornered more than a fifth of the nearly $255 million allotted for construction and planning funds for the Park and Fish and Wildlife services. 

Trading on one measure can be linked to another as seen in the near-completed negotiations over a Treasury and Postal Service bill totaling over $18 billion.
Rep. Silvio Conte, the ranking Republican on the House Appropriations Committee, has made a late bid for $2 million to be added as a grant to Smith College in his western Massachusetts district.
Rep. Edward Roybal, chairman of the House conferees, has so far resisted.
But the California Democrat broke into a smile when asked if he was seeking to pressure Mr. Conte to help him on a separate bill this week affecting federal aid to states adjusting to an influx of new immigrants. "I'm not going to put any pressure on him," said Mr. Roybal. "I'm going to ask him to help." 

