.START 

The budget-reconciliation bill pending before the House of Representatives contains a provision that would allow another "agency" borrower, the U.S. Postal Service, to enter the capital markets. 

The measure, which would remove the Postal Service from the federal budget, would bar the agency from borrowing from the Federal Financing Bank and would open the door for it to go to the private capital markets as well as to invest in government securities and deposit its funds in private institutions. 

The measure gradually would boost the Postal Service's debt limit to $30 billion from the current $10 billion by fiscal 1996.
It would permit the agency to repay existing Federal Financing Bank loans without penalty starting six months after enactment of the bill.
It also would exempt Postal Service bonds from Securities and Exchange Commission registration. 

The Postal Service has sold one bond issue to the public, in 1972, according to the report on the House reconciliation bill.
Since then, it has borrowed from the Federal Financing Bank, an entity in the Treasury created in the 1970s in part to purchase "agency debt" to keep agency borrowers from tripping over each other in the private capital markets and to borrow at the lowest costs possible. 

The federal bank's operations are financed by direct Treasury borrowing, which costs less than agency borrowings. 

In recent years, Congress has created a number of new agency borrowers including the new off-budget entity known as Refcorp, which is authorized to borrow $30 billion to fund the thrift-industry rescue. 

The Postal Service is authorized to borrow as much as $10 billion to finance capital projects and to defray operating expenses.
The reconciliation bill would raise the Postal Service's debt limit to $15 billion for fiscal 1990 and 1991, $20 billion for fiscal 1992 and 1993, $25 billion for fiscal 1994 and 1995 and $30 billion for fiscal 1996 and thereafter. 

Explaining why the measure would exempt Postal Service securities from SEC registration, the report on the bill said the "registration requirements and procedures of the SEC would be wasteful and duplicative in the case of entities, such as the Postal Service, which are otherwise subject to financial controls and disclosure requirements under federal law." 

The Postal Service would have to consult with the Treasury on the timing and terms of its bond sales. 

The Congressional Budget Office estimated the Postal Service's cost of borrowing from the public would be higher than the Treasury's borrowing cost. 

