.START 

A National Aeronautics and Space Administration research scientist said Congress must provide more money for the space program or the agency will have to tell the public the U.S. has chosen to be second-rate in space. 

Richard Petersen, director of the Langley Research Center, said NASA's early dreams were shattered when the agency's funding fell from 4% of the federal budget in the 1960s to less than 1% in the 1980s. 

"Tragically, throughout the 1970s the American public was led to believe that they had the best space program in the world," Mr. Petersen said. "It is crucial in the future that we either provide the funds to compete as a world-class space power, or that we tell Americans the whole truth -- that this country has chosen not to be a world leader in space." 

Mr. Petersen spoke at an awards ceremony for several Purdue University graduates who became astronauts. 

Mr. Petersen, also a Purdue graduate, said NASA scientists in the 1960s envisioned a program that would put men on the moon in the '60s, create a space-shuttle system in the '70s, build a space station in the '80s and put men on Mars in the '90s. 

"But somewhere after Apollo, we lost our way," he said. "Early in the '70s, we shut down the Apollo program, slashed NASA funding by two-thirds and proceeded slowly and timidly to develop the space shuttle." Progress on the space station has been even slower, with an operating space base not expected until the late 1990s. 

"There are many reasons for our slow progress in exploiting space, but fundamentally I believe we simply weren't given the resources to run a first-class program," Mr. Petersen said. 

Now, President Bush has committed the U.S. to launching a space station in the next decade and beginning a new program, Mission to Planet Earth, that will place several large platforms in orbit with instruments to study the land, the seas and the atmosphere. 

Between 2000 and 2010, NASA will develop a manned base on the moon, Mr. Petersen said, and a manned trip to Mars will follow in the decade from 2010 to 2020. 

"To have a world-class space program, we will need to make a long-term investment and double the funding for NASA in the near future, which will be a major political battle," he said. 

