.START 

After the Catholic Church, which institution in the United States has the largest membership?
It's the American Association of Retired Persons, with 30 million members over age 50.
One out of five voters is a member. 

That's why AARP is one of the most feared lobbies in Washington.
Phil Longman, a former congressional aide who was fired from his job only days after criticizing AARP on television, told the New York Times, "When AARP's lobbyist shows up, it's like Darth Vader at the door -- he tells people how to vote." 

AARP's membership is as politically diverse as the nation, but it consistently endorses tax increases and loopy federal programs that many of its members would never think of supporting.
Example number one is the now-infamous catastrophic-healthcare surtax. 

In 1987, its lobbying clout allowed AARP to push through the catastrophic program which imposed a surtax of up to $800 a person largely to pay for coverage more than 85% of seniors already had.
AARP claims its surveys showed senior support for the catastrophic bill, but syndicated columnist Leonard J. Hansen says AARP chapters report they were barely consulted.
The surtax soon generated such an outcry among those who would pay it that the House will begin debate tomorrow on its complete repeal. 

But the Democratic leadership and AARP staffers are trying desperately to salvage something from the program.
Their last-ditch alternative would basically leave intact only the drug benefit, which would pay for half the cost of Medicare-approved drugs after an $800 deductible.
AARP lobbied hard to add that to the original bill and says drug reimbursement "is clearly the most important benefit" of the program, even though two nationwide polls have shown it fell low in the priorities of most seniors. 

Why does AARP persist in lobbying so hard for the prescription-drug benefit?
Perhaps because it is at least as interested in commercial ventures as it is in "representing" its membership.
Founded in 1958 as a group that would "promote independence, dignity and purpose" among the elderly, AARP has become a moneymaking machine that peddles everything from vacations to mutual funds and auto clubs.
A nonprofit entity, in 1987 it employed a legislative staff of 120 and produced a surplus of $32 million without paying taxes. 

One of its more lucrative ventures is as a middleman for the nation's second-largest mail-order drug-supply service.
AARP collects a handsome royalty from every one of the 7.5 million prescriptions it fills, and it stands to gain even more from government reimbursement for drugs. 

Under current law, the government will pay a $4.50 fee for every prescription filled by a pharmacy or mail-order supplier.
Joseph Califano, Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare under Jimmy Carter, points out that a typical mail-order supplier charges corporate clients only 50 cents to fill a prescription and says the $4.50 dispensing fee "represents a substantial windfall" for AARP.
The law allows a lower reimbursement for mail-order suppliers, but doesn't require it. 

Die-hard support for the drug benefit isn't the only AARP policy stand that flies in the face of reason.
Last week, it weighed into the debate over capital gains with a letter opposing the rate cut and supporting the Democratic leadership's alternative proposal that would expand Individual Retirement Accounts and allow them to be used for college and home-buying expenses.
Now, the leadership is working to save AARP's prescription-drug benefit. 

Of course, the IRA proposal would be of little use to people who are already retired.
However, the Treasury Department reports that 65% of all taxpayers over age 65 realized a capital gain once in the past five years.
AARP says that many of its members under 65 use IRAs, but just as many no doubt realize some capital gains. 

AARP's opposition to a capital-gains tax cut comes as no surprise to Jack Carlson, an economist who was hired in 1987 as AARP's executive director.
Mr. Carlson began exploring some market-oriented solutions for the problems of the elderly, but ran into a buzz saw of opposition.
He was fired after only four months.
He says many of AARP's relatively young staffers have worked in the federal government and "tend to think of a federal solution to any problem.
But I think many members would prefer to see a private or a state solution." 

AARP has clearly strayed from the goals of its founder, retired schoolteacher Ethel Percy Andrus.
In 1965, she wrote, "AARP holds no meetings to bewail the hardships of old age, nor to formulate pressure programs nor stress potential political strength of older folk, nor to urge governmental subsidy." 

AARP is now the embodiment of governmental subsidy. 

