.START 

Some public officials thrive on being in the middle of controversy.
Judge Russell G. Clark isn't one of them. 

Ever since the 64-year-old federal judge nearly doubled Kansas City's property tax to pay for school desegregation, his name has become a household word here, often accompanied by an expletive. 

The judge's 1987 order made him the focus of local protests called "tea parties," which complained of "taxation without representation." It also made him the target of Republican campaign literature in last year's presidential election.
And it has prompted thousands of residents to pay their taxes under legal protest, forcing county officials to place millions of dollars in taxes in escrow until the dispute can be resolved. 

Some residents even tore up their voter registration cards and mailed them to Judge Clark. "With the decision of one man to go ahead and impose this tax, why vote?" says Harry Coulas, who operates a local insurance agency. 

Now, Judge Clark's order is one of the major issues of the new U.S. Supreme Court term that begins today, testing the power of federal judges to remedy violations of the Constitution. 

The nine justices have agreed to decide whether the district judge exceeded his constitutional authority by ordering the tax increase.
The case will be argued later this month.
The high court is also considering a related appeal in which a federal judge fined members of the Yonkers, N.Y., city council for failing to approve a court-ordered housing desegregation plan. 

The Kansas City and Yonkers cases raise questions about one of the Constitution's fundamental principles, the separation of powers among the branches of government.
The court may use these cases, says Prof.
Susan Bloch of Georgetown University Law Center, "to make strong statements about what the role of the federal judiciary is." 

It is an issue as old as the nation itself.
Even as the Constitution was being ratified, Alexander Hamilton wrote in the Federalist papers that the judiciary "has no influence over either the sword or the purse," and James Madison warned against judges' exercising legislative authority.
In more recent years, conservative legal scholars, former Judge Robert Bork among them, have criticized the federal courts for usurping the role of the elected legislative and executive branches, while more liberal authorities have defended the judicial actions. 

If the high court uses the two cases to rein in the federal courts, U.S. judges handling other desegregation cases would also be left with less discretion.
Similar repercussions would probably be felt by judges overseeing state prison systems, county jails and other programs. 

Judge Clark is an unlikely protagonist for this urban school-desegregation drama.
Reared in rural southern Missouri, near the Arkansas border, he told one school official that he grew up in a county with only one black resident.
A part-time cattle rancher, he is a low-key, private person who practiced law in Springfield, Mo., where he now holds court. 

The Kansas City school case has been with Judge Clark from almost his first moment on the bench after he was appointed by President Carter in 1977.
The suit was filed that same year by the school board and a group of parents and children against the state.
Judge Clark later made the school board a defendant, rather than a plaintiff. 

For years, Judge Clark supervised legal maneuvers in the complicated case.
Finally, it went to trial, one that lasted 92 days.
When it was over, he found in 1984 that the state and school district had intentionally run separate school systems for whites and blacks until the Supreme Court's 1954 desegregation ruling, and that they had failed to dismantle this dual system in the decades that followed. (Three-fourths of the 36,000 school children in the district are black.
The racial makeup of the district's total population is difficult to compute because the district cuts across numerous census tracts; however, local leaders estimate it is roughly half white and half black.) 

Judge Clark's notoriety didn't begin until Sept. 15, 1987.
That day, he threw up his hands in frustration at the school board's inability to pay for its share of the massive desegregation plan he had approved, and at the repeated refusal of the school district's voters to raise taxes to finance the plan. 

"The court . . . is not insensitive to the fact that those patrons . . . who voted in previous elections have refused to approve a tax levy increase and a bond issue," he wrote. "However, a majority has no right to deny others the constitutional guarantees to which they are entitled." 

His remedy was sweeping.
Property taxes in the Kansas City School District, which includes a large part of the city and parts of neighboring Independence and Sugar Creek, were ordered raised to $4 per $100 of assessed value, from $2.05. (The property tax is levied on personal property, such as cars and boats, as well as on residential and commercial real estate.) Judge Clark also imposed a surcharge on the state's income tax, raising the levy for those who live or work in the school district to 7.5% from 6%. 

Last year, the surcharge was invalidated by a federal appeals court in St. Louis, but the increased property tax was kept on the books.
It is soon to be collected for the third year. 

The tax order catapulted Judge Clark to local media stardom, making his name and face familiar in virtually every household in the school district. 

In an Independence City Council meeting, dozens of people marched to the front of the room and threw tea bags into a box to symbolize their anger.
The scene was repeated a few days later at a rally outside the county courthouse: In front of a statue of Harry Truman, banners and speakers decried "taxation without representation." Local residents also circulated petitions -- eventually some 25,000 signatures -- that were sent to Gov. John Ashcroft and to President Reagan. 

Judge Clark was dragged into the political arena in a way that few, if any, federal judges have been before.
The Missouri Republican State Committee pummeled him in campaign literature designed to attack the Democratic presidential nominee, Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis. "With a liberal federal judge named Russell Clark, Missouri can't afford a liberal president named Michael Dukakis," the brochure proclaimed, displaying their pictures side-by-side. 

There is an irony in this attack, says Scott Wright, chief judge of the U.S. District Court in western Missouri and a colleague of Judge Clark's. "Russell Clark is no wild-eyed liberal," he says. "In fact, he's a pretty conservative person." 

Judge Clark declined to be interviewed for this article.
In one of just two interviews he gave after the 1987 tax order, he told the Kansas City Times that the criticism "bothers me, but you just try to be sure you're correct." Judge Wright says the protests have had an effect on his colleague. "I think it's taken its toll on him emotionally," he says. 

Judge Clark isn't without his defenders.
Angela Bennett, a government lawyer, is one.
Her seven-year-old son is in second grade at a school that specializes in science and math and that was established under the desegregation plan. "He is getting a better education than many of my friends' kids who are in private schools," she says.
Ms. Bennett blames community attitudes for the decline of the schools, and adds, "Now the community has to be responsible for what it has done." Many business leaders also support Judge's Clarks efforts, according to David Stanley, who heads a specialty lumber chain in the area and is chairman of the local Civic Council. "I think the Civic Council and its members have understood for a long time that public support for public education in Kansas City has been inadequate," he says. 

By far the most persistent form of complaint has been the tax protest.
Mike Pendergast, director of collections for Jackson County, says the owners of 15,000 parcels of property, out of 220,000 parcels in the district, paid the tax increase under protest in the 1987 tax year; there were 12,000 such protests last year. 

By paying under protest, landowners force the county to place the disputed taxes in a separate escrow account, which is withheld from the school-district budget until a court finally decides the legality of the tax increase.
For the two tax years, there is $23.5 million in the escrow fund, Mr. Pendergast says. 

The Landmark Legal Foundation, a conservative public-interest law firm based in Kansas City, has sued on behalf of most of the tax protesters to recover the taxes, though the Supreme Court would first have to declare the increased levy unconstitutional.
Although many of the protesters are small businesses or major companies, some are retired people living on fixed incomes.
One 84-year-old woman, living on $440 a month, wrote the foundation, "If you can help lower my taxes, I can eat better and buy me a pair of shoes." 

A series of orders by Judge Clark between 1985 and 1987 led up to the showdown in the Supreme Court.
Adopting much of the school district's own desegregation proposal over the state's objections, Judge Clark approved massive capital improvements for the badly decaying school system and development of numerous state-of-the-art, or "magnet," schools.
The goal was to improve the overall quality of education and to desegregate by attracting whites to join blacks at the magnet schools. 

But the price tag is staggering.
Estimates in 1985 of the total cost exceeded $500 million, and the projections now have surpassed $700 million.
Judge Clark ruled that the state and the school district should share the cost, but he also made it clear that the state would have to make up the difference if the school district was unable to pay its share. 

Missouri law provided a major barrier for the district.
The school system is financed by the local property tax, but state law says the local taxes can't be raised without the approval of the voters.
In fact, until recently, a two-thirds vote was required. 

Voters in the Kansas City School District hadn't approved a tax increase or bond issue since 1969, but a proposed increase to fund desegregation was put on the ballot four different times in 1986 and 1987.
Each time the increase fell short of the necessary majority. 

Sue Fulson, president of the school board, shares Judge Clark's frustration. "The basic concern here is not over the education of kids but over taxes, and the unwillingness to pay taxes for public services if they don't serve the middle class directly," she says. 

In his 1987 order, Judge Clark concluded, "The court . . . is not so callous as to accept the proposition that it is helpless to enforce a remedy to correct past violations." 

But that is the heart of the issue in the Supreme Court. "It is our belief that a federal judge doesn't have the authority" for this sort of action, says Michael Fields, an assistant attorney general in Missouri. "We did fight a Revolutionary War over the issue of taxation without representation." He argues that the judge should have scaled back the desegregation plan to an affordable level.
Ironically, if the state succeeds in having the property tax declared unconstitutional, the shortfall in funds for the desegregation plan will have to be paid by the state. 

The Reagan administration joined the state in opposing the tax in the St. Louis federal appeals court last year.
Many conservatives see the case as a crucial case. "This is an egregious example of a judge absolutely consumed with the ability of the bench to enforce its orders at whatever cost to society," says Gary McDowell of the conservative National Legal Center for the Public Interest.
The Bush administration has so far stayed out of the Supreme Court case. 

Civil-rights groups counter that it is essential that judges be able to enforce their orders.
John Powell, legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union, says that should the Supreme Court overturn Judge Clark's order, it "would be devastating.
It would essentially cripple the judiciary from executing its role protecting constitutional rights." 

All this close scrutiny hasn't deterred Judge Clark.
He warned school officials recently that if implementation of the plan doesn't improve, he may have to appoint a special administrator to run the school system. 

