.START 

American Airlines' parent AMR Corp., its stock buffeted by rumors following takeover bids for two other major airlines, tried to chill the action by seeking two official investigations into reports about the rumors. 

Dallas-based AMR said Friday it has asked the Securities and Exchange Commission and the New York Stock Exchange "to investigate recent Dow Jones press reports regarding the company." AMR officials wouldn't elaborate on the one-sentence announcement. 

Dow Jones & Co., which publishes this newspaper, operates the Dow Jones News Service and Professional Investor Report.
PIR, a news wire for stock traders, specializes in computer-activated alerts on unusual stock trading activity and publishes news reports on causes of that activity.
A spokesman for Dow Jones declined to comment. 

Both news services have published several items about AMR in the past few weeks, including reports last week that New York real-estate developer Donald Trump, who bought the Eastern shuttle earlier this year and renamed it the Trump shuttle, has been buying AMR stock. 

Last week's reports also cited rumors that Goldman, Sachs & Co., one of AMR's investment bankers, is restricted on AMR stock, meaning that Goldman traders can't solicit orders for AMR stock.
That could be an indication that some AMR transaction is in the offing.
Goldman wouldn't comment.
The reports also cited rumors of possible interest by the Bass family of Texas.
The Basses have declined to comment. 

Mr. Trump was quoted in a report in USA Today earlier last month as saying he liked AMR stock, and several traders said he was buying the stock openly last week, "flashing his name around," as one put it.
Some market observers believe Mr. Trump has sought government permission to buy more than $15 million worth of AMR shares.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Trump wouldn't comment. 

Mr. Trump has often bought stock in companies and then sold after his buying was disclosed and the stocks rose in price on takeover speculation, so his interest wouldn't necessarily presage a bid by him.
However, he bought UAL Corp. stock before a stockholder revolt forced a restructuring of that airline company in 1987. 

There has also been speculation that Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis, whose bids for Northwest Airlines parent NWA Inc. and United Airlines parent UAL have already triggered buy-out deals this year for those two airlines, might pursue AMR next.
A spokesman for Mr. Davis wouldn't comment. 

But it could be premature for Mr. Davis to pursue AMR because he remains the backup bidder for UAL if a $6.79 billion offer by a fragile coalition of employees, management and British Airways PLC should falter.
The U.S. Department of Transportation may challenge the size of British Air's $750 million stake in that bid. 

The call for investigations is in keeping with the aggressive reputation of AMR Chairman Robert Crandall, who has vowed to avoid the kind of debt levels involved in the Northwest and United takeovers. 

Mr. Crandall is believed eager to retain the financial freedom of a low debt level to be able to slash fares to win market share from rivals whose debts might limit their ability to respond.
By seeking to douse market rumors during the current airline takeover frenzy, he is evidently hoping to cut the chance that AMR is put in play for a takeover. 

AMR stock has gyrated wildly this year amid the Northwest and United contests.
In the past two months alone, it has risen from below $70 a share to an intraday high of $96.
In the past month, it has slumped back to the mid-70s before rebounding during the latest round of rumors.
AMR shares rose $2.75 to $86.50 Friday after a $4.75 gain Thurday in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
With volume of over 2.6 million shares, AMR was the second most active issue on the Big Board. 

In Washington, the SEC declined to comment on the AMR request.
One SEC staff member said he thought the agency would conduct a routine review. "I suppose we'll probably look at it, but I don't know what we'll do with it.
They're rumors, and I don't know what we could do about them." 

Although the agency is concerned about false rumors and their impact on the stocks of large companies, he said trying to track down the genesis of a rumor is usually a fruitless and time-consuming exercise. 

A New York Stock Exchange spokesman said the Big Board had already begun an analysis of trading in AMR before the request.
However, he wouldn't say whether that analysis will be expanded into a fuller investigation. 

