.START 

Armand Hammer loves biographies. 

The industrialist, art collector and self-appointed diplomat has written or commissioned no fewer than four books about himself, with a fifth in the works. 

But Dr. Hammer's affection for literary introspection screeches to a halt when it comes to the work of a bespectacled journalism instructor who has spent nearly five years assembling the first unauthorized Hammer biography. 

So perturbed is Occidental Petroleum Corp. 's venerable chairman by "Armand Hammer: The Untold Story" that he's trying to scuttle the book's planned publication this month by Time Warner Inc. 's Little, Brown & Co. subsidiary.
Lawyers for the 91-year-old executive complain it's "riddled" with scandalous falsehoods distressing to the doctor and his family.
The lawyers have threatened to file suit in the U.S. and have already taken the first steps toward filing a suit in Britain. 

Dr. Hammer declined through a spokesman to discuss his objections to the book, but the prospect of a rumble over the biography has hands rubbing in the book world, where controversy equals sales.
Author Connie Bruck's timely inside look last year at junk-bond king Michael Milken and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. jumped to the best-seller list after the brokerage house fought bitterly with the author.
Salmon Rushdie's nearly impenetrable "Satanic Verses" took off only after the Ayatollah Khomeni's death threats. 

Speaking generally, "as a publisher, we're delighted when someone attacks our books," says Peter Osnos, associate publisher at Random House Inc., the division of Advanced Publications Inc. whose Ebury Press Ltd. subsidiary holds the British rights to the unauthorized biography of Dr. Hammer."It's the modern-day equivalent of being banned in Boston." 

Steve Weinberg, the book's author, maintains that Dr. Hammer's dilemma isn't truth but ego. "He has spent so much time building his image and wanting to be remembered in a certain way that now he's troubled by cracks appearing because of the book," he says, maintaining that every detail in his densely footnoted work has been checked for accuracy. 

While in many ways an admiring portrait, Mr. Weinberg's book looks at much that Dr. Hammer covered up or glossed over in his most recent, best-selling autobiography, published in 1987.
It explores a questionable bankruptcy filing by Dr. Hammer's father, which a court-appointed official suggested was fraudulent.
It finds that the doctor failed to mention plans to visit post-revolutionary Russia when applying for a passport in the early 1920s and recounts scrutiny by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and State Department of the doctor's early travels to that nation. 

Moreover, Mr. Weinberg, who teaches investigative journalism at the University of Missouri, has unearthed documents indicating that although Dr. Hammer's insights on East-West relations are generally listened to, he has scarcely been the valued confidant of State Department officials and presidents as he has portrayed.
Once he was even publicly ridiculed by Franklin Roosevelt, according to the book. 

Letters by Dr. Hammer's lawyers, sent to Little Brown this summer and obtained by The Wall Street Journal, complain that the biography "is beyond redemption by correction," containing dozens of passages implying that Dr. Hammer "is and has been throughout his life unscrupulous and willing to attain personal goals and ambitions through criminal act, breaches of fiduciary duty or other unconscionable behavior." 

Dr. Hammer's British lawyer, in a letter to Ebury Press, goes further, charging that "it is difficult to envisage a more despicable attack upon a gentleman who, throughout his long life, has done so much for his country and so much in the interests of health care and world peace." 

Counters Mr. Weinberg, "the objections in the letters are both ludicrous and defamatory." 

Such are the battles of unauthorized biography these days, in a market hungry for inside dope on the rich and famous.
Authors and their subjects have squabbled for years; Oscar Wilde's advice to the famous was to outlive their biographers.
Most lawsuits don't inhibit properly researched biographies in this country, although libel laws in England and elsewhere make opposition easier overseas. 

According to the 41-year-old Mr. Weinberg, his decision to play Boswell to Dr. Hammer's reluctant Johnson came about almost by accident in 1984, when a friend considered and then discarded the idea of a biography of Dr. Hammer. 

Though Mr. Weinberg wasn't aware of it at the time, Dr. Hammer soon knew all about his project.
According to Dr. Hammer's lawyers, he had gotten the details from a copy of the publishing proposal, one that Mr. Weinberg angrily says Dr. Hammer wasn't entitled to have. 

Little Brown beat out five competitors for the publishing rights, agreeing to pay a $160,000 advance for the book.
And, starting in 1986, Mr. Weinberg wrote seven letters to Dr. Hammer asking for interviews. 

Dr. Hammer never responded.
Senior executives at Occidental avoided Mr. Weinberg's calls.
Even the company's top spokesman, Frank Ashley, refused to return any of the 20 or so calls Mr. Weinberg made. 

Though locked out of the company, Mr. Weinberg began contacting more than 1,000 people who had once worked for Dr. Hammer or otherwise knew him.
About 700 agreed to talk. 

Dr. Hammer's apparent displeasure with the unauthorized biography hung like a pall over the project.
The Soviet government informed Mr. Weinberg, through its U.S.A. and Canada Institute of the Academy of Sciences, that is wasn't interested in aiding his research.
Advice columnist Abigail Van Buren, a longtime friend of Dr. Hammer, agreed at first to meet with Mr. Weinberg but changed her mind after talking to one of Dr. Hammer's lawyers. 

But others did talk, including Ms. Van Buren's twin sister, Ann Landers, and publisher Malcolm Forbes.
Both spoke of Dr. Hammer in laudatory terms. 

Countering the official silence from Dr. Hammer, Mr. Weinberg dug into dozens of cases of personal and commercial litigation, government investigations, divorces, property transactions and correspondence that have marked Dr. Hammer's long and active life.
To add breadth to the search, he hired researchers from Los Angeles to Tel Aviv and studied documents originally written in a dozen languages, including Chinese and Estonian. 

The letters by Dr. Hammer's lawyers arrived soon after the book was set in type, apparently based on a reading of a review copy.
Copies of the letters were sent not only to Little Brown but also to J. Richard Munro, Nicholas J. Nicholas and Steven Ross, the top executives of Time Warner. 

So far, the saber-rattling hasn't halted publication in the U.S.; Little Brown is distributing 50,000 copies to bookstores.
In England, Ebury Press, facing preliminary steps of litigation, had agreed to wait at least until the end of last month before proceeding. 

