.START 

Men Apt to Suffer More 

From a Spouse's Death 

MEN ARE MORE vulnerable to depression after a spouse's death than women are, a new study demonstrates. 

Many psychologists and sociologists have held that, contrary to popular belief, husbands generally receive more emotional and other non-financial benefit from marriage than the wives. 

Men, it's argued, depend on the wives to maintain relationships with adult children, relatives and friends and to take the lead in involving the couple in community activities.
Frequently, too, men lack close confiding relationships with anyone other than their wives, whereas wives often have several very close friends to confide in. 

A study by sociologist Debra Umberson of the University of Texas and two University of Michigan colleagues turn up widowhood patterns that seem to confirm this view of marriage.
They drew on a 1986 national survey that included extensive interviews with several thousand people, a little over one-fifth widowed. 

Adjusting for age and other factors, they found widowhood contributing "significantly" to depression for both men and women, but with considerably larger impact on the men.
In case after case, when the wife died, the husband not only lost his one intimate confidante but also found himself without much support from other people.
Widowers also had difficulty taking on unaccustomed household chores. 

To be sure, widows were more likely to suffer severe financial stress, but they usually had many close friends and other social contacts to provide emotional support.
And adult children, the investigators noted, were more likely to rally around the mother than around the father. 

Alcohol Consumption 

Rises Among Veterans 

PEOPLE WHO served in the military drink more heavily than non-veterans, according to an analysis from the University of Illinois. 

A four-person team from the university's School of Public Health used large nationwide health surveys conducted in 1977, 1983 and 1985 to compare alcohol consumption among several thousand white non-veterans and several thousand comparable white veterans, both combat and noncombat.
In all the surveys, many more non-veterans abstained or reported light consumption, while many more veterans were moderate to heavy drinkers. 

In the 1985 survey, for example, 11% of veterans reported heavy drinking -- frequently consuming the equivalent of about six bottles of beer a day, five glasses of wine, or four mixed drinks -- compared with only 6.5% of the non-veterans.
Over 41% of the veterans had five or more drinks on at least 12 days during the preceding year, compared with just over 32% of the non-veterans.
Lifetime prevalence of alcoholism was 2 1/2 times more common among the veterans. 

The veterans' heavier drinking had substantial social costs, the analysis discovered.
Serious family and marital problems were over 50% more frequent among the veterans, and alcohol-related car crashes and motor violations also were more than 50% higher. 

Margaret Richards, an epidemiologist and the main author of the study, suggests, "There is a military culture that involves not only drinking but drinking heavily, and this carries over into civilian life." 

Some Drugs Prescribed 

Just to Pacify Patients 

MANY DOCTORS prescribe useless or unnecessarily expensive drugs simply to satisfy their patients' demands or to make patients feel they're getting good care. 

In an experiment by three Harvard Medical School researchers, 141 randomly chosen doctors who were moderate or heavy prescribers of three particular drugs received mailed information indicating that these drugs were ineffective or far more expensive than equally effective alternatives.
They also received two follow-up visits in which specially-trained pharmacists discussed the clinical evidence with them. 

Almost half the doctors said they were merely satisfying their patients' demands for these drugs, and indicated fears that failure to meet such demands would risk losing patients to more obliging physicians.
Many conceded the prescribing couldn't be justified on scientific grounds. 

Another quarter of the doctors cited a "placebo" effect as justification.
Writing a prescription, they argued, can have positive psychological benefit for the patients and thus possibly bring some real relief.
One New Hampshire doctor said he always gave patients "drugs with names they don't know to benefit from the mystical power of suggestion." 

A final quarter of the doctors insisted the scientific evidence was simply all wet.
Their own clinical experience, they said, showed the drugs to be effective for the conditions involved. 

The Harvard inquiry concluded that efforts to modify unscientific medical decision-making must rely not only on new clinical evidence but must also take into account economic, cultural and other non-medical forces motivating the doctors. 

Odds and Ends 

CHILDREN who live with their father and a stepmother generally get more of their dad's time than do children in an intact marriage, University of Wisconsin sociologist Elizabeth Thomson finds. . . . One-fourth of all U.S. households experienced a burglary or theft in 1988 or had some household member victimized by a crime of violence or theft, according to the Bureau of Justice Statistics.
This was about the same level as in each of the three preceding years. 

