.START 

After a couple of statistically quiet weeks, two notable reports bring fresh September figures -- the purchasing agents' index and jobs data. 

The purchasers' index, due out at 10 a.m. (EDT) today, will be watched for any uptick in a reading that has been on the weak side for several months.
It will also provide a clue on important employment figures due out Friday.
The consensus view calls for a status quo jobs report showing an unchanged unemployment rate of 5.2% of the work force and moderate new-job creation, according to MMS International, a unit of McGraw-Hill Inc., New York. 

In between the buyers' and the workers' statistics, come August reports on new home sales and manufacturers' orders as well as September's tally of auto sales.
August construction spending is also forthcoming today and the month's consumer credit report finishes the week's figures on Friday. 

The September economic statistics are expected to present a familiar result: a mixed signal that economists say is unlikely to cause a change in interest rate policy. 

"Looking at the whole collection of our survey, the data is consistent with the current view that there's some concern about strength," said Michael Englund, research director of MMS International, Belmont, Calif.
If the forecasts are correct, "we will continue to produce data to prevent the (Federal Reserve) from easing credit," he added. 

The purchasers' index, which gives an early look at the manufacturing sector's pace, isn't normally forecast by economists.
But a survey of five economists by Dow Jones Capital Markets found that they expect the index to inch ahead to 46.3% from 45.2% in August.
A reading below 50% generally indicates a declining economy while a reading above 50% indicates an expanding economy. 

A fuller picture comes in Friday's employment data.
Economists figure non-farm jobs grew by about 200,000, excluding the return of some 75,000 or so striking telephone workers. "It's a fairly strong number" even after the returning workers are subtracted from the total, said Gary Ciminero, chief economist at Fleet/Norstar Financial Group, Providence, R.I. 

"But it isn't strong enough to cause the Fed to act, particularly given the massive revision that this number goes through," he added.
Jobs have been growing at about the 200,000 pace for several months. 

Many economists expect the Fed's policy-making arm to maintain a holding pattern on interest rates at its meeting that begins tomorrow, partly because of the expected jobs data and partly because it may have to "turn its attention to batting down the dollar," Mr. Ciminero said. 

Construction spending in August is thought to have increased a modest 0.2% after July's flat reading.
A rebound in residential and public building activity was probably partly offset by a drop in non-residential construction, according to Stephen S. Roach, senior economist at Morgan Stanley & Co., New York. 

And the consensus view on new home sales calls for a 5.3% fallback in August following July's sharp increase.
Even so, economists said the expected sale of 700,000 or so units is still fairly robust and could trim inventories enough to spur housing starts.
But expectations are cloudy, at best, judging from the range of economists' estimates, which run from a drop of 12.1% to an increase of 2%. 

Wednesday's report on September auto sales is eagerly awaited for a final call on a month that started out weak but picked up sharply during the middle two weeks.
But new-model sales hold even bigger questions for economists and auto makers as incentive-spurred sales of 1989 models have buoyed the economy for months. 

August consumer credit is thought to have grown by about $3.5 billion, although the MMS poll found a wide range of estimates running from a flat reading to a jump of $6 billion. 

