.START 

Axa Midi Assurances Chairman Claude Bebear vowed to continue his efforts to buy B.A.T Industries PLC's Farmers Group insurance unit, despite a restructuring plan announced by B.A.T last week to fight off Sir James Goldsmith's hostile takeover bid. 

Mr. Bebear's comments in an interview Friday followed a decision by an appeals tribunal of Britain's Takeover Panel to uphold a ruling giving Sir James's Hoylake Investments Ltd. more time to pursue its #13.35 billion ($21.52 billion) B.A.T bid.
The appellate decision, which sets a precedent that could make hostile U.K. takeovers easier, means Hoylake can start a new bid within 21 days of getting approval from U.S. insurance commissioners for a change in control of Farmers. 

Last Tuesday, B.A.T proposed its radical restructuring to fend off Sir James.
The plan -- under which B.A.T would divest itself of #4 billion in assets, including such U.S. retailing units as Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field's -- aims to raise the value of B.A.T shares beyond Sir James's reach.
B.A.T believes its plan -- which would transform it into a leaner tobacco and financial-services company -- will make it less vulnerable to a hostile bidder. 

Sir James dropped his offer Friday but he said he intends to continue to fight for U.S. regulatory clearance.
He also said that only 0.05% of B.A.T holders had accepted his offer, giving Hoylake effective control over only 2.3% of the company.
B.A.T said the "minuscule" level of acceptances showed that Hoylake's proposals "are wholly unacceptable" to shareholders.
B.A.T shares rose two pence to 820 pence Friday in London. 

In the interview, Mr. Bebear said that B.A.T's restructuring plan simply accepts many of Hoylake's ideas without going far enough in breaking up the giant company. "B.A.T will still be a conglomerate with a curious melange of tobacco and insurance interests.
To me, that doesn't change much," he said. 

Mr. Bebear said he is still interested in buying Farmers.
But he indicated that he doesn't intend to bid to buy the California insurer directly from B.A.T if it eludes Sir James.
Such an offer would be unlikely to succeed -- B.A.T wants to keep Farmers, which it bought for $5.2 billion late last year, and Axa is offering Sir James $4.5 billion, or $700 million less.
Said Mr. Bebear: "We are in a deal with Jimmy.
If he can't deliver the goods, we can't buy them." 

Mr. Bebear said that by the end of this week Axa expects to complete the submissions to state insurance commissioners that are required for regulatory approval. 

He also said that Axa believes several other U.S. insurance properties would be alluring acquisition targets if Axa fails to buy Farmers.
He declined to identify them and declined to say whether Axa has a timetable for expanding in the North American market.
But he said he would be "disappointed" if Axa doesn't have a more significant presence within four to five years. 

Mr. Bebear said he and Sir James are discussing ways to coordinate their U.S. regulatory efforts.
People close to Hoylake say the group may be close to dropping federal suits in several jurisdictions seeking to remove the state regulators' power to review the bid.
Mr. Bebear said he asked Sir James to drop the suits. 

