.START 

John Rice used to feel put upon.
As a franchisee of a computer store, he was forced to hand over to his franchiser a percentage of total sales, even though one-quarter of his $4 million in annual revenue came from consulting and other services he had built up on his own. 

"I was paying on every dollar that came through my business," the Annapolis, Md., businessman says. 

No more.
Last December, Mr. Rice's Entre Computer Center store and the other 184 shops in the chain were acquired by Intelligent Electronics Inc., and with the new franchiser came a new set of rules.
Richard Sanford, the founder of Intelligent Electronics, never liked the rigidity of franchising as it's usually practiced, and he had thrown it all out the window. 

Traditional franchising is a proven way to grow in a hurry.
And Mr. Sanford's experience with fast-growing Intelligent Electronics suggests that even greater rewards may come when the concept is modified to custom-fit a business.
His approach is also inspiring a major structural shift in computer retailing as other large franchisers, such as MicroAge Inc. of Tempe, Ariz., follow Intelligent Electronics's lead.
Businesses in other industries that lend themselves to franchising may not be far behind them. 

Under standard franchising agreements, the franchiser offers a business format, including nearly all products and services, in exchange for a royalty, that is, a percentage of gross sales.
Franchisees are essentially a captive market for a franchiser's products, often having to buy items they don't want or need and pay for services they don't use. 

The 45-year-old Mr. Sanford has unbundled the package of products and services and done away with the royalty.
His company's principal role is selling to franchisees certain computer products, mostly made by International Business Machines Corp., Compaq Computer Corp. and Apple Computer Inc.
His profit comes from middleman markup instead of a percentage of retail sales.
If franchisees want additional services, such as training or help in getting a loan, Intelligent Electronics provides them for an additional fee. 

Intelligent Electronics, in effect, acts like a distributor.
Yet the Exton, Pa., company is still technically a franchiser because franchisees are under contract to buy the microcomputer systems made by IBM, Compaq and Apple that are distributed by Intelligent Electronics. 

The margin for flexibility is the difference.
While the bulk of merchandise offered in the stores comes from Intelligent Electronics, dealers are also free to buy other products or services from outside sources and pass up any Intelligent Electronics services they aren't interested in.
For instance, if a dealer wants to sell an Apple computer that isn't on Intelligent Electronics's list, it can get it through another distributor. 

The arrangement also frees Intelligent Electronics from many of the hand-holding services franchisers provide, saving on personnel and other overhead costs.
The company says it is able to pass on some of that savings in the form of lower product prices to its franchisees. 

"We looked at the model that was out there and saw it was archaic," Mr. Sanford says. 

"It is a very novel concept," says John Reynolds, marketing director for the International Franchising Association in Washington, D.C. "To unbundle the package seems counter to the idea" of franchising. 

Mr. Sanford's empire has grown incredibly in a short time.
Revenue at Intelligent Electronics soared last year to $130 million from a mere $115,000 in 1984, when the business was just getting going.
In the nine months ended in July, revenue rocketed further to an estimated $648 million. 

Five months after Entre was meshed with the 200 or so franchisees he already had, Mr. Sanford agreed to buy Connecting Point of America, a Denver-based retail computer chain with 245 stores.
Over the past year alone, employment at the computer-store franchiser has swollen to 650 from 60, not counting any franchisee workers.
With 740 computers stores, Intelligent Electronics is now one of the largest companies of its kind.
Mr. Sanford's 20% stake in Intelligent Electronics is currently worth more than $35 million. 

The acquisitions have catapulted Intelligent Electronics into a leading market position.
But the rapid growth also may endanger the primary advantage Mr. Sanford's approach to franchising provides: cost-saving efficiency in an intensely competitive, price-sensitive business. 

While net income doubled to an estimated $9.2 million during the nine months ended July 31, profit margins fell to 3.9% from 5.8% a year earlier, as general expenses soared nearly sevenfold.
Mr. Sanford will be pressed to reduce such costs at a time when his company is running on negative cash flow from operations, trying to pay for some $117 million in acquisitions amid signs of a softening microcomputer market. (At an analysts meeting in late July, software maker Microsoft Corp. predicted that the rate of growth for microcomputer unit sales would fall to 10% during the ensuing 12 months, one-half the rate of the past three years.) 

Mr. Sanford became an entrepreneur in 1982, after leaving Commodore International Ltd. and forming Intelligent Electronics.
At first he tried to sell microcomputer systems through leased space in department stores.
That worked until a competitor -- Computer Depot -- doubled the fee paid to host stores in an effort to win sales space.
Computer Depot eventually went out of business, but not before other department stores started demanding its generous terms, which, Mr. Sanford says, wrecked the economics of the business. 

In 1984 Mr. Sanford took a new tack to find outlets for the computers he was selling.
Instead of setting up budding entrepreneurs with brand-new franchises in big cities, as most computer retailers did, Mr. Sanford chose to sign up previously established independent office-products dealers outside highly competitive major metropolitan areas. 

After years of concentrating on copiers, typewriters and such, these office-products dealers were eager to join in the microcomputer boom, which largely had passed them by.
Mr. Sanford's recruits typically boasted 15 years of experience and solid reputations, so Intelligent Electronics saved on training costs and advertising to promote the dealerships.
The dealerships kept their names but added to their signs "Todays Computers Business Center," a slogan to link the chain together. 

The independence of the office-products dealers fit nicely with Mr. Sanford's view of franchising. "We weren't interested in a cloning system," Mr. Sanford says. "We were interested in participating in the dealers' customer base, in maintaining their independence as an entrepreneur." 

As the industry's profit margins fell, the savings Intelligent Electronics offered on its computer systems lured even computer dealers franchised by other companies.
The company's cafeteria-style menu of services was an additional attraction; it appealed to mature computer dealers that were still being forced by their franchisers to pay for support they no longer needed. 

"I'm pretty self-sufficient," Mr. Rice, the owner of the Entre store in Annapolis, says. "I never took advantage of the programs Entre developed -- and in many cases they had to come out with programs just to justify the royalty." 

"The difference between being with Entre or Intelligent Electronics," Mr. Rice added, "is probably worth a couple of points on the bottom line." 

