.START 

Darkness shrouds the railroad tracks on the deserted outskirts of town, hours before dawn. 

Through the mist, a rider on a small vehicle rolls quietly along the rails on four flanged wheels.
He casts frequent glances backward and ahead until he spots a glimmer above the treetops in front of him. 

As the glow gets brighter, the rider applies the foot brake, dismounts and lifts the contraption from the rails.
Hiding it under some vines along the gravel railbed, he ducks into the woods and watches as a coal train, with three diesel locomotives, roars past. 

Seconds later, Herbert X. Smith is back on the rails, pedaling his two-seat railbike through rock cuts, watching for wildlife along the tracks and recalling the panicky passenger who once insisted he install a rearview mirror: "She didn't have any faith in my ability to spot trains." 

The 40-year-old Dr. Smith, an emergency-room physician at a local hospital, is the sort of buff whose recreational use of the tracks gives railroad officials nightmares.
Tired of highway traffic and inspired by the railroads' wholesale abandonment of track, railbikers have proliferated over the past decade, from a handful to perhaps several hundred.
Most limit their runs to disused track.
But some prefer the excitement -- and the smooth ride -- of active rails.
Railbikes, some say, are a landlubber's alternative to the sailboat, the earthbound equivalent of the hang glider. 

"You close your eyes, and you feel the breeze.
It is like gliding," says Ron Forster, a railbike promoter and the owner of an organic pizzeria in Hillsboro, N.H. Mr. Forster is also trying to sell the idea of railbiking on abandoned track as a sport for the blind and handicapped.
No steering required. 

Some railbikers equip a conventional bicycle with guidewheels and an outrigger for balance.
Others pay up to $1,700 for a four-wheel model of the sort Mr. Forster sells.
A few equip their railbikes with gasoline engines or sails to take advantage of the wind.
Richard Smart, a railbiker from Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, once towed a rolling platform behind him.
Friends sat there on lawn chairs and sipped champagne. 

"It's a wonderful way to see country no one else sees," says Dr. Smart, a dentist.
He has logged about 15,000 miles on railbikes, mainly in the West.
On some trips he has ridden right up to bears, deer, elk and coyotes.
And he once rolled through a two-mile railroad tunnel, thunderstruck by the blackness. "It's so dark you can't even see your hand," he says. "It's like pedaling through space, like a black hole." 

Railroad officials take a dim view of railbikers, fearing they will cause accidents, get hurt and sue. "It's an illegal and very dangerous activity," says Daniel Lang, a vice president of the Association of American Railroads.
He points out that these fun lovers are trespassing on private property.
Laird Pitz, a general manager of the Burlington Northern Railroad, declares that railbikers are "playing Russian roulette with the railroads.
They often don't know when they cross from an abandoned line to an active line or a mainline." 

Railbikers themselves swap stories about washouts, collapsed tunnels, broken rails, railroad cops and oncoming trains.
Dr. Smith, the Oak Ridge physician, says he once tumbled 40 feet down an embankment when an axle broke. 

Says Mr. Forster: "Sure, there's danger -- there's danger to going to work, to living." Garden-variety bicycle riding is dangerous too, he points out, "but they don't condemn that." 

Railbikes aren't exactly new, though the sport is burgeoning.
Track inspectors used them a hundred years ago.
In 1908, Sears, Roebuck & Co. advertised a kit to turn a street bike into a railbike.
Paul Moudy, of Adrian, Mo., recalls that, in 1975, he and a friend used parts from an old Ford to rig up vehicles light enough to get off the tracks quickly in the face of an approaching freight train.
But the hobby has been spurred in recent years as major railroads have declared about a third of their track to be surplus. 

Another attraction of old rail lines is that the grades aren't as steep going over a mountain.
Indeed, Mr. Forster says he was inspired to make a railbike as he struggled to pedal a bicycle up a New Hampshire mountain and happened to notice a relatively flat track on which he could accomplish the same purpose without so much effort. 

Most railbiking is done in daylight, but Dr. Smith prefers to do his riding at night when it is easier to spot trains (by their headlights) and harder to be spotted himself.
On this particular night, he takes the extra precaution of wearing dark clothing.
His railbike, a low-slung two-seater he bought from Mr. Forster, is painted flat black. "I don't want anyone to see what I am doing," he says. 

Dr. Smith starts his journey at rural Crab Orchard, Tenn., setting his vehicle on branchline track at about 9 o'clock.
After he pedals slowly through a factory rail yard, he picks up speed, cruising past woods, rushing streams, mobile homes, road crossings, rail sidings, one possum and several barking dogs -- all at up to 30 miles per hour.
As he races across a high, curved trestle, Dr. Smith observes: "If you derail here, you're a dead man." A thought to give an itinerant reporter pause. 

He finishes the run hours later in Harriman, a small railroad junction.
There, he lifts the railbike into the back of his pickup truck and proceeds to another rail line outside Oak Ridge. 

Later that night, he will yield the right of way to the coal train with the three diesels and also pedal alongside a freight train traveling on parallel track. "You get to go places no one else goes and see sights no one else gets to see except the train crews," says Dr. Smith, fanned by the breeze from freight cars passing just nine feet away. 

The adventure appeals to Dr. Smith, who is the son of a man who built coach cars.
He says he grew up familiar with rail yards, signals, train crews and diesel horns.
The family background (his grandfather and great grandfather were train engineers) has stood him in good stead, he says, whenever he has put his railbike down on track in Kentucky, North Carolina, South Carolina or Tennessee. 

Railbikers have their favorite routes, of course.
In the East, many like to ride a dormant line through New Hampshire's scenic White Mountains.
Paul Brown, a biker in San Diego, favors a particularly rugged line through the California desert.
Some railbikers rode the Milwaukee Road's track through the northern Rocky Mountains before it was ripped up early in this decade. 

But even when abandoned track remains in place, it soon succumbs to weeds and washouts.
On one occasion Mr. Forster half-seriously telephoned a railroad official to complain about out-of-alignment rails, bad joints and an excess of weeds on a line he wanted to use. 

Railroad officials aren't amused. "If they have the gall to suggest our track is not maintained to railbike standards, let them build their own track," says Mr. Lang of the Association of American Railroads. "It only costs $1 million a mile." 

Recently, Mr. Forster aborted a railbike demonstration on an overgrown track in Potter Place, N.H., when the weeds tangled his wheels. "The hell with it," he said. "Let's walk." 

