.START 

After a week of sustained central-bank dollar drubbing, analysts are evenly split over the U.S. currency's near-term path, but most predict it will trade marginally higher by year end. 

Most of the 10 analysts polled this week by Dow Jones International News Service in Tokyo; Frankfurt, West Germany; London and New York expect the world's leading central banks to continue their assault against the U.S. currency in a coordinated blitz of dollar selling. 

In late afternoon New York trading Friday, the dollar stood at 1.8713 marks, down from 1.8823 marks Thursday, and at 139.00 yen, down from 140.65 yen.
A month ago, a similar survey predicted the dollar would be trading at 1.9660 marks and 146.00 yen at the end of September.
Sterling was at $1.6200 late Friday, up from $1.6105. 

In Tokyo Monday, the U.S. currency opened for trading at 138.77 yen, down from Friday's Tokyo close of 139.35 yen. 

The average estimates of the 10 analysts polled puts the dollar around 1.8690 marks and 139.75 yen by the end of October and at 1.8872 marks and 140.00 yen at the end of December.
An average of those with a bullish view puts the U.S. currency at 1.9325 marks and 143.83 yen in 30 days, and at 1.9600 marks and 142.00 yen in 90 days, while those with a bearish perspective see the currency trading at 1.8046 marks and 137.00 yen at October's end, and at 1.8300 marks and 135.30 yen in three months. 

Half of the analysts offered a relatively bullish forecast for October, estimating that the dollar will continue to trend higher on continued healthy U.S. economic data. 

The others, however, said the central banks have successfully cast a bearish tone to the market and added that the continued threat of an official rise in West German and Japanese interest rates will further damp enthusiasm for the U.S. currency in the near term.
Indeed, most analysts who see the U.S. currency edging higher this month are quick to point out that trade will be extremely volatile with players and the central banks in a game of tug-of-war over the currency's direction. 

Douglas Madison, a corporate trader with Bank of America, predicted the central banks will win the "major, major test of wills" and turn market sentiment against the dollar, at least temporarily. 

"The banks really want to knock the stuffing out of the market," Mr. Madison said. "We haven't begun to see the end of their firepower." He noted that in May and June the U.S. Federal Reserve sold a record $11.92 billion to cap the dollar's advance, adding that he believes the Fed is prepared to mount an equally vigorous campaign this autumn. 

So far, traders speculate world-wide central-bank dollar sales amounted to under $5 billion last week from a five-day barrage of coordinated actions. 

While most analysts concurred the central-bank intervention strategy would keep the market on tenterhooks, several said a narrowing in interest-rate differentials was crucial if the Group of Seven industrialized nations hoped to press the U.S. currency lower or even hold it at present levels. 

Last weekend, top G-7 monetary officials met in Washington where they called the dollar's rise in recent months "inconsistent with longer-run economic fundamentals." G-7 nations include the U.S., Japan, Britain, West Germany, France, Italy and Canada. 

"Intervention alone will never work.
The interest-rate situation has got to change as well," said Tomoshige Kakita with Mitsu Bank Ltd., in Tokyo. 

Added Wolfgang Nett, a senior trader for Bayerische Vereinsbank, in Munich, "Intervention alone has never succeeded," pointing out that it will take a West German rate increase coupled with a U.S. rate decrease to push the dollar lower. 

He sees the dollar squeezed lower during the next three months because of narrowing interest-rate differentials between the U.S. and West Germany.
The U.S. Federal Reserve will find it necessary, he says, to lower interest rates to relieve pressure on the junk-bond market and to prevent the U.S. economy from stalling. 

At the same time, Mr. Nett said, it is possible the West German Bundesbank will soon raise its key discount and Lombard lending rates by a full percentage point each to 6% and 8% from the current levels of 5% and 7% respectively.
The Lombard rate is the effective ceiling on domestic overnight rates. 

Nick Murphy, an analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd in London, forecasts that the dollar will firm slightly during the next few weeks, but adds its performance will be nervous in the face of further central-bank intervention and concern about a rise in West German interest rates. 

But if a West German rate rise is announced, Mr. Murphy expects the benefits to the mark to be short-lived, with bullish dollar fundamentals reasserting themselves to push the U.S. currency higher.
Mr. Murphy reckons that U.S. interest rates are set to remain where they are for some time.
Also, given a further drop in the U.S. inflation rates, this will make real dollar yields increasingly attractive. 

The risk of a Japanese official rate increase also remains a risk to the dollar's performance, but Mr. Murphy says that any such increase has been discounted by the market and will have minimal impact on dollar sentiment. 

All the same, he doesn't see the dollar soaring. "It is going to be trending up but not up to the highs" reached during the past few weeks when the dollar hit nearly 2.0050 marks. 

Most of the analysts polled said they believe the dollar will rise by year end, but only one predicts the U.S. currency will reach the two-mark level in 90 days. 

Mark Goloven, an economist and vice president with Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York, suggested the dollar will climb to two marks by January as the U.S. trade deficit continues to narrow. 

"It's going to be very hard for central banks to justify debasing the currency," Mr. Goloven said. 

Mr. Goloven is skeptical the West Germans will increase interest rates significantly, but added that the mark remains weak within the European Monetary System, which could provide impetus for the West Germans to boost rates. 

Dieter Manderbach, a trader in Norddeutsche Landesbank-Girozentrale offered the opposite view, saying the dollar will drop in the near and longer term. 

"The market sentiment isn't yet bearish," he said. "But it's starting to get close to the edge of tipping over that way." 

Mr. Manderbach surmises that many commercial banks are currently holding dollars that were poured into the market by the central banks in the recent wave of interventions.
As the commercial banks' hopes of a stronger dollar wane, Mr. Manderbach said there could be additional dollars dumped on the market that will accelerate the currency's decline. 

The fallout from last week's dollar sales and the G-7 central banks' next move are the focus of much speculation among currency analysts.
Ventured Robert Alan Feldman, a vice president at Solomon Brothers Inc., "{Intervention is} the easy part. . . . The hard part is coordinating changes in monetary policy." 

On New York's Commodity Exchange Friday, current-delivery gold settled at $367.20 an ounce, down 90 cents.
Estimated volume was a moderate 3.6 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Monday, gold was quoted at $366.99 an ounce. 

Christopher Hill in Tokyo, Nicholas Hastings in London, Erik Kirschbaum in Frankfurt, and Caitlin Randall in New York contributed to this article. 

