.START 

More bad oil news is coming out of Alaska. 

Although it has been obscured by fallout from the Exxon Valdez oil spill, production in Alaska's big Prudhoe Bay field has peaked and is declining.
Output is expected to fall an average 150,000 barrels a day this year from the 1.6 million a day produced in 1988.
Experts estimate that in 1990 and beyond, production will continue falling at between 4% and 10% a year. 

In the oil world, that development isn't a surprise.
No oil fields last forever.
Among some of the oil companies operating on Alaska's North Slope, such as Atlantic Richfield Co., the only surprise is that production hadn't slowed earlier. 

Still, the realization that output at the fabled Prudhoe field is slipping is setting off alarms in the industry -- and may do the same soon in Washington.
The field accounts for 20% of U.S. oil output, and its reduced flow would increase U.S. dependence on oil imports.
That in turn could add to the U.S. trade deficit and influence future U.S. energy policies. 

Production didn't begin from Prudhoe Bay until 1977, after years of political debate over the building of a pipeline across Alaska.
The field was discovered a decade earlier on Alaska's frigid North Slope.
Its initial 10 billion barrels of proven reserves made it America's largest and one of only 35 so-called supergiants -- those with five billion barrels or more of recoverable oil -- ever discovered.
It soon became a cornerstone of operations for some of the world's biggest oil companies, including Atlantic Richfield and Exxon Corp., which jointly discovered it. 

The peaking of Prudhoe Bay production is believed to have been a major factor in British Petroleum Co. 's decision to restructure its operations.
BP's biggest oil holding is in Prudhoe, and it operates half the field.
BP announced last week it is selling $1.31 billion in oil and gas assets and shaking up its world-wide exploration business to spend more money on a "frontier" search for new oil reserves. 

Oil experts say the drop in Prudhoe Bay's production underscores the seriousness of the deterioration of America's petroleum base.
The U.S. was once the world's largest oil producer, and until this year, increasing Alaskan output helped offset the plunge in production in Texas and the Southwest. 

Between 1985 and 1988, Alaskan crude oil production, the bulk of it from Prudhoe Bay, increased more than 200,000 barrels a day to two million barrels a day, notes John H. Lichtblau, president of the New York-based Petroleum Industry Research Foundation.
During that period, he adds, output in the remainder of the U.S. dropped one million barrels a day to 6.1 million barrels. 

"For the last several years, Prudhoe Bay has been the principal factor in offsetting the declines in the lower 48 states," says Mr. Lichtblau, "but now it isn't doing that any more." 

No one is writing off Alaska.
Prudhoe Bay isn't the only major field in the state.
The Kuparuk, the second-largest oil field in North America, also is on the North Slope.
And there are others, including a recent significant Atlantic Richfield discovery called the Point McIntyre. "We still see a long life ahead for Alaska," says an Atlantic Richfield spokesman. 

Bernard J. Picchi, a Salomon Brothers Inc. oil analyst recently in Alaska for an on-the-spot look at Point McIntyre and other fields, agrees. "Alaska has an incredible resource base," he says. 

But Mr. Picchi and others worry about the strong anti-oil attitude that has sprung up following the Exxon tanker spill.
They say that may eliminate or postpone the possible discovery and development of new Alaskan fields to replace Prudhoe. 

"The Valdez incident has created much negative damage -- a setback for any attempts to make up routine declines in existing fields," says Brice Sachs, a former Exxon planner who is now an energy consultant based in Morristown, N.J. 

Among the casualties, he and others note, is any exploration soon in Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.
The refuge, or Anwar as it's commonly called, is believed to contain the types of geological structures that could harbor deposits of oil on a par with those of Prudhoe Bay.
But industry officials concede the political impossibility of exploring for oil there for at least two to three years. 

Even if big fields exist there, with the lag time needed for development, oil couldn't flow until the next century. 

Meantime, the decline in Prudhoe Bay's production, combined with disruptions in shipping oil from Alaska after the Exxon Valdez spill in March, will result in a decline in North Slope output to fewer than 1.9 million barrels a day this year, from two million a day last year. (Alaska produces a modest 40,000 barrels a day outside the North Slope.) 

This drop is having a noticeable effect on U.S. crude-oil output.
Industry officials say it is accelerating the erosion that has been entrenched since the 1986 oil-price crash and subsequent drilling collapse.
The American Petroleum Institute says domestic oil output is suddenly falling at an average annual rate of 5% to 6%, nearly double the 3%-plus declines of recent years.
The API reports production for August averaged 7.5 million barrels a day, down from nearly 8.1 million barrels a year earlier and the lowest figure in 25 years. 

Oil imports are climbing faster than U.S. production is shrinking because domestic consumption of petroleum is increasing.
According to the API, imports totaled nearly 8.6 million barrels a day in August, up from 7.4 million a year earlier. 

