.START 

Chairman Lloyd Bentsen of the Senate Finance Committee is considering imposing a tax on the short-term trades of securities by currently tax-free pension funds. 

In an interview, the Texas Democrat said he was considering the new levy "among other options" as part of his drive to raise enough taxes to meet deficit-reduction goals this year.
He added that he hasn't made any decision about the pension option. 

The notion stems from Sen. Bentsen's interest in encouraging long-range thinking by American business interests and in discouraging short-term trading for quick profits. 

"I'm deeply concerned about the churning of stocks and short-term horizons," he said. "That's been particularly true of the pension managers and some of the tax-free funds." 

Sen. Bentsen and his committee soon will begin drafting legislation designed to raise some $5.3 billion in taxes to reduce the budget deficit.
A package of proposals meeting a similar obligation is pending in the House, and is scheduled to be voted on as early as next week. 

The House version of the revenue-raising plan, passed last week by the House Ways and Means Committee, doesn't include a similar tax on pension-fund trades. 

A proposal to tax pension-fund trading would cause tremors on Wall Street, where such a levy would cut broker commissions by reducing trading.
The tax would also be a clear violation of President Bush's "no tax" pledge. 

But the idea would be a shrewd political response by Sen. Bentsen to efforts by Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady to devise measures to discourage short-term thinking by U.S. businesses.
A senior Treasury official said the department hasn't considered any proposals to tax pension funds, and noted that that would clearly violate the president's tax stance.
But some administration officials are sympathetic to the idea. 

Taxing pension funds also has bipartisan support on Capitol Hill.
Republican Sen. Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas wrote a column in the New York Times Aug. 30 proposing a 20% capital-gains tax on pension investments held for less than three months.
Under Sen. Kassebaum's proposal, the tax would be reduced each quarter and phased out for assets held more than a year. 

Sen. Kassebaum said she sent a copy of the column to Sen. Bentsen last week and received a note from the Finance Committee chairman saying he'd like to discuss the idea with her.
Staff aides to Sen. Kassebaum and Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) also met with Treasury officials last week to promote the idea of taxing pension funds. 

