.START 

Have you driven a Ford lately?
Before long, the answer might be yes even if your car is a Jaguar or, perhaps, a Saab. 

Ford Motor Co. yesterday jolted the automotive world -- and Britain -- by disclosing that it wants to buy a stake of up to 15% of Britain's leading luxury-car maker, Jaguar PLC.
The announcement came just two weeks after Ford said it was negotiating "closer cooperation" with Sweden's Saab Scania 

Other European auto makers -- Group Lotus PLC, Aston Martin Lagonda Ltd., Automobili Lamborghini S.p.
A. and Alfa Romeo S.p.
A. -- have surrendered their independence in recent years, but now the trend, driven by growing competition, may be shifting into high gear.
Though Ford's overtures to Jaguar and Saab haven't produced any firm deals yet, auto-industry watchers are already wondering who's next.
Prime candidates for an alliance, they suggest, are Britain's Vickers PLC, which makes Rolls-Royce and Bentley cars, and West Germany's Porsche AG.
Some even suggest that Germany's Bayerische Motoren Werke AG, or BMW, might one day need a partner. 

All are gilded marques that confer instant status on their owners, especially in the U.S., where sales of European luxury cars boomed in the early 1980s.
But in the last few years, their U.S. sales have plunged, thanks to a lower dollar that made all imports more expensive and to an onslaught of new competition from Japanese luxury cars.
Now, many of Europe's best-known small auto makers -- BMW being the notable exception -- are struggling financially, and unable to spend the huge sums needed to develop and market innovative new models in an increasingly competitive world. 

"The European little guys were already losing out as independent competitors before the Japanese came on the {luxury-car} scene," says James Womack, research director of the International Motor Vehicle Program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. "I basically think all the little guys are going to become subsidiaries of the big guys." 

Such a shakeout promises to be shaped by individual corporate strategies, executive egos and, not least, by national pride.
Ford's bold bid to buy Italy's Alfa Romeo a couple of years ago got squashed when Fiat S.p.
A. came on the scene, and argued that Alfa should be kept in Italian hands.
Likewise, when General Motors Corp. tried to buy the Land Rover and Leyland subsidiaries of state-owned BL PLC three years ago, British politicians howled at the thought of foreigners owning a national institution.
GM backed off. 

It isn't clear how British pride might affect Ford's move on Jaguar, but the U.S. auto maker clearly will have to deal with Jaguar's corporate pride first.
Ford's terse announcement was made at around 4 p.m. London time and 11 a.m. EDT in Detroit. "We believe there are substantial benefits for both companies in a holding that could lay the foundation for a long-term association between Ford and Jaguar," L. Lindsey Halstead, chairman of Ford of Europe, said.
He praised Jaguar as "an outstanding British company with a distinctive product range," and promised that if Ford should eventually gain control, it would keep Jaguar "as a separate and autonomous entity." 

Those diplomatic words notwithstanding, the announcement caught Jaguar executives flat-footed.
Though rumors of a possible Ford overture had been circulating since last spring, the executives had no warning of Ford's decision beyond a phone call from the auto maker just before the announcement yesterday. 

"I think we are going to remain independent," declared Sir John Egan, the tough-minded Jaguar chairman who was dubbed "England's Lee Iacocca" for rescuing his company from the brink of bankruptcy in 1986. "I would remind you of the 'golden share' provisions." 

The "golden share" is a strong anti-takeover measure.
When the British government sold its stake in Jaguar in 1984, it retained one share that prevents any outside investor, British or foreign, from buying more than 15% of Jaguar without the government's permission.
The golden share expires on Dec. 31, 1990. 

It isn't clear how the British government might view Ford's move, but the spate of British acquisitions in the U.S. in recent years might head off outright opposition. "We look silly if we don't allow Americans to buy here," says David Willetts, director of a London-based think tank with close ties to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. "The last thing you want is to give the economic nationalists in Congress an excuse to be obstructive about British takeovers." 

But it is clear that, beneath Sir John's stern words and the golden-share protection, Jaguar's fortunes are slipping badly.
The company recently reported a precipitous decline in pretax profit for the first half of this year to #1.4 million ($2.2 million) from #22.5 million.
In recent months, Sir John has talked to virtually every major car maker about a possible partnership, but found nothing to his liking yet.
Jaguar's problems, and those of Saab as well, illustrate the woes afflicting virtually every one of Europe's small auto makersa situation that contrasts starkly with their huge prosperity earlier in the decade. 

Then, a strong dollar made imported goods of all kinds inexpensive to Americans.
The Reagan years -- with their robust stock market and recovery from recession -- made upscale consumption fashionable.
European makes became the cars of choice for a generation of Americans who suddenly had money, but wanted no part of their father's Oldsmobile, Cadillac or Lincoln. 

Jaguar's U.S. sales jumped 55% between 1983 and 1986.
During the same period, BMW's American sales surged 63%, Mercedes-Benz's 35%, Porsche's 40% and Saab's 83%. 

European auto makers got so bullish on America they expanded their plants.
In early 1984, for example, Saab could produce 105,000 cars a year.
Over the years it kept enlarging its factories, to the point that now it has the capacity to build 180,000 cars annually.
Saab had assumed its sales in the U.S. would continue to grow.
But the world was changing. 

In 1985, with the U.S. trade deficit burgeoning, governments of the major industrial nations agreed to drive down the value of the dollar.
The U.S. currency nearly halved in value compared with other major currencies, and suddenly, European cars weren't so affordable any more. 

The base sticker price of Saab's 900 four-door sedan in the U.S., for example, has soared 38% in the last four years to $17,515.
The Mercedes 190D with a 2.5-liter engine has jumped in price more than 27% since 1986. 

Making matters worse, Japanese auto makers invaded the luxury-car market.
Honda Motor Co. led the way with its Acura division, which sold nearly 53,000 cars in its inaugural year, 1986.
Last year Acura sold more than 128,000 cars, and many were purchased by people who once owned European cars. 

One is George Pendergast, who lives in suburban Boston and markets financial services.
Just last month he traded in his 1986 Saab turbo for a new Acura Legend, which carries a sticker price of nearly $27,000. "One of the things I miss is having that 'ugly' Saab around," says Mr. Pendergast, who concedes he grew fond of the Swedish car's quirky shape.
But he says he found the Acura far more comfortable, with a much smoother ride. 

The Japanese threat to the Europeans is only getting worse.
Last month Toyota Motor Corp. launched its luxury Lexus line in the U.S., and in November Nissan Motor Co. is unveiling its Infiniti models.
The Japanese offer technologically advanced cars that get completely re-engineered every four to five years.
The big change on European models, in contrast, tends to be their price tags; the Europeans often make only minor physical changes in their cars for the better part of a decade. 

Jaguar's 1988 model XJ6 luxury sedan, for example, is the only car the auto maker completely re-engineered during the 1980s.
This year, to boost lagging U.S. sales, the company is introducing a stripped-down variation of the car, which will come without a sun roof, fancy suspension system and full-scale walnut interior trim.
The price is $39,700, compared with the regular XJ6's $44,000.
But even the "bargain" Jaguar costs more than the top-of-the-line Lexus and Infiniti models. 

The Europeans' problem: the huge sums it takes to develop new cars and bring them to market.
Small auto makers must spread those development costs -- which can run in the billions -- over a thin sales base.
For years, the small European companies assumed they never had to bother with frequent make-overs of their products.
Now they know better, but simply don't have the money. 

Access to cash, and to technical talent, is what Ford is dangling before Jaguar. "We could help strengthen Jaguar in areas like advanced technological design and development, manufacturing processes and world-wide marketing," said Ford's Mr. Halstead, "by offering full access to our technical and financial resources in Britain and around the world." 

What Ford appears to want in return from Jaguar and Saab is snob appeal.
Ford has a distinctly middle-brow image, both in the U.S. and Europe.
Its effort to ship some of its European-made Fords into the U.S. and sell them under the pricey Merkur label has bombed. 

"Ford hasn't got any $40,000 to $50,000 cars in the U.S.," says David Healy, auto analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert. "This is an easy way to associate themselves with a luxury-car producer that can broaden their product mix." 

Ford's risk, though, is in possibly buying a couple of losers. "I don't see sales turning around for the Europeans," says Edward J. Sullivan, who tracks the auto industry for the WEFA Group, a consulting firm in Bala Cynwyd, Pa. "I don't see what Ford is going to gain.
They would be throwing {Jaguar} right into the teeth of Lexus and Infiniti." 

It's uncertain how the battle for Jaguar will play out, or even if there's to be a battle.
Ford is already bracing for political repercussions in Britain, where Jaguar is a national symbol.
At a news briefing, Ford executives wrapped themselves in the British flag as a pre-emptive move. "We are the biggest British car maker," said Derek Barron, a native Londoner and chairman of Ford's U.K. subsidiary. 

After breaking their news to Jaguar's Sir John in a phone call yesterday, Ford officials instructed their investment bankers to start buying Jaguar stock.
Ford's purchases didn't exceed $15 million, says Bruce Blythe, vice president of business strategy for Ford's European operations.
That's enough to buy just over 1% of Jaguar. 

Jaguar shares surged after the Ford announcement Tuesday in very heavy volume on London's Stock Exchange.
Some 8% of the company's shares changed hands, and the price closed at 467 pence ($7.33), up 62 pence (97 cents).
Jaguar could command a total price of about $1.4 billion, said Andrew Chambers, an analyst at Nomura Research Institute in London, a securities firm.
Under U.S. law, Ford can't buy more than $15 million worth of Jaguar stock for the next 30 days, Mr. Blythe explained.
But after that, Ford could raise its stake to 15%.
Jaguar's board, meanwhile, is expected to meet this week to map strategy.
The company so far is keeping its options open. "Let's get our breath back," said a Jaguar spokesman yesterday. "We only got {word of} this this afternoon." 

