.START 

When Africans relate their everyday tales of economic misery, they often talk in circles. 

"Our countries are too poor to develop themselves, so we must go into debt to develop; but when we have debt, we must pay it back and then we can't develop," says Francis Wainaina, tidying the shelves of his general store here at the foot of Mount Kenya. "When there is no development, there are no jobs; and when no one has jobs, no one has money." The circle comes round in his shop. "When no one has money, business is slow." 

Eighty miles to the south, in Nairobi's Pumwani slum, Angelina Kasiva leans against the plastic and cardboard hovel she calls home and spins another circle.
Miss Kasiva, who doesn't know her precise age but guesses 26, recalls leaving her poor rural home as a teen-ager and coming to Nairobi in search of education or a job.
She found neither.
Today, a decade older and still illiterate, she collects and sells scrap metal to provide a little food for her three children.
But she has no hope of paying for their schooling, and, she fears, they will end up just like her: no job, no education; no education, no job. 

"No hope, no future," Miss Kasiva whispers.
The circle is complete. 

Life in Africa is an endless series of these vicious circles, which spread economic suffering across the continent like concentric rings rippling across a pond after the splash of a stone.
In sub-Saharan Africa, the poorest pond on earth, the stone is the region's $130 billion foreign debt. 

"The impact {of the debt} is felt on the whole of the microeconomy," says Kenyan Finance Minister George Saitoti, who uses one-third of his country's export earnings to service its $6 billion debt. "Without our debt repayments," he muses, "we could have at least 6% growth." Instead, the economy struggles to barely keep ahead of Kenya's 4% population growth.
Poverty begets debt, debt begets poverty. 

Sub-Saharan Africa's debt is about one-tenth of the debt in the developing world, one-quarter of Latin America's debt, and little more than the debt of Brazil. 

But according to the World Bank, the debt of sub-Saharan Africa, where 22 of the world's 30 poorest countries are located, equals two-thirds of the region's gross domestic product.
Per-capita debt is more than $240; per-capita GDP is $380.
The debt service, or the principal and interest obligations falling due, amounts to nearly half of the region's export revenues.
Without rescheduling or other relief, some countries are obligated to pay out more than their exports bring in. 

Still, the African debt crisis hasn't attracted anywhere near the attention focused on the Latin American debt problem.
For in Africa, economic decay is simply overshadowed by the continent's constant stream of heart-wrenching tragedy. 

"It's easy to see a crisis when it involves famine, locusts or war.
You can photograph that and show it on television," says Bisi Ogunjobi, the southern Africa representative of the African Development Bank. "But this debt crisis is hard to see.
You can't take a picture of debt." 

The rigorous fiscal adjustments necessary to meet debt-servicing obligations so strain and weaken a country's meager resources that it becomes susceptible to all manner of economic, social and political upheaval.
Today, many of Africa's vital signs are worse than they were in the 1960s, during the first heady years of the post-colonial era. 

In the west African country of Benin, government workers, medical staff and teachers go on strike because they haven't been paid in more than three months.
In Zambia, 15 people die during a riot triggered by cornmeal-price boosts.
In Malawi, industry is reduced to 50% of capacity by a cut in vital imports.
In the Ivory Coast, the banking system nearly collapses when the government agricultural marketing board runs short of money. 

Yet Africa's glorious post-independence dreams started shattering when the continent was awash in development money.
Much of it was coming into Africa on expensive financing terms, and much of it was being wasted by mismanagement and corruption.
Then came the oil shocks of the 1970s, which caused import prices to skyrocket, greatly increasing development costs.
At the same time, the prices of Africa's basic commodities, from copper to cocoa, began a steady nosedive, triggering a prolonged foreign-currency drought.
By the mid-1980s, as much money was leaving the continent in debt-service payments as was entering in development aid. 

Creditor nations, slow to respond at first, are offering some relief; some are converting loans to grants, others are outright forgiving portions of the debt.
Two months ago, the U.S. dropped its longstanding opposition to debt forgiveness and said it would write off about 20% of its loans, or a total of about $1 billion, to 16 of the poorest African countries.
In return, more than two dozen African countries are adopting market-oriented economic reforms under strict structural-adjustment programs funded by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. 

But, in typical African fashion, this discipline and outside pressure is causing the vicious circles to spin even faster. 

Kenya, for example, is making a brave push to meet its debt obligations -- it eschews rescheduling even though its 33% debt-service ratio (repayments as a portion of export earnings) is one of the highest in Africa -- and it is swallowing the reform medicine of the IMF and World Bank.
This has earned it a credit-worthy reputation abroad. 

At home, though, an economic and social time bomb is ticking.
The debt payments and reform belt-tightening are holding back the economy at a time when it needs to be running flat out, making the state turn miserly precisely when it needs to be more generous.
With the population growing at 4% a year, one of the highest rates in the world, there is tremendous pressure for more schools, health centers, agriculture output and, above all, jobs. 

Even with substantial development-aid inflows, the government can't keep up with these demands, and the Kenyans, with an average per-capita income of about $360, are expected to somehow uplift themselves.
For instance, the biggest share of the state budget goes to education (mostly for teachers' salaries), but parents are obliged to pay for building and equipping schools.
The result is that more and more children, whose parents can't afford these fees, are being forced to drop out after one or two years of education. 

In Nairobi's slums, the Undugu Society, a private welfare agency (Undugu means "brotherhood" in Swahili), is swamped with pupils hoping to get into its free three-year education program.
The only requirements are that the children be at least 12 years old, and have had no previous formal education. "When classes begin, all the children of the slums suddenly become 12 years old," says Gladys Wambui, the Undugu schools coordinator. "We have to look at the child's face and say, 'No, you're not 12 yet. '" 

But even an education, a precious commodity in Africa, no longer guarantees a job.
Each year, an additional 600,000 people enter the labor market, but the economy is creating less than 100,000 jobs annually.
The streets of Nairobi are teeming with the unemployed.
The more ambitious try to eke out a living in the informal sector, called "jua kali", or hot sun, where they make and repair all manner of things in open-air workshops. 

Amid a deafening din at one "jua kali" on the edge of town, where a couple of hundred men hammer metal into a variety of products, George Dhuu, 24, pounds out another chicken feeder.
He sells enough to make about $75 a month, which goes to support his wife and young son and his mother and two brothers. "A lot of people depend on me," he says. "But I'm sorry, this is the best I can do." 

Prospects are just as grim in the countryside, as the government scales back its ambitions to develop the productive capacity of Kenya's arid and semi-arid regions.
Agriculture-ministry officials say budgetary cuts have left the agriculture-extension services with a lack of vehicles, expert staff, veterinarian supplies and farming aids, which in turn means little or no improvement in the lives of the 15 million Kenyans involved in food production. 

At the moment, Kenya is one of the few African countries able to feed itself, but officials worry that the delay in rural development may leave the country dangerously vulnerable to the next drought. 

The last severe drought, which historically comes in five-year cycles, was in 1984, before the debt crisis fully hit and when the country still had plenty of foreign currency to import grain. 

