.START 

BAKER SAID the U.S. has dropped a basic demand in superpower arms talks. 

In an attempt to "get the ball rolling" with the Soviet Union in negotiations in Geneva aimed at reducing strategic arms, the secretary of state said the Bush administration has instructed its negotiators to stop insisting on a ban on mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles.
Baker, who is to meet in Wyoming this weekend with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, also predicted progress in the areas of chemical weapons and nuclear testing. 

Shevardnadze, who has made clear he wants to confer about a summit between Bush and Gorbachev, is expected to offer new arms-control proposals. 

THE VATICAN SAID a convent should be moved from its site near Auschwitz. 

In the first public declaration by the Roman Catholic hierarchy on the controversy that has offended Jewish groups, the Vatican issued a communique calling for the removal of the convent of Carmelite nuns from the site of the former Nazi death camp in Poland.
The statement, which rejected the opposition to the relocation by Poland's Cardinal Glemp, also said the Vatican would help pay to build a new prayer center. 

Jewish leaders hailed the decision, and the World Jewish Congress said it would call for an end to a freeze on formal relations with the Holy See. 

GORBACHEV RECEIVED the chance to revamp the Communist Party next year. 

As the policy-making Central Committee opened a meeting in Moscow primarily devoted to ethnic unrest in the Soviet Union, members approved a plan to reschedule the party's next congress for October 1990.
The session originally was scheduled for the spring of 1991.
The move, called for by the Soviet president, was calculated to hasten the pace of his restructuring program and to change the Kremlin leadership. 

Gorbachev said that attempts by outlying republics to secede wouldn't be tolerated and actions to kindle ethnic strife would be dealt with severely. 

Hurricane Hugo churned past the Bahamas on an uncertain path that threatens an area from Florida to North Carolina by the weekend.
Disaster teams worked in Puerto Rico and on a string of islands thrashed by the storm in the Caribbean.
More than 50,000 people were left homeless, and at least 25 were reported killed. 

A French passenger plane vanished with as many as 170 people aboard, probably over the African nation of Niger, officials said.
Radio contact with the DC-10, bound for Paris from the Congo, was lost after taking off from a stopover in Chad.
Passengers included the wife of the U.S. envoy to N'Djamena, the French airline UTA said. 

A judge in Bogota issued an arrest warrant for an Israeli army reserve colonel, Yair Klein, who is suspected of training hit squads for Colombian drug traffickers.
The arrest of an Israeli civilian also was ordered on the same charges.
Israel doesn't have an extradition treaty with Colombia. 

Burkina Faso executed by firing squad two leaders of a foiled plot to overthrow the government of President Blaise Compaore, an official of the West African nation said.
The coup apparently was timed for Compaore's return to the country, formerly called Upper Volta, from a trip to Asia. 

The FAA ordered ultrasonic inspections of the type of General Electric Co. engine whose failure led to the July crash of a United Airlines DC-10 in Sioux City, Iowa, killing 112 people.
The "emergency regulation" was announced during a Senate panel's hearing on the airworthiness of the tri-jet. 

West Germany announced that it would indefinitely close its embassy in Warsaw today, saying the situation caused by refugees seeking resettlement in the West was untenable.
The move came as more than 600 East German emigres occupied Bonn's missions in Poland and Czechoslovakia. 

Israel's Premier Shamir held talks with Rabin about the defense minister's discussions Monday with Egyptian President Mubarak.
Speculation mounted, meanwhile, that the government could collapse over a dispute caused by Mubarak's plan to sponsor Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. 

Quayle met in Seoul with Prime Minister Kang, while hundreds of students held rallies denouncing South Korea's government and the U.S.
The vice president, on the first stop of an Asian tour, discussed a range of issues with Kang, including the future of 43,000 U.S. troops in South Korea, aides said. 

Haiti's president has commuted the life sentence of Luc Desir, the ex-chief of secret police who directed torture sessions during the Duvalier regime, a state-run newspaper in Port-au-Prince reported.
Desir's sentence was reduced to 30 years, but the move was viewed as a step toward a full pardon. 

A New York state appeals court declared the San Diego Yacht Club the winner of the 1988 America's Cup, reversing an earlier decision that the club had unfairly won the sailing competition by using a catamaran.
The court said San Diego had properly fulfilled its obligations under the rules when it beat New Zealand. 

