.START 

Stock prices rose as worries about junk bonds eased, but long-term Treasury bonds and the dollar slipped a little. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 12.92 points to 2687.50 in thin trading.
The dollar dropped against the mark and the yen, but traders welcomed a return to a narrow trading range after sharp swings in the U.S. currency's value Friday.
Bond prices tracked the dollar's course through much of the day. 

Traders said that although investors remain worried about the viability of the junk-bond market in the wake of Campeau Corp. 's troubles, they aren't yet running for cover.
Stock-market investors still are trying to puzzle out the impact Campeau's problems ultimately may have on the financing of leveraged buy-outs and mergers and acquisitions. 

"The trouble with junk bonds has clouded our market," said Dudley Eppel, senior vice president and manager of equity trading at Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette.
But he added, "I think the market is holding up quite well." 

The modest stock rebound was welcome after two straight weeks of declines from the industrial average's all-time high of 2752.09 on Sept. 1.
But few analysts said they expect another major rally to begin soon.
Besides the junk-bond concerns, investors are uncertain about the direction of the economy.
Another statistic will be added today when the government reports the August consumer-price index.
It is expected to be up about 0.2%, which would have little effect on financial markets. 

Despite the dollar's decline, traders said the overall feeling about the currency remains mildly bullish.
But little action is expected this week in advance of a meeting this coming weekend of the Group of Seven industrial powers to discuss monetary policy.
G-7 nations include the U.S., Japan, Britain, West Germany, France, Italy and Canada. 

Bond prices drifted lower in concert with the dollar.
Bond traders said the release this week of the Federal Reserve's so-called tan book, a summary of economic activity, may bolster perceptions that inflation continues at a modest rate. 

In major market activity: 

Stock prices rose in anemic trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 136.9 million shares.
Advancing issues on the Big Board were ahead of decliners 751 to 693. 

The dollar eased.
In late afternoon New York trading the currency was at 1.9520 marks and 145.88 yen compared with 1.9660 marks and 146.43 yen Friday. 

Bond prices were off slightly.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond lost less than an eighth of a point, or less than $1.25 for each $1,000 of face amount.
The yield on the issue was 8.08%. 

