.START 

More than three years have passed since John Lehman sat in his observation post at the Pentagon and listened to U.S. bombers pounding Libyan air bases into dust.
Now he sits at a desk high above Sixth Avenue, planning a different kind of raid. 

The former Navy secretary is part of a PaineWebber investment-banking squad that is scouring the ranks of the nation's defense contractors, seeking possible targets for takeovers and restructurings. 

"There will be consolidation world-wide" in the defense industry, predicts Jack Modzelewski, a Rockwell defector who is a member of the seven-member PaineWebber team.
The resulting mergers and other deals could mean handsome profits for investors who choose the right defense stocks, analysts say. 

Hostile bids and foreign suitors are rare on the military scene, of course.
And takeover speculators of all stripes have been shaken by recent tremors in the junk-bond market.
After the dust settles, however, the Street expects to see a number of strategic acquisitions of defense companies. 

"For the first time in a long time, assets are undervalued" in the defense sector, says Bernard L. Schwartz, the acquisitive chairman of Loral, the defense-electronics concern. "Not since I have been in the business have I seen such an attractive situation for making acquisitions." 

Contracting scandals and bad cost judgments have combined with a shrinking Pentagon budget to turn the defense stocks into market pariahs.
Many of the issues trade at or near single-digit multiples of the companies' estimated 1989 earnings. 

General Dynamics, for example, is trading at less than 8 times this year's profit estimate from Shearson Lehman Hutton, well below the 13 multiple for the Standard & Poor's 500.
Grumman trades at 11 times estimated earnings, while Martin Marietta's multiple is below 9. 

Some defense stocks trade below their asset values, seemingly making them takeover bait.
Michael Metz, market strategist for Oppenheimer & Co., says defense-budget cutbacks will leave the companies with scant reason to increase capital spending, but their cash flow remains strong.
It all adds up to a rocket-fuel formula that he thinks should send some of the stocks off into the wild blue yonder in takeovers. 

Mr. Metz says investment bankers and possible suitors are probably looking at Tech-Sym, General Dynamics, Whitehall, Grumman and United Technologies, whose Pratt & Whitney aircraft-engine business is one segment of a sprawling conglomerate.
Raiders have been cautious so far, however, because of the industry's ties to the Pentagon and some members of Congress.
Most takeovers of defense companies will be portrayed as friendly. "Totally neutral" is the way Loral's Mr. Schwartz describes the Defense Department's attitude toward inter-industry marriages. 

Some analysts think Loral might pursue E-Systems of Dallas.
Much of E-Systems' allure lies in its "coded communications, spy-plane avionics -- 25% of their business is pure James Bond kind of stuff," says Shearson's Gary J. Reich.
Loral focuses on a different area of defense electronics, namely communications and electronic-defense systems.
From 1984 through 1988, ESystems sales rose 85% while operating profit increased only 21%, Mr. Modzelewski says.
E-Systems holders might demand that a suitor pay at least 50 for their shares, which closed yesterday at 34 1/8. 

Another company well-positioned for the industry change to more surveillance and less armament is Watkins-Johnson. 

"It is a well-managed company with strong underlying cash flow," says Oppenheimer's Lior Bregman.
It has businesses in intelligence, microwave and semiconductor components, and recently acquired a company that measures water contamination.
Cash flow -- defined as operating profit plus depreciation, minus expenses for equipment -- is a strong $5 a share.
At midyear the company had $27 million in cash and long-term debt of only $22 million, Mr. Bregman says.
The shares are worth 45 on a takeover basis, he says; they closed yesterday at 25 1/8. 

Grumman would make a nice fit with a larger aerospace concern, such as Boeing, says Shearson's Mr. Reich: "Boeing would acquire fighter-plane expertise." Some think Grumman shares, at 21 1/2 yesterday, could fetch 35 in a takeover.
But a suitor might wait for Grumman to hit the skids and ask for federal assistance before assuming its heavy debts. 

More than 20% of General Dynamics is owned by the Crown family of Chicago, which analysts believe might sell to an aggressive bidder.
The highly diversified company makes submarines, fighter planes, tanks and missiles.
Again, a merger might require federal aid because of the company's heavy liabilities. 

Dallas investor Harold Simmons holds nearly 10% of Lockheed, but many analysts think he is merely hoping to attract a larger buyer, such as Ford, Rockwell International, Chrysler or Boeing.
PaineWebber's Mr. Modzelewski says "the numbers work well into the 70s" for a takeover of Lockheed -- at 48 3/8 yesterday -- "but you are still dealing in time frames of over a year." 

A final caveat comes from Jonathan de L. Squires, senior vice president at Kleinwort Benson: "If there is no takeover," he warns, "what is supporting the earnings of a Whitehall, Tech-Sym or Watkins-Johnson?
They are vulnerable to a shrinking defense budget." 

