.START 

CAMPEAU REACHED a definitive accord in which it will cede substantial control to Olympia & York in return for a $250 million loan.
Olympia & York also will supervise a major restructuring of the Toronto-based retail and real estate concern.
Apparel makers, many of which halted shipments to Campeau-owned stores last week, had mixed reactions. 

Junk-bond prices staged a partial recovery following news of the Campeau bailout.
The market was thrown into turmoil last week by disclosures about the company's financial woes. 

Consumer prices held steady in August, the first time in over three years they didn't rise.
A drop in energy costs kept prices in check, though economists remain wary about inflation.
Housing starts plunged 5%, the biggest slide in six months. 

American Airlines proposed sizable fare increases that would take effect next week if competitors match the move.
Most carriers were still studying the plan late yesterday. 

Short-term securities trades by pension funds could be taxed under a plan being considered by Senate Finance Chairman Bentsen.
The levy is "among other options" under review to raise revenue, Bentsen said. 

Ford Motor disclosed it wants to buy up to 15% of British luxury-car maker Jaguar.
Ford also is negotiating an alliance with Sweden's Saab.
The moves come amid a growing consolidation of Europe's car industry. 

MGM Grand plans to build a movie theme park as well as a 4,000-room hotel in Las Vegas.
The Kirk Kerkorian-owned firm also sued Walt Disney over use of the name "MGM Grand" for a movie theme park. 

Upjohn's prescription drug Halcion is being investigated for safety by the FDA. Halcion is the most widely prescribed sleeping agent in the world. 

Australian financier Alan Bond announced a series of moves to ease the financial strains on his flagship company, including the sale of half of his Australian brewery empire. 

A fiscal 1990 deficit plan isn't likely to clear Congress in time to avoid automatic budget reductions next month, officials say.
But Congress is expected to restore the cuts later. 

Resorts International unveiled a recapitalization plan aimed at keeping the company out of Chapter 11.
But bondholders attacked the plan. 

Avon Products cut its forecast of 1989 earnings, prompting speculation the door-to-door sales company may soon be a takeover target again. 

IBM introduced an array of products aimed at helping corporate customers write software faster. 

Ferranti of Britain is discussing a possible merger or alliance with two suitors as one way to resolve the financial crisis at the defense firm. 

A mortgage insurance program designed to help low and moderate-income people buy homes was unveiled by GE Capital Mortgage Insurance, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. 

Markets -- 

Stocks: Volume 141,610,000 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 2687.31, off 0.19; transportation 1450.21, up 8.00; utilities 216.55, up 0.06. 

Bonds: Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3335.28, up 

Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 129.66, off 0.58; spot index 129.57, off 0.01. 

Dollar: 145.85 yen, off 0.03; 1.9545 marks, up 0.0025. 

