.START 

Avon Products Inc. cut its forecast of 1989 earnings, prompting speculation on Wall Street that the company may soon be a takeover target again. 

James Preston, chairman and chief executive officer of Avon, said in a statement that weak sales and the strong U.S. dollar have prompted the company to reduce its forecast of 1989 per-share earnings to a range of $1.95 to $2.15, down from an earlier estimate of $2.30 to $2.40 a share. 

Avon, primarily a door-to-door sales concern, said its new gift and jewelry products are posting disappointing sales, a trend expected to continue as the key Christmas selling season starts.
Non-cosmetic products account for about half of Avon's fourth-quarter sales. 

The trend appears so significant that the company has also reduced its 1990 earnings estimates below the $3.35 to $3.45 it previously forecast.
Avon has decided not to make any new projections for 1990 earnings at this time. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Avon closed at $31.75 a share, down $2.125.
The stock reached a 1989 high of $41.25 on May 17. 

Earlier this year, Avon rejected takeover bids from Amway Corp. and Minneapolis investor Irwin Jacobs.
At that time, Avon management not only projected increased earnings but stated that Avon shareholders would benefit from cost efficiencies then being implemented.
In August, Mr. Preston met with Mr. Jacobs to discuss Avon's future prospects.
Following that meeting, Mr. Jacobs stated he was happy with the company's direction. 

Several Wall Street money managers expressed severe disappointment with Avon management and said they believed Mr. Jacobs, who controls a bit more than 10% of Avon's stock, may now try to make another run at the company.
Mr. Jacobs couldn't be reached for comment. 

Jeffrey Ashenberg, an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., said that Avon is experiencing what he described as serious roadblocks.
He also questioned whether the company's earnings projections were unduly affected by the bids by Mr. Jacobs and Amway. 

"It's conceivable that estimates by management were made in a frenzy to protect itself from hostile takeovers then underway," said Mr. Ashenberg. "If the disappointment is deep enough another hostile offer may be . . . forthcoming." 

Mr. Preston, responding to this criticism, said through a spokesman, "There was no way in May to forecast that the gift and jewelry lines would underperform in the fourth quarter.
We expected continued growth of 4% to 5%, which we could build on by adding sales representatives." He said the lower-than-expected gift and jewelry sales "will more than offset the expanded sales staff." Mr. Preston denied that the company made its earnings projections as a response to the bids by Amway or Mr. Jacobs. 

Robert Renck, Jr., managing partner at R.L. Renck & Co., said some investors will undoubtedly be disappointed with Avon's performance, but he praised the company for releasing the bad news quickly. "The real question that comes to mind is whether this is an Avon trend or an indication of what the Christmas selling season is going to be like," he said. 

In 1988, profit from continuing operations was $1.70 a fully diluted share.
After a charge related to an accounting change and a loss from discontinued operations, Avon had a loss of $404.5 million for the year. 

