.START 

In the race for stock-market profits, some financial advisers say it may be time for mutual-fund investors to bet on the "tortoises." 

The tortoises in question are funds run by portfolio managers who follow the so-called value-investing approach. 

They are bargain hunters, who buy stock in companies that are undervalued based on various measures of what the companies are worth today.
Unlike growth-fund managers, who are willing to pay high prices for stocks on the basis of expectations about future earnings power, value managers refuse to pay for what might happen tomorrow. 

When the market is soaring, value funds are tortoises, failing to match the streaking performance of the growth-fund "hares." But the market has already risen so much, some investment advisers doubt there's that much more to gain.
And if the market should take a plunge, they say, value funds should cushion the fall. 

"Buying value mutual funds makes sense now if you are nervous about the market," says Donald Phillips, editor of Mutual Fund Values, a Chicago publication that tracks mutual funds. 

Kurt Brouwer, a San Francisco investment adviser, agrees. "If you want to get into the stock market now, the best way is to buy good value mutual funds," he says. "They have cash positions ranging from 15% to 25% {of their total investment portfolios}, and they are still looking for undervalued companies." It's this cash position, plus the cheap stocks they have purchased, that protects investors in a downdraft. 

So far this year, growth funds have clearly outrun the value funds, by investing in hot sectors like telecommunications and cable TV, or in takeover stocks.
While value funds have cashed in on some of the takeover action, their large cash positions have held them back. "Like your grandmother, they have refused to pay high prices," says Mr. Brouwer. 

For example, Delaware Group Trend Fund and Twentieth Century Growth Fund, two popular growth funds, were up 49.7% and 43.6%, respectively, through Aug. 31, according to Lipper Analytical Services.
In contrast, Mutual Shares and Lindner Fund, two big value funds, were up 18.8% and 19.6%, respectively. 

But during the fourth quarter of 1987, the quarter of the October stock-market crash, value funds clearly outperformed growth funds.
Delaware Group Trend Fund plunged 31.2% and Twentieth Century Growth tumbled 27.3%, according to Lipper.
Meanwhile, Lindner Fund and Mutual Shares both fell about 16%. 

Ken Gregory, partner in Litman/Gregory & Co., a San Francisco money manager, says value funds tend to have fewer bad years than growth funds.
Looking at a group of top-performing no-load mutual funds over the past 10 years, he says, the growth funds in the group had a negative year 22% of the time.
But the value funds ended up in the red in only 9% of the years. 

Moreover, in the loss years, the growth funds lost more than twice as much as the value funds, Mr. Gregory says. 

Value funds can make it easier, psychologically, to stick with an investment program because they keep investors from getting so discouraged in down markets. "I keep very little of my clients' money in aggressive growth funds," says Laura Adams, a Princeton, N.J., financial planner. "They are so volatile that many people have trouble dealing with them." 

Identifying funds that are truly value funds can be tricky.
For one thing, they don't fit into any of the handy categories used by mutual-fund analysts.
Some are classified as growth or growth-and-income funds, while others fall in the capital-appreciation and, even, small-company-stock categories. 

In addition, investors can't always judge by a fund's name.
Some value funds -- like Royce Value, Bartlett Basic Value and Merrill Lynch Basic Value A -- use the word "value" in their names, says Mr. Phillips of Mutual Fund Values.
But others don't. 

As a result, investors need to look at the kind of stocks a fund holds.
Value funds own stocks with low price-to-book ratios and low price-earnings ratios, two indicators of value.
The price-to-book ratio is the relationship of a company's stock price to its book value (assets minus liabilities) per share.
The price-earnings ratio is calculated by dividing a stock's price by earnings per share. 

Value funds like Windsor Fund, Bartlett Basic Value and Babson Value have price-to-book ratios that are 50% of the general market's price-to-book ratio, Mr. Phillips says. 

So which value funds do investment advisers like these days? 

Mr. Phillips chooses Clipper Fund, Merrill Lynch Basic Value A, Babson Value Fund and FPA Perennial Fund.
Mr. Brouwer, the San Francisco investment adviser, suggests Vanguard Equity Income Fund, Nicholas Fund and Nicholas II, Linder Fund, Gabelli Asset Trust, Evergreen Fund and Evergreen Total Return Fund.
Mr. Gregory likes Mutual Shares and the Windsor Fund (both closed to new investors), Gabelli Asset Fund, Selected American Shares, Lindner Fund and Lindner Dividend Fund, and Clipper Fund. 

