.START 

Rep. Henry Waxman's Aug. 15 letter in response to your Aug. 3 editorial on the president's Clean Air Bill was an accurate and pointed description of America's air-quality problem.
I believe, however, that misrepresentations should be corrected.
Rep. Waxman, a champion of clean air for many years, unfortunately misstates many elements of President Bush's clean-air proposal. 

First, he claims the averaging of tailpipe standards would increase emissions.
To ensure that this does not happen, the proposed legislation clearly stipulates averaging can be used "so long as averaging would achieve at least the same reductions." It is the cost-effectiveness of this averaging program, and other programs, that enables the president's bill to achieve 95% of the environmental benefits of Rep. Waxman's bill at $6 billion less cost. 

Second, Rep. Waxman says the legislation would repeal provisions protecting air quality in national parks.
In fact, Mr. Bush's proposal leaves intact protection afforded to the parks under existing regulations.
Parks will benefit from sulfur-dioxide reductions achieved from our proposed acid-rain provisions, reductions from tighter automobile and factory standards, and reductions from the phase-in of clean fuels.
The administration's proposed clean-air legislation is designed to enhance, not degrade, air quality in national parks. 

Third, Rep. Waxman refers to relaxation of restrictions on tall stacks at industrial plants.
Again, he fails to note that the 10 million-ton reduction in sulfur dioxide in the president's proposal is far more than has been, or could be, provided through implementation of current regulations governing emissions from tall stacks. 

Finally, he criticizes a 50% exemption of major sources of air toxics.
There is no such blanket exemption.
The administration's proposal requires 50% of the affected source categories to be regulated within seven years, with action on the remaining categories within 10 years.
These regulations will achieve a 75% to 90% reduction in air toxic emissions at an acceptable cost.
No affected facility is exempt from the administration's proposal. 

William G. Rosenberg 

Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation 

Environmental Protection Agency 

Washington 

