.START 

New Deal philosophers Adolph Berle and Gardner Means in 1932 published "The Modern Corporation and Private Property," a book that much pleased the American near-left.
It argued that the ascendancy of professional managers as a result of the broad spread of public stock ownership of the Roaring '20s had severed corporate control from corporate ownership.
Government was justified in challenging these managers who had usurped economic power. 

Nine years later, in "The Managerial Revolution," James Burnham attacked from the opposite direction.
He asserted that capitalism itself, not government, had the most to fear from the new professionals.
They offer little resistance to socialism, he argued, because they have no deep philosophical commitment to private property and could as happily manage state corporations as private ones. 

Professionally managed corporations grew and prospered despite such attacks.
The professionals were good at their jobs.
Alfred P. Sloan Jr. decentralized General Motors, showing how to manage efficiently vast enterprises with many production and sales units and many thousands of employees.
Pearl Harbor touched off amazing managerial feats as consumer-goods plants were retooled in months to produce weapons.
Postwar, CEOs made use of strong dollars and American political hegemony to internationalize.
In response to political and social pressures in the 1960s and 1970s, they turned corporations into miniwelfare states, with wide-ranging benefits and protections for employees. 

Now, another challenge looms.
Professional managers are confronted with "the market for corporate control" as raiders seek their assets and power.
LBOs, management buy-outs, division spinoffs and stock repurchases are restoring narrow private ownership.
As owners increasingly take a direct hand in management, and vice versa, corporations look more and more like those created early in the century by the likes of J.P. Morgan, Henry Ford, Thomas Edison, Harvey Firestone and other rugged individualists. 

A new debate rages: Is this bad or good?
Do the raiders mostly milk the corporations?
Is the heavy use of leverage dangerous?
Is there insufficient regard for employee welfare?
Does the risk of hostile takeovers force corporate officers to focus on the short term and ignore the corporation's long-range interests?
An excellent discussion of these issues is offered in the September-October Harvard Business Review by two Harvard Business School professors, Michael C. Jensen and Jay O. Light.
Prof.
Jensen argues that what he calls the "Eclipse of the Public Corporation" is, on balance, good.
For one thing, it is breaking down the natural reluctance of managers to return surpluses to the capital markets through dividends, where they will be subject to market judgments in their reinvestment.
It has subjected managers not only to capital-market disciplines but also to the direct scrutiny of new owners with very large stakes in performance.
Managers are no longer as able as in the past to apply their own tests to investment decisions.
Those tests might be no more beneficial to shareholders or the economy than their desire to make the company larger, giving themselves more prestige and middle managers more chances for promotion. 

Prof.
Jensen asserts, "The publicly held corporation, the main engine of economic progress in the United States for a century, has outlived its usefulness in many sectors of the economy and is being eclipsed." He believes that a profound change in American capitalism is well under way and thinks it should be encouraged. "By resolving the central weakness of the public corporation -- the conflict between owners and managers over the control and use of corporate resources -- these new organizations are making remarkable gains in operating efficiency, employee productivity and shareholder value.
Over the long term, they will enhance U.S. economic performance relative to our most formidable international competitor, Japan, whose companies are moving in the opposite direction." 

This revolution is not happening because someone decreed a new "industrial policy" from Washington, but rather because of major changes taking place in the capital markets themselves.
Huge supplies of capital are building up in the hands of institutional investors -- pension funds in particular.
Their investment needs are very different from those of individual investors.
In his companion piece, Prof.
Light notes that pension funds don't really need the liquidity the individual wants, since they "can project their cash needs well into the future based on predictable factors such as employee demographics, life expectancies and health trends.
So they can take a long-term view of investment returns and keep their holdings in illiquid assets." 

Stock trading is essentially a zero-sum game for big funds since, on average, their managers can never beat the market itself.
So it is an attractive alternative to take large positions in companies, through private placements or LBO syndicates, and exercise a direct hand in improving the company's investment performance. 

Prof.
Jensen notes that private placements of debt and equity have risen more than tenfold since 1980 and now account for more than 40% of annual corporate financings. "In every year since 1983, at least 5% of the outstanding value of corporate equity has disappeared through stock repurchases, takeovers, and going-private transactions." Indeed, Prof.
Light observes, fancifully he admits, that if the current trend should continue, "the last share of a publicly traded common stock owned by an individual will be sold in the year 2003." 

There is a certain plausibility in the argument that greater owner involvement in corporate management is a good thing.
Indeed, some corporate CEOs take that view themselves, saying that operating a company in a kind of ownership limbo makes them uncomfortable.
On the other hand, very few CEOs want to be victims of hostile takeovers.
And their fears that some of the raiders are merely looking for a short-term gain, not real ownership, have justification in recent experience. 

Then, of course, there is the question of what role stock exchanges will play in this future world of narrow ownership and less interest in liquidity.
Will they become less important? 

Prof.
Jensen doesn't think that the privatization trend will be universal.
The conventional 20th-century model of corporate governance, with widely dispersed owners and professional managers, will remain viable for growth industries, where attractive opportunities for investment continue to exceed cash generation, he believes.
Such firms will continue to need capitalmarket liquidity.
Computers, electronics, biotechnology and financial services are examples.
Privatization is most appealing for industries with large cash flows and limited opportunities. 

In short, American industry and capital markets can, in the absence of political interference, adapt to changing circumstances quite effectively.
That early debate about the consequences of the gap between ownership and control has taken a long time to bear fruit.
But now the market is setting about to resolve it. 

