.START 

GE Capital Mortgage Insurance Cos., Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac jointly announced a mortgage insurance program designed to help low-income and moderate-income people buy homes. 

The Community Home Buyer's Program relaxes lending standards to help lower-income families qualify for a mortgage.
To help avoid defaults, however, the program requires buyers to attend a training course on choosing, financing and owning a home, and it emphasizes prepurchase inspections. 

GE Capital, a General Electric Co. unit, said it will insure as much as $500 million in loans, or enough money to finance nearly 10,000 dwellings.
Fannie Mae, as the Federal National Mortgage Association is known, agreed to buy as much as $200 million of the loans from lenders.
Freddie Mac, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., didn't specify a total. 

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are federally chartered, stockholder-owned corporations that operate a secondary market in mortgage loans, buying loans from lenders and packaging them into securities for sale to investors or holding them in portfolio. 

GE Capital said six lenders have signed up already and the company expects 50 lenders to participate in the next few months.
Gregory T. Barmore, president of GE Capital, said the buyers' program "addresses a critical need while offering a good business opportunity" for GE, lenders, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. 

Earlier this year, GE and Fannie Mae launched a similar initiative, with GE Capital insuring home loans to low-income and moderate-income families in five Midwest cities.
Under that program, Fannie Mae agreed to buy $40 million in mortgages. 

The program announced yesterday allows buyers to apply 33% of their income to their monthly housing expenses, rather than the standard 28% required for most financing with a 5% down payment.
The program also waives the condition that buyers have a cash reserve equal to two monthly mortgage payments, and it permits buyers to use a subsidized second mortgage to cut costs.
As evidence of good credit history, borrowers can also use non-traditional documents such as rent and utility payments. 

In addition, the Community Home Buyer's Program requires potential buyers to attend classes that explain the mortgage application process as well as the income level, savings and credit history needed to obtain a mortgage.
Instructors also teach buyers how to choose a home that isn't going to need extensive repairs, and emphasize home inspections to avert a potential default because of a costly maintenance problem in the first few years.
In some cases, the inspections are subsidized. 

