.START 

Maxwell Communication Corp. moved to increase its growing role in the U.S. textbook market by agreeing to buy Bell & Howell Co. 's Merrill Publishing unit for $260 million. 

The purchase of Merrill, an old name in U.S. elementary and secondary school publishing, would further strengthen Maxwell's position in U.S. textbook publishing through its U.S. unit, Macmillan Inc.
A recently formed Macmillan joint venture with McGraw-Hill Inc. is already the second-biggest publisher of U.S. textbooks, after New York-based Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. 

The purchase price, at least twice Merrill's expected sales this year, reflects the continuing allure of U.S. educational publishers, analysts said.
Since about 1985, U.S. elementary school enrollment has been rising.
That demographic trend, expected to continue into the late 1990s, is increasing school book sales across the U.S. and perking up a once-dull niche of publishing.
This year, publishers' sales to elementary and secondary schools are expected to rise at least 11% from last year's $1.78 billion, said New York-based industry analyst Kendrick Noble of PaineWebber Securities Inc. 

"The schools area {of publishing} is assured good growth into the 1990s," Mr. Noble said.
Such expectations have already prompted a series of industry mergers, as publishers jockey for position.
Besides the Macmillan/McGraw venture, announced last May, other industry mergers have included Time Inc. 's 1986 purchase of Scott Foresman and Harcourt's purchase of CBS Inc. 's textbook unit. 

Since 1986, analysts say, the sales prices for these and other educational publishers have ranged from 2.2 to 2.9 times revenue -- a figure comparable to Merrill's sales multiple. 

William Reilly, president of Maxwell's Macmillan, called the $260 million purchase "reasonable for a company" with Merrill's strengths in science, health, and mathematics texts -- three areas of "weakness" for the Macmillan/McGraw-Hill venture.
Mr. Reilly said he expects Merrill's sales to exceed $125 million in the fiscal year ending March 31.
About 70% of that, he said, represents sales to elementary and secondary schools, while the remainder stems from college text sales. 

Mr. Reilly said Merrill's elementary and secondary school business would be merged into the Macmillan/McGraw-Hill venture.
Merrill's college text business is to be consolidated into Macmillan's own college unit, he said.
Mr. Reilly added that he believes the purchase would make Macmillan/McGraw-Hill the biggest U.S. textbook publisher, with combined sales of $550 million.
But some industry analysts disputed that claim.
BP Report, a White Plains, N.Y., trade publication, estimated Harcourt's educational book sales last year at $643 million. 

Bell & Howell, a publishing and information services concern based in Skokie, Ill., was acquired last year for $678.4 million by an investor group led by Texas financier Robert M. Bass.
In Dallas, Bass spokesmen declined to discuss details of the Merrill sale. 

Jerry Herb, corporate vice president for administration at Bell & Howell, said Columbus, Ohio-based Merrill posted revenue last year of about $100 million.
Though profitable, Mr. Herb said, with the overall consolidation going on in the publishing industry a $100 million company would find it more and more difficult to compete and be cost effective.
Bell & Howell has tried unsuccessfully for several years to expand Merrill by acquiring other companies.
When that proved unsuccessful, it decided to sell. 

"It just came down to a numbers game," said Mr. Herb.
He said Bell & Howell has owned Merrill for more than 20 years. 

Robert Tomsho in Dallas contributed to this article. 

