.START 

Oil prices declined as concern receded that members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries might clash at next week's meeting. 

Market participants expect the gathering of oil producers to be uneventful.
Reports that Saudi Arabian Oil Minister Hisham Nazer won't be attending the meeting due to illness has disappointed some traders who had been expecting the Saudis to vent their frustrations over quota violations. 

OPEC has been consistently producing beyond its 19.5 million daily quota since the oil ministers met last June.
In fact, production may have exceeded 21 million to 22 million barrels a day at certain times in recent weeks. 

"Even if they decide to increase their quota at the meeting, they'll still be producing beyond their allotment," said Andrew Lebow, analyst for E.D. & F. Man International Futures Inc. whose remarks echoed similar comments from traders who said it's unlikely any OPEC action will really change the actual supply and demand situation. 

Hurricane jitters are also declining as it becomes clear that one of the most powerful tropical storms of recent years is unlikely to hit any of the refineries located along the coast in the Gulf of Mexico.
Caribbean refineries that have already been lashed by the storm appear to have escaped with minimal damage.
The only remaining concern is that gasoline shipments along the East Coast could be disrupted if Hurricane Hugo slams into that shoreline. 

Also weighing prices down is a temporary glut of heating oil supplies in New York Harbor.
Market participants report that major oil companies are selling the home heating fuel at a discount of up to one cent a gallon to futures prices. 

Crude oil prices for delivery during October may become especially vulnerable to declines because several refineries will be closed for scheduled maintenance turnarounds.
As a result, demand for crude would decline temporarily. 

Crude for October delivery yesterday fell 32 cents a barrel to $19.56 in moderate to heavy trading action.
In other commodity markets yesterday: 

COPPER: Futures prices fell after a sharp early advance.
The December contract settled at $1.2595 a pound, down 1.75 cents.
The December contract traded as high as $1.2990, up 3.20 cents from Monday.
However, the most dramatic turnaround was in the spot September contract, which will cease trading Sept. 27.
At first it traded up to a new life-of-contract high of $1.4050, then dropped to end at $1.37, for a net loss of 0.80 cent.
The price retreat began following an announcement by the Commodity Exchange that its margin committee has raised the original margin requirement, or good faith money, for the September contract to its full value from $2,600 for each speculative contract and $2,000 for each hedge contract.
Based on $1.4050 a pound, which prevailed in the September contract prior to the issuance of the margin notice, each 25,000-pound futures contract would have been worth $35,125.
The September contract has been at a premium over December since the beginning of the month as Commodity Exchange warehouse stocks of copper for delivery against September have dwindled, said John Gross, president of J.E. Gross & Associates, a New City, N.Y., industry consulting firm. "The premium has risen from 3.3 cents on Sept. 1 to 11.05 cents yesterday, with the September settlement price of $1.37, compared with December at $1.2595," he said.
Yesterday, Comex copper warehouse stocks fell by 1,156 tons to 11,987 tons.
Mr. Gross observed that the open interest, or the number of contracts remaining to be nullified by an opposite trade or fulfilled by delivery of copper, at 3,750 contracts yesterday was equal to 46,875 tons, or about three times the amount of copper in storage for delivery against the September contract. "With that kind of discrepancy, one would have to believe that the majority of the buying of contracts has to be by traders who'd previously sold in anticipation that prices would go down," he said. 

GRAINS and SOYBEANS: The prices of most corn and wheat futures contracts dipped amid continued speculation that the Soviet Union might skip its usual autumn buying binge of U.S. grains.
The speculation was touched off last week by a top Soviet trade official's remarks that it doesn't need to import grain for the remainder of the year.
Most U.S. analysts are skeptical -- the Soviet Union has long depended on imports to meet its internal food needs and might be trying to depress the prices of the grains it needs.
Remarks by other Soviet officials seem to indicate that it will continue to be a major purchaser of world crops.
But analysts are nonetheless jittery: the Soviet purchases are one of the biggest price-moving developments to occur in the fall, and prices would dip sharply if the Soviet Union actually didn't buy U.S. grain for the rest of the year.
That would help Soviet agriculture officials avoid the political embarrassment of importing massive amounts of crops at a time when they are trying to encourage more production from Soviet farmers with cash bonuses.
Indeed, there is speculation that the management of the Soviet Union's importing arm is being changed, and that this reflects a new import policy. 

SUGAR: Futures prices dropped slightly from Monday's strong gains.
The October contract ended with a loss of 0.09 cent a pound at 14.27 cents.
One analyst said Hurricane Hugo had bypassed Cuba and that, as concern over possible damage to sugar-growing areas on that island diminished, so did demand for contracts.
However, he noted, there is increasing belief that India, after having rejected offers three times recently, will buy sugar on the world market this week, along with several other countries. "This spate of anticipated demand was sufficient to provide some support and minimize reaction from Hurricane Hugo," the analyst said. 

