.START 

Skittish investors have forced media magnate Rupert Murdoch to scotch plans for an ambitious new investment vehicle.
But a source close to the situation said Murdoch's News Corp. and its investment bank adviser Credit Suisse First Boston Corp. hope to relaunch the proposal in an altered form. 

The failure of the proposed venture, Media Partners International Ltd. -- dubbed Son of News Corp. by Mr. Murdoch -- potentially complicates News Corp. 's long-term international expansion plans.
Mr. Murdoch needs another vehicle to take the borrowing pressure off his Sydney-based News Corp., whose debts have ballooned in the wake of a five-year acquisition streak. 

"It is a setback," said Viktor Shvets, an analyst at Sydney stockbrokers Capel Court Powell Ltd. But, he added, "I'm sure it's a temporary one." 

Mr. Shvets and others think News Corp. is likely to redesign the venture to make it more advantageous to investors other than News Corp. 

Under the original plan announced in March, Credit Suisse First Boston intended to raise at least $1 billion in a world-wide private placement by June 30, 1989, the end of News Corp. 's fiscal year.
News Corp. was to own 20% of the new company and manage it and be entitled to certain fees.
As part of the plan, News Corp. would have then transferred its book-publishing assets to the new company, a transaction that would have lowered News Corp. 's hefty debt. 

But analysts say that, among other things, potential investors were concerned about the fees payable to News Corp. 

Mr. Murdoch disclosed News Corp. 's intention to abandon the proposal in an interview with London's Financial Times. "It was a clever idea," Mr. Murdoch was quoted as saying. "But it was too much of a blank check." 

Other News Corp. officials weren't immediately available for comment. 

Signs that the Media Partners idea was in trouble emerged in early June when Credit Suisse First Boston conceded it had been able to get commitments for only $450 million from investors other than News Corp., which planned to invest at least $200 million. 

A Credit Suisse First Boston official said then that trying to put together such a transaction within four months was too optimistic.
He attributed the tepid response, particularly among Australian investors, to a misunderstanding of the transaction.
The investment bank was confident it would reach its $1 billion target by the end of July, but the commitments stalled at about $500 million. 

Meanwhile, News Corp. began to implement a stopgap measure, which a senior company official said in June was an "insurance policy" against the "remote chance" that the Media Partners plan could fall through.
News Corp. sold its book-publishing interests, including Harper & Row Publishers Inc. and William Collins PLC, for about $1.3 billion to a joint-venture company owned by News Corp. and a company associated with Credit Suisse First Boston.
News Corp. also asked Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. of New York to arrange an $880 million loan repayable over 7 1/2 years and a $120 million four-year loan to be used as working capital for the joint venture. 

That transaction helped News Corp. meet bank creditors' demands that it lower its debt-to-equity ratio.
But it also reduced the pressure on News Corp. to quickly complete the Media Partners arrangement.
Now, any new transaction is probably months away. 

