.START 

Lloyds Bank PLC, continuing its retrenchment from low-margin U.S. businesses, agreed to sell its U.S. commercial-banking operation to Japan's Daiwa Bank Ltd. for about $200 million. 

The U.S. operation, with 170 employees in 15 offices, had net income of $11 million last year on overall assets of $1.46 billion, for a return of about 0.8%.
It represents about a third of Lloyds's activities in the U.S. 

The sale reflects Lloyds's strategy to divest itself of low-profit, overseas businesses to concentrate on higher-margin operations in Britain and elsewhere in Europe.
It also may blunt takeover speculation surrounding the bank, Britain's fourth-largest in assets. 

The agreement also highlights the rising profile of Japanese banks in the U.S.
The acquisition gives Daiwa -- the world's 25th-largest bank and one of Japan's 13 major commercial banks -- an established U.S. network, staff and expertise to expand its business with medium-sized U.S. corporations.
The transaction appears relatively low-cost: Daiwa is paying roughly 1.66 times indicated book value for the business. 

Lloyds said its U.S. commercial-banking business wasn't achieving returns on equity or assets targeted for the group world-wide.
The business's return on net assets was a quarter of the bank's average, and the U.S. operation's 8% return on equity was well below the 18% targeted by the bank as a whole. 

"The return was perfectly respectable in the U.S. but it just isn't good enough for us," said Michael Thompson, Lloyds's deputy chief executive. "We could get the same returns if we kept it all in cash in the money markets" in Europe, he said. 

Mr. Thompson added that the divestment reflects Lloyds's previously announced plan to focus on four major business areas: retail banking in Britain, financial services, corporate banking and private banking. 

Banking industry analysts also said the higher cost of capital for European banks, which trade at much lower price-to-earnings ratios than Japanese competitors, makes far-flung operations increasingly unattractive for European institutions.
Bankers estimate the average British bank's cost of capital is currently triple that for a Japanese bank.
Lloyds has freed up #800 million ($1.25 billion) in capital over the past five years through such transactions as selling its California unit to Sanwa Bank Ltd. and closing its U.S. government-securities primary dealership. 

Mr. Thompson said the divestment of the U.S. commercial-banking business could contribute to a Lloyds defense against any hostile takeover bid, a subject of continuing speculation in the London markets. "The defense {to a takeover} is performance; this is certainly part of maintaining that performance," he said. 

Mr. Thompson said proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes, and that Lloyds isn't planning any major acquisitions.
Lloyds's biggest recent acquisition was last year's purchase of a 57% stake in Abbey Life Group PLC, a British insurer, which sharply increased the bank's financial-services activities in Britain. 

The sale will leave Lloyds with about 350 employees in the U.S. in foreign-exchange and other money-market operations, corporate lending and private banking.
The divested commercial-banking network includes offices in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Atlanta and Dallas. 

