.START 

Armed with a machete, Eastman Kodak Co. Chairman Colby H. Chandler marched into a meeting with his top 75 managers last month and began whacking away at a wooden crate. 

His subordinates were dumbfounded.
Usually, the diminutive Mr. Chandler emphasizes a point with intricate graphs, and he rarely raises his voice.
But after Kodak's second-quarter profit plunged 85% -- and shocked Wall Street -- only a tantrum, a vivid demonstration of how he wanted to cut costs, would suffice. "There's no working the middle course in wartime," Mr. Chandler asserted, borrowing a line from Winston Churchill. 

The 64-year-old executive, embarking on his fourth restructuring of the company in six years, knows that it is his last chance to prove his leadership before he retires next May.
Already, Kodak watchers are shaking their heads, wondering why he needs four tries to accomplish essentially one job: cut costs.
Is he simply the leader of a gang that can't shoot straight? they ask. 

"He's a considerate and sincere person, but he doesn't have the creativity and adaptability needed in today's markets," says Karen Paul, a business professor at the Rochester Institute of Technology. 

Even Mr. Chandler's chief lieutenants say that past restructurings, while yielding significant improvements, didn't go far enough. "We're getting criticized by people who say, 'We've heard this all before, ' and ask, 'Why haven't we delivered? ' There's some justification for that," says President Kay R. Whitmore.
Indeed, a decision last month to tie annual bonuses to profits rather than to dividends on common stock was first proposed in 1986. 

Vice Chairman J. Phillip Samper, says, "We have to be tougher.
Our costs are still too high." Although the company's cost structure has improved, sales per employee last year totaled only $140,000, far below the $380,000 at Kodak's chief competitor, Fuji Photo Film Co., analysts say. 

But does Kodak still have enough time to rein in expenses?
The plan announced last month includes elimination of 4,500 jobs and disposal or restructuring of 20 businesses with $1.25 billion in annual sales; it is designed to generate $1 billion in operating savings in 1990.
But it hasn't dispelled persistent takeover rumors.
Some analysts and investors consider Kodak's stock to be greatly undervalued, given the total value of its assets.
Analysts say the company would fetch at least $75 a share in a takeover, compared with the $47.75-a-share closing price on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday. 

Wall Street is buzzing with talk of possible raiders, including Carl Icahn -- although a source close to him says "he hasn't owned Kodak in years." In any event, Kodak, with 324.2 million shares outstanding and a market capitalization of about $16.2 billion, would be a huge chunk to swallow. "But it has great break-up value and a stellar name," says a Shearson Lehman Hutton money manager. 

The takeover talk is likely to intensify after a federal judge determines, in coming months, the size of the settlement in Polaroid Corp. 's successful instant-camera patent suit against Kodak.
Kodak could get a multibillion-dollar bill for damages -- a fact that has acted as a poison pill, discouraging takeover attempts. 

For Mr. Chandler, the job of making elephant-like Kodak dance has been painful and frustrating.
It has required ripping apart a 100-year-old culture that guaranteed lifetime employment but fostered complacency.
Kodak had monopolized photography for so many decades that many managers didn't worry about competition -- or mistakes. 

After becoming chief executive six years ago, Mr. Chandler didn't dally.
The methodical engineer set up more than a dozen business units, forced middle managers to make decisions, demanded shorter product-development cycles and even trimmed cafeteria hours.
Some results were gratifying: A color copier went from design to manufacturing in 22 months.
And a color film introduced this spring is widely considered the best in the world. 

Last year, when Kodak posted record profit of $1.4 billion, its managers believed that tough times were over.
They were mistaken; in the 1989 first half, net slid 60% as operating earnings declined in most of the company's businesses. 

Critics blame Mr. Chandler for not shrinking Kodak's size in one radical restructuring.
Although the entire company was reorganized in 1984 into smaller divisions to make them more efficient, that wasn't enough to avoid a 10% work-force reduction and a 5% budget cut in 1986.
Similarly, Kodak said earlier this year that it would slash costs for support services by 15% by 1990, only to embark on the fourth restructuring last month. 

The repeated rounds of cutbacks, some observers say, have demoralized employees and still not done the trick.
In spite of the cuts, Kodak's employment, at 145,300, is still at a peak because of a spate of acquisitions.
And bloating of Kodak's payroll sometimes seems apparent: At a recent meeting about a small legislative matter involving Kodak's Sterling Drug unit, for example, Sterling's two managers were outnumbered by 22 Kodak staffers. 

Disgruntled employees recently called for Mr. Chandler's resignation in letters to the editor of Rochester's daily newspapers. "Perhaps it is time for you to move on and let someone else straighten up the mess," wrote James Powless, an employee at Kodak's Elmgrove plant. 

Others recommend the Jack Welch approach at General Electric Co. Asserts Bernard Ouellette, a former Sterling Drug executive: "Divisions should have to defend why they should be kept.
If you want to make motors, you have to show how you can deliver a 13% profit increase.
If you can't, we'll get rid of you.
It's pretty hard stuff, but a big company like Kodak has to go through it." 

But Mr. Chandler, who fondly calls his employees members of the "Kodak family," consciously avoided wholesale cuts. "How big a change can you make without destroying everything in the process?" he asks.
The executive, who grew up on a Maine dairy farm, is especially protective of both the company employees and the city of Rochester. "There is not a family in Rochester that isn't touched by Kodak in some way," he says. 

Unlike a Manhattan executive who never has to face laid-off employees, Mr. Chandler is often greeted by managers on Rochester's streets with a wave and a "Hi, Colby." "I agonize about every single dismissal from the company," he declares. 

Meanwhile, Kodak's diversification binge culminated in its $5.1 billion takeover of Sterling Drug last year.
The camera and film company now also makes such unlikely products as artificial snow, floppy disks and aspirin.
But top executives admit that they need to cull their lines of business and narrow their focus. "We have an accumulation that we shouldn't have built up," Mr. Chandler says. 

At the same time, Kodak has been reluctant to shed products with little growth potential.
For example, the carousel slide projector, a Kodak innovation that is experiencing slow growth, doesn't generate big profits, but Mr. Chandler is reluctant to part with it. "I have a soft spot in my heart for it," he explains. 

And how could Kodak lightly abandon motion-picture film, even though the product's long-term growth is threatened by videotape and high-definition television?
Years ago, movie makers sought Kodak's help in improving film; Kodak responded, and shelves lined with Emmy and Oscar awards hail its achievement. "There's only one Kodak in the U.S.," says John Larish, a former employee. "People expect them to continue doing certain things." 

Certainly, Kodak faces a dilemma hamstringing many American conglomerates: It must hold down prices or risk losing market share to foreign competitors.
But, at the same time, investors are demanding hefty returns now. 

Kodak, which once set prices at will on everything from film to flash-cubes, has been forfeiting increases to stave off Fuji and others.
Competition has been especially fierce in Kodak's key color print film and photographic-paper businesses.
That partly explains why earnings couldn't keep pace with the healthy 9% growth in volume this year. 

"Nothing in this world is simple anymore," Mr. Chandler says, adding: "You pay a terrible price to buy market share back." 

Yet, at times, top Kodak executives have ignored competitors' strengths.
When a manager began tracking Fuji, he discovered that the Japanese company had been quietly licensing Kodak technology from Kodak's patent attorneys, who didn't inform senior executives.
Fuji also had a more efficient inventory system in the U.S.
While Kodak warehouses stocked almost all its products, Fuji relied on overnight air shipments, which increased freight expenses but sharply reduced inventory costs and delivery times. 

After he presented his findings about Fuji to senior management, however, the manager, who has since left the company, says he was told never to talk about it again. "The message was, 'We don't want to hear that story, '" says the departed manager, who doesn't want to be identified because his wife works at Kodak.
The company declines comment on the incident. 

Nor did Kodak always listen to its employees in Japan, who urged the company to assimilate Japanese ways.
Instead, Kodak insisted on imposing its U.S. work policies and refused to offer standard Japanese benefits, such as housing assistance, according to a former Japanese manager.
And until 1985, the print on its familiar yellow film boxes was in English.
The result: Although Kodak has gained 13% share of the Japanese color print film market, employee turnover is high, and Japanese consumers' acceptance of Kodak products is slow. 

Kodak acknowledges that it has broken "with some Japanese traditions in terms of office layout and uniforms" and says its housing assistance isn't as high as other employers' or even offered in all cases.
However, it believes that its salaries are generally higher and that it offers an attractive benefit package. 

President Whitmore says the battle in Japan was "lost by not being there earlier." Until five years ago, Kodak executives rejected as too costly opening offices in the world's second-largest photographic market. "The best we can do now is fight it out," he says. "We want to make them fight for every share point they got." 

While Kodak missed the mark in Japan, the jury is still out on Mr. Chandler's biggest, boldest move -- the Sterling Drug acquisition.
That shocked investors who liked blue-chip Kodak for studiously shunning high debt -- and all the more because Sterling promises slight short-term returns. 

The drug company does provide an entry into the fast-growing pharmaceutical business, although Kodak stock has yet to rebound to pre-Sterling highs. "We won't know for sure if we did it right {buying Sterling} for another five years," Mr. Whitmore says, noting that it takes at least that long to get new drugs on the market. 

Absorbing Sterling hasn't been easy.
Kodak wanted Sterling's top managers for their marketing savvy and knowledge of drugs, but within a year most of them left.
Among them was the highly regarded former chairman, John M. Pietruski.
Colleagues say Mr. Pietruski, who declines comment, felt slighted by Kodak's refusal to give him a board seat. 

"Pietruski would have been a big help to Colby.
He's the kind of guy who sees things as they are and not as they want them to be," a Sterling manager says. 

Kodak executives say they expected management resignations but weren't prepared for problems with Sterling's flagship product, Bayer aspirin.
Kodak assumed that Bayer would take off on reports that aspirin helps heart patients. "We didn't understand the business," Mr. Whitmore says. "The big part is, 'I've got a headache, ' and that's very competitive." 

To Kodak, even Bayer is a minor headache compared with the migraine that hit when Mr. Chandler realized how badly things were going this year.
Kodak's first half ended just a month after the company's annual meeting in May where -- right before giving shareholders free lunch and cholesterol checks -- Mr. Colby optimistically predicted a record 1989. 

Although he says he was "surprised" by the pervasiveness of problems, red flags were flying since the beginning of the year.
But subordinates assured top executives that they could "turn it around," Vice Chairman Samper says.
Such was the case in information systems, where operating profits plunged 93%, after new high-tech products stalled and oversupplied customers cut orders. 

Now, Kodak is telling its employees: Be productive, or you are out.
But how seriously the company means that isn't clear.
Rather than making hard-nosed decisions about who will go in the 4,500-employee cutback, the company is seeking voluntary resignations with generous severance packages. "I don't sense a lot of fear, even after the latest announcement," says a former Kodak manager and now a consultant. 

In addition, securities analysts are already saying they don't expect Kodak's profit to improve this year.
They are lowering their second-half estimates in anticipation of declines in operating profits in all of Kodak's major business segments.
Prudential-Bache Securities' Alex Henderson reduced his 1989 forecast to $3.60 a share from $3.70 a share, and says that may still be too high.
In 1988, Kodak earned $1.4 billion, or $4.31 a share, on sales of $17.03 billion. 

Mr. Chandler has only nine months before his retirement to turn things around, a time pressure that could explain his resort to machete dramatics at meetings.
Mr. Whitmore explains: "We're saying to managers, 'Watch me throw a tantrum, '" in hopes that "they'll finally understand we're serious." 

Peter Pae contributed to this story. 

