.START 

Lo Yuk-sui, who is seeking control of Australia's struggling Hooker Corp., has a reputation as a stickler for detail.
But he also likes to keep details of his business dealings to himself, and that could pose problems down the road. 

Since 1984, the 45-year-old entrepreneur has acquired dozens of hotels and properties in Hong Kong and in the U.S., often by buying into moribund businesses.
His flagship company, Century City International Holdings Ltd., with seven publicly listed affiliates under its control, is one of Hong Kong's fastest-growing companies. 

Respectability hasn't come as easily. 

His hotels division represents spoils from a widely publicized family feud that he won over his father.
Bitterness over the 1984 episode lingers. 

A year ago, he backed off after waging a takeover battle for Hongkong & Shanghai Hotels Ltd., earning a modest share-trading profit and a reputation -- perhaps undeserved -- both as a lightweight and something of an opportunist. 

And his habit of shuffling investments within his amorphous corporate structure confuses even admirers and deflects the interest of major institutional investors from all but one or two of his companies. "The group structure seems to have grown increasingly untidy," says John Mulcahy, a director at Peregrine Brokerage Ltd., a local securities firm. 

This record may bedevil Mr. Lo even if his Hooker proposal passes the scrutiny of the cash-strapped company's bank creditors. 

Through Richfield International Holdings Ltd., a Century City affiliate, Mr. Lo has offered Hooker a 100 million Australian dollar (US$76.6 million) loan.
In return, Richfield is seeking a stake of at least 65% in the Australian company, which owns substantial retail and property interests in the U.S.
To raise the money, Mr. Lo may need to gain the confidence of Hong Kong investors. 

Not that those investors seem to question his ability to make the most out of Hooker.
But given Mr. Lo's characteristic reticence over the proposal, it is hard to predict which of his companies might reap the benefits from Hooker's assets and which might foot the rescue bill. 

Attempts to reach Mr. Lo and executives of his Century City group for comment weren't successful. 

As one of nine children, Mr. Lo's mastery over the property business stood out when he was helping to run Great Eagle Co., the real-estate concern headed by his father, Lo Ying-shek.
Being one of the most headstrong of the Lo heirs, some of his associates say, his break in 1984 with his family seemed inevitable. 

Since striking out on his own, he has come to be known as a demanding boss who lets few details slip by.
After seizing control of Regal Hotels International Holdings Ltd., the hotel unit his father once headed, Mr. Lo insisted on signing all the company's checks, an associate says.
Another recalls that one of his hotels had trouble replacing a worn carpet because the staff couldn't get his blessing. 

From what little is known of the Hooker plan, analysts consider it a typically shrewd move.
For the loan to Hooker, Richfield is requesting not just security, but also preferential status over other creditors.
Moreover, Mr. Lo's fluid corporate structure could ultimately dilute his own exposure in the proposed arrangement. 

According to a company chart dated July 17, Mr. Lo owns a 51.7% interest in Century City, the group holding concern.
His effective interest in Richfield, after filtering through several other affiliate companies, comes to just 18%. 

Though his tactics vary, Mr. Lo's strategy -- gaining control over prime assets with minimum capital investment -- has remained relatively consistent. 

During the 1984 family feud over Regal Hotels, Mr. Lo seemed the underdog because he owned relatively few shares compared with his father and siblings.
What his father apparently didn't realize was that Mr. Lo had been accumulating warrants, or rights to buy new Regal stock.
The warrants, trading at a fraction of the shares' value but carrying disproportionate voting rights, enabled the dissident son to beat the odds. 

