.START 

The Senate voted to raise the national ceiling on Federal Housing Administration-insured mortages for single-family homes to nearly $125,000 -- a roughly one-quarter increase from the current level. 

Final approval came after prolonged debate in which the chamber narrowly split over a proposal to do away with any fixed ceiling and allow FHA-insured home loans to rise with the median cost of housing in individual markets.
The more generous provision had the backing of real-estate agents and lawmakers from high-cost states on the East and West coasts, but conservatives led by Sen. Don Nickles (R., Okla.) ultimately succeeded in peeling away enough votes to preserve some fixed dollar limit. 

The floor action came as Republican negotiators offered a compromise that would significantly increase spending above President Bush's request for law-enforcement and anti-drug programs in the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1.
As outlined in a closed-door meeting, the package moves about halfway toward increases demanded by Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.).
But major differences remain with Democrats, who will caucus today, over how to finance the added costs. 

Though specifics remain subject to negotiation, the GOP plan would open the door to additions of as much as $800 million in new budget authority above the $2.2 billion in increases proposed by Mr. Bush for the related programs.
Of this increase, $200 million would be designated for state and local law-enforcement grants, but the greater share would go to drug-treatment and education programs favored by the Democrats. 

Measured in direct spending, the increased appropriations would add $400 million to federal outlays in the coming fiscal year, and these increases must be offset by cuts elsewhere to stay within budget targets. 

The GOP proposal assumes an across-the-board cut of one-quarter of 1% on domestic and military accounts to cover the bulk of the president's proposals.
However, all of the $800 million in additional budget authority would still have to be matched by more-selective, individual reductions.
These cuts could come in some cases from defense as well as domestic accounts, but the Bush administration is fearful that if a blanket across-the-board formula is applied, the military will be forced to absorb two-thirds of the total package. 

The FHA provision was an amendment to a pending fiscal 1990 spending bill providing more than $67 billion to fund federal housing and veteran programs as well as independent agencies covering science, space and the environment.
The diverse and competing programs lead to immense fiscal pressure on the lawmakers allocating funds, resulting in an annual scramble for accounting devices to stay within the budget.
These considerations helped fuel the drive to stimulate FHA lending, and thereby increase premiums paid by borrowers. 

As initially proposed by the Senate Appropriations Committee, the bill would have removed any fixed cap and allowed the FHA to insure loans of as much as 95% of the median value of sales in a state or market area.
Budget analysts estimated that new revenues would amount to $157 million, but opponents argued that the immediate windfall disguised a long-term risk for the government. 

An early bid to set the ceiling at approximately $118,000 lost on back-to-back 50-49 roll calls, but a second alternative -- about $124,875 -- survived a tabling motion, 55-43, and was then approved by voice vote.
The new ceiling would be more than $24,000 above the current limit of approximately $101,000, and though still restrictive on lending in such states as California and New York, the new limit is expected to encourage FHA activity and yield $104 million in new premiums. 

The increase would have the greatest effect on sales of new housing, and in more than a dozen states including Illinois, Michigan, Maine and Maryland, the new ceiling would be above or roughly the equivalent of median purchase prices, according to figures used by the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee.
Though not approaching the $180,000 to $189,000 level of metropolitan New York, the higher ceiling comes far closer to the New York state median, and FHA terms would encourage first-time buyers, who are required to put up only 5% of the total purchase price. 

The bigger premiums would help give the Senate the flexibility to raise annual spending for the space station to $1.85 billion, which is twice this year's level and includes the first construction funds for the massive project.
The space station figures are nearly $195 million above the House-passed level.
The measure also provides $62 million to preserve the advanced communications-technology satellite being developed by General Electric Co. 

Funding for the administration's high-speed aerospace plane was rejected, but the bill preserves at least partial financing of $20 million for starting up the CRAF-Cassini mission -- a successor to the celebrated Voyager probe. 

Among major domestic accounts, the bill endorses a House-passed increase of more than 20% in funding to modernize public housing occupied by many of the nation's poorest tenants.
Financing for the Superfund program to clean toxic-waste sites would be increased 10% above current appropriations, and total spending for the Environmental Protection Agency's programs would exceed $5.6 billion, or 15% above the president's request. 

Though the Senate completed debate last night on the underlying bill, final approval was delayed by the GOP leadership in an apparent effort to gain some leverage in the negotiations on anti-drug programs.
The larger result is to slow the entire appropriations process, and with less than two weeks before the new fiscal year, the Senate has yet to give even initial approval to bills covering the bulk of defense and domestic spending. 

By slowing the process, the GOP preserves its options for offering competing drug-funding amendments if the party can't reach a settlement with the Democrats, but for some, the strategy is directed too at Mr. Byrd.
The West Virginia Democrat was adamant in opposing anything but an across-the-board cut to finance the entire drug package, and his position makes him a target for Republicans who resented his tenure as Democratic leader in the Senate. 

Republicans deny any animosity toward Mr. Byrd, but by delaying the bills, some GOP senators see an opportunity to take aim at Mr. Byrd's pride in "running the trains on time." It has prompted recollections of an earlier analogy in which a senior Republican suggested half-jokingly of devising a "Gaslight" strategy, in which the GOP would seek to undermine its old nemesis much as Charles Boyer sought to drive his wife mad in the 1940s suspense movie set in London. 

"I'm puzzled by that approach; I'm saddened by it," Mr. Byrd said of the delaying tactics.
But Sen. Alan Simpson (R., Wyo.) vigorously denied any effort to "bait Byrd." "I wouldn't be part of it," he said. 

