.START 

Japan, Taiwan and South Korea tried to keep out American cigarettes.
But where those economic powerhouses gave in, Thailand is putting up a stiffer fight, and may win a compromise -- mainly because it has found an ally in the U.S. anti-smoking movement. 

At a public hearing to be held by the U.S. Trade Representative's Office today, a parade of congressmen and public-health advocates will testify in favor of Thailand, the object of an unfair-trade complaint by the U.S. Cigarette Export Association. 

In the past, such complaints had the full support of the federal government.
But now, an outcry by the U.S. anti-smoking movement against the imposition of trade sanctions is forcing U.S. trade officials to re-examine their position.
And while the Bush administration is likely to be extremely cautious about altering its policy, it might end up softening its demands. 

Threats to punish a foreign country for resisting U.S. cigarettes, says Matthew Myers, director of the Coalition on Smoking OR Health, are "an international scandal." Rep. Chester Atkins (D., Mass.), a leader of the anti-smoking movement in the House, asks, "Why should we spend so much political capital on a harmful product like cigarettes when there are other things we can sell Thailand, like agricultural products, high tech, and services?" The Massachusetts Democrat is scheduled to speak at the trade representative's hearing today, as is Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, who will be appearing as a private citizen. 

The Cigarette Export Association -- made up of the three biggest cigarette makers in the U.S., the cigarette units of RJR Nabisco Inc., Philip Morris Cos., and B.A.T Industries PLC -- used to win handily because its complaints were treated strictly as matters of trade.
But the anti-smoking movement is arguing trade policy should reflect another national goal -- discouraging tobacco use. 

Fresh from its victory in persuading the Senate to approve a permanent smoking ban on domestic airline flights, the coalition, led by the American Heart Association, the American Lung Association and the American Cancer Society, has thrown its weight behind Thailand. 

The Thais, who appear intent on protecting their state-run tobacco monopoly, couldn't be happier.
They don't have Japan's lobbying power, or South Korea's or Taiwan's negotiating experience.
But they did have the wits to contact the anti-smoking coalition shortly after Trade Representative Carla Hills accepted the cigarette exporters' complaint on May 25.
Less than a week later, Thai diplomats stood with coalition members and their congressional backers at a Washington celebration of World No-Tobacco Day. 

"We have our own anti-smoking people, and they are well-connected with the U.S. group," says Supavud Saicheua, the Thai Embassy's trade specialist.
Asked about the irony of using the U.S. anti-smoking movement to protect his country's state-run cigarette monopoly, Mr. Saicheua argues that the clever advertising employed by U.S. cigarette companies would seduce more Thais into smoking. 

The Cigarette Export Association wants to keep health out of the discussion. "The issue isn't whether people smoke or not, but who gets the business," contends Owen Smith, the association's president. 

The association charges that by banning imports, the Thai Tobacco Monopoly deprives the U.S. of a reasonable share of a $744 million-a-year retail business.
The group seeks a "free and competitive" market, including the right to advertise its brands on Thai television.
Thai officials say all TV advertising of tobacco products is banned for public-health reasons. 

Even if they don't win an outright victory, the anti-smoking group hopes to secure better terms for Thailand than other countries gained.
They hope, for example, to prevent U.S. exporters from gaining the right to promote their brands on Thai television. "We'd have won if we get at least that," Rep. Atkins says. 

So far, the U.S. trade office hasn't shown how it is leaning.
If it supports the exporters, its recommendation will have to be reviewed at the cabinet level, and possibly by President Bush himself. 

The Bush administration is likely to be extremely wary of siding with the anti-smoking movement.
It can't easily dismiss the export question.
One reason for the recent improvement in the U.S. trade balance has been a boom in cigarette exports, which last year were valued at $2.6 billion, more than double the 1985 figure.
The successful trade actions against Japan, South Korea and Taiwan accounted for much of that gain.
The U.S. has made few trade breakthroughs as dramatic as that. 

What's more, any decision favoring the anti-smokers could set a legal precedent that might encourage other countries to invoke health reasons for contesting other U.S. trade actions involving foods, pharmaceuticals and other products. 

