.START 

Scientists say a new test for cystic fibrosis may be available within weeks, giving a major boost to the nascent genetic testing industry and paving the way for the first widespread screening for carriers of a genetic defect. 

The new test will be based on the recent identification of a genetic glitch underlying about 70% of cases of cystic fibrosis, an inherited disease that causes thick mucus to build up in the lungs and often is fatal before age 30.
While the test's emergence was expected in the wake of the finding, its rapid development and the potentially huge demand for it promise an unexpected quantum leap for genetic testing. 

Several research teams working on the new test said the technology for it will probably be ready before licensing agreements are worked out.
Companies offering the new test are expected to license it from the two institutions involved in the cystic fibrosis discovery, Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children and the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 

A test for cystic fibrosis already exists, but the new one will be faster, cheaper, more precise and available to many more people than the old one.
About one in 20 Caucasians are "silent" carriers of the disease, that is, people who have the genetic defect but don't show signs of the disease.
If two such carriers have a child, there is a one-in-four chance their baby will have cystic fibrosis. 

The new ability to identify silent carriers of cystic fibrosis "raises the possibility that there will be more genetic testing than ever before by orders of magnitude," said Philip Reilly, medical director of Boston's Shriver Center for Mental Retardation and an authority on genetic testing.
He added that unlike other genetic diseases for which fast, accurate tests exist, cystic fibrosis is one of the most common inherited disorders. "A reasonable target for testing in the U.S. are the 3.6 million couples having babies annually," he said. 

Burgeoning demand for cystic fibrosis testing could overwhelm counselors who advise people about genetic tests and intensify controversy surrounding them, he added.
For example, an obstetrician who doesn't offer the test to a couple might be held liable if they have a child with cystic fibrosis. 

Prenatal testing for the disease also might motivate some pregnant women to abort fetuses afflicted with cystic fibrosis.
Alternatively, the test might reduce the number of abortions of normal fetuses by parents who fear they may have a baby with the disease because of a history of occurrence in their family. 

Only a small proportion of silent carriers are now identifiable because the existing test for the disease works only in families with previous occurrences of it and requires analysis of genetic material from several family members, including one with cystic fibrosis.
Moreover, the test typically takes two weeks to complete and costs more than $1,000. 

The new test initially will cost "hundreds instead of more than a thousand dollars," said Orrie Friedman, chairman and chief executive officer of Collaborative Research Inc., a Bedford, Mass., concern that is one of a handful of places offering cystic fibrosis testing.
Economies of scale, however, might eventually cut its cost to as little as $100, researchers said. 

The new test is "technically feasible to do today," said Kathy Klinger, director of genetic disease research at Integrated Genetics Inc., a Framingham, Mass., biotechnology concern recently purchased by Genzyme Corp., Boston.
She added, however, that weeks or months may be needed to complete licensing agreements for commercial use of the test and for doctors to develop guidelines for its use.
Refinements of the test to enable it to identify the 30% of cystic fibrosis carriers who have genetic defects other than the recently discovered one may take a year or so, she said. 

Collaborative Research and Integrated Genetics are two of the main commercial players in the market for genetic tests.
Increasing demand for such tests, however, is expected to attract new players, including large medical technology concerns that eventually may offer kits for testing for cystic fibrosis and other diseases.
Currently, the tests are offered as a service at a few laboratories, including some associated with medical schools. 

In national over-the-counter trading, Genzyme closed at $12.875, up 75 cents, while Collaborative Research slipped 12.5 cents to $1.75 a share. 

