.START 

As communist Europe has begun crumbling, the delicate issue of German reunification has made its way back into U.S.-German relations -- haltingly, like an unwelcome lost relative. 

Over the past six months, visiting West German leaders have paraded through Washington, each going out of his way to reassure the administration and U.S. reporters that eventual reunification wouldn't mean a return to the type of nationalist German superstate that ignited two world wars.
They insist that, in the new climate of European unity, it would be safe to have one Germany again. 

Now, after the stampede of East Germans fleeing westward, senior State Department officials also see Germany's future as an issue demanding more attention.
They have begun an informal review of U.S. policy on the subject. "It's not going to happen tomorrow," explains one, "but we may have to respond to it sooner than we once thought." 

Nobody involved in these conversations believes the two Germanys will be rejoined any time soon.
U.S. officials are convinced that the Soviets are far from ready to see a rebirth of the Greater Germany that invaded the U.S.S.R. less than 50 years ago.
And these officials are sure that similar doubts exist in Britain, France and Poland, which also were the victims of past German aggression. 

The U.S. is formally pledged to support German reunification, as long as it occurs democratically.
Reaffirming a position it has held for some years, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in May said in its 40th-anniversary declaration: "We seek a state of peace in Europe in which the German people regains its unity through free self-determination." 

But U.S. officials actually are profoundly uneasy with the idea.
Only a few weeks after NATO's statement was signed, Secretary of State James Baker was ducking the issue. "Reunification has, of course, been a goal of the NATO alliance," he told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
But he added: "I prefer to speak of it in terms of normalization of relations between the two Germanys on the basis of Western values." In other words, even in a Europe where "Western values" prevail, there still would be two Germanys. 

One Baker aide says that the very word "reunification" is being shunned inside the administration because it connotes a return to Germany's dark past. "When we discuss a single Germany, we'd rather talk about unification, to create something new, not reunification," he says.
And, in the new climate of U.S.-Soviet amity, nobody wants to irritate Moscow by embracing an idea many doubt is sound anyway. 

West German officials are painfully aware that the idea is still unpalatable to non-Germans.
So, in private meetings with officials and "deep background" conversations with reporters, they've been rolling out an argument they hope is comforting.
A larger, unified Germany, they say, couldn't be a nationalist dictatorship because it would retain West Germany's current federal system.
In that system, they note, power is divided among federal bodies and states, with checks and balances that would thwart a new would-be Hitler. 

What's more, they insist, a reunited Germany wouldn't be free to throw its weight around in Europe.
It would be politically and economically integrated with the European Community, they argue, and the EC governing bodies would keep it reined in. 

West German President Richard von Weizsacker told a U.S. audience recently, "I'm quite aware of many misgivings in the connection with German attitudes, if you look back in history.
But . . . I would simply invite everybody not to underestimate, if I may say so, our own intelligence.
And our own intelligence prescribes absolutely to stay on the solid ground of the NATO alliance and European Community, to strengthen those partnerships which we have been lucky enough to find after a more-than-terrible past." 

The arguments have fallen on friendly, but skeptical, ears here.
Officials note, for instance, that the EC is still largely an economic organization, years or even decades away from holding the kind of power that could curb nationalist sentiments in its largest member.
Moreover, West Germany already is the dominant power in the community. 

So the "German question" is likely to continue to gain visibility here, a hot potato nobody wants to handle but which will be increasingly hard to avoid. 

