.START 

Paul Stuart Inc. goes to great lengths to cultivate its image as a genteel clothier for the upper crust.
So customers of the New York store had a rude shock last month when they opened their bills. 

Enclosed was a green and white flier that had the audacity to suggest the customers might be interested in a "skip-a-month" payment option.
That would allow them to delay payments if they happened to be -- perish the thought -- short of cash. 

Several customers immediately called the store. "They said this isn't like you at all," says Julie Oddy, a spokeswoman. "They said what is going on?" She adds: "We were so horrified that something like this had gone out from Paul Stuart.
We had nothing to do with it." 

The store rushed a letter of apology to its customers on Sept. 27, saying, "We are sure that you noticed a rather crass flier offering a 'skip-a-month' payment plan . . . ." It explained that the error had been made by its mailing house, and it assured ruffled customers: "We would never consider addressing you in this manner." 

Paul Stuart also promised to honor the skip-a-month payment plan (interest would accrue) "for those of you who decide to take advantage of the offer." So far, the store says, no one has. 

So what happened?
Lisa Van Orden, a spokeswoman for General Electric Capital Corp., which handles some of Paul Stuart's billing and mailing, says the flier was part of a promotion aimed at helping retailers boost sales in September, a time of back-to-school expenses.
However, GE Capital failed to alert Paul Stuart first. 

"All businesses have some human error.
GE Capital is extremely sorry," says Ms. Van Orden. 

And which retailers use this "crass" skip-a-month payment option?
Ms. Van Orden declined to provide names, but a customer-service representative at GE Capital, a unit of General Electric Co., said the retailers include the Caldor discount chain, a unit of May Department Stores Co. Another is the Zayre discount stores, owned by Ames Department Stores Inc. Officials at those stores didn't return phone calls. 

Does GE Capital think its fliers are crass? "I couldn't say whether it's crass or not," says Ms. Van Orden. "Some of the clients feel it's a plus.
If I got the option to not pay for a month, I would think it was a nice benefit." 

