.START 

Pacific Telesis Group said it decided to end plans to test a videotex gateway because market research turned up insufficient numbers of potential customers and information providers. 

In addition, the trial would have required a substantial investment with no indication it would ever earn a profit, telephone company officials said.
A videotex gateway links customers via personal computers equipped with modems to a wide range of information providers.
Pacific Bell had planned to start the videotex gateway trial early next year in San Francisco. 

In a letter to information providers who had hoped to offer their services through the California Online gateway, Pac Tel's Pacific Bell telephone unit said it would concentrate instead on audiotex services, information customers can get by pushing buttons on a touch-tone phone. 

The letter from Pac Bell's Roger Conrad, director of voice information and gateway services, said the company "concluded that we are not able to offer users and information providers the features, support and value necessary to make California Online a successful service." He said the company doesn't believe it would serve either customers or information providers to "conduct a trial for a service that does not have a high probability of becoming a successful commercial offering." 

Keith Epstein, who heads external affairs for Pacific Bell's Information Services Group, said the trial was canceled "mostly because we were caught in a market development dilemma." A number of "critical factors need to come together, and they hadn't," he said.
For a successful gateway trial, the company needs a sizable number of customers with personal computers and information providers to draw those customers to the gateway.
Neither turned up, he said. 

Pac Tel is the first of the seven Baby Bells to cancel a gateway trial, though Chicago-based Ameritech had decided months ago to skip the exercise and concentrate instead on providing information services over push-button telephones. 

Analysts said the decision apparently reflects some technological problems and perhaps an expected change in California's regulatory climate.
State regulators are preparing to adopt so-called incentive regulation that spurs the telephone company to cut costs and become more efficient. "The only thing I can read into it is that technologically the company isn't ready to trial it," said Robert B. Morris III, a telecommunications analyst with Goldman, Sachs & Co. 

Compared with other Baby Bell gateways, Pacific Bell planned to offer the most technically advanced service.
Analysts said, however, that the company can now watch the development of other Baby Bell gateways and the Prodigy service being offered by Sears, Roebuck & Co. and International Business Machines Corp. to gauge the mass market for information delivered via personal computers. 

In part, Mr. Epstein blamed the consent decree that broke up the Bell System and barred the Baby Bells from providing information services themselves.
But he said that was only one of a number of factors. "People need to grow accustomed to using information services, and they are more likely to feel comfortable with audiotex," he said.
Eventually, the telephone company is counting on push-button phone services to lead the way to computer gateway services. 

