.START 

Becalmed by back-to-back holidays in the U.S. and Japan, the dollar inched lower against most major currencies, but posted sharp gains against the pound. 

Despite two rounds of supporting intervention by the Bank of England, sterling eased through the key psychological level of 3.00 Deutsche marks "like a hot knife through butter," in the words of one London trader, to close at its lowest level in 19 months against the mark. 

Market participants said the pound is suffering a delayed reaction to last week's coordinated interest rate increases in Europe, which pushed Britain's base lending rate up a full percentage point to 15%, the highest level since 1982. 

According to analysts, concern has gripped the market that Britain's high interest rate policy will prompt a recession, which could leave the pound vulnerable to an even steeper decline. 

"Traders are disillusioned with the interest rate hike and beginning to realize that we're seeing a decaying {United Kingdom} economy," said Scott Greene, chief dealer at Bank Julius Baer & Co. 

Some observers take the view that domestic political pressure will prevent Britain from raising rates further, despite continued signs of inflationary pressure. 

Underscoring the inflationary situation was news that Britain's producer-price index rose 0.4% in September, while input prices gained by a steep 0.8% after falling 0.2% in August. 

But according to Douglas Madison, a corporate trader with Bank of America in Los Angeles, "the pound's Achilles' heel is Britain's current account deficit." 

The current account deficit stood at #4.864 billion in the second quarter, compared with #4.777 billion in the first quarter.
The country's merchandise trade deficit hit a record #2.29 billion in August. 

In New York late Monday, the dollar was quoted at 1.8875 West German marks and 142.80 yen, compared with 1.8867 marks and 142.35 yen late Friday.
Sterling was quoted at 1.5775, down from 1.6065. 

Investors gave the dollar a slight push higher in early Asian trading, but the Columbus Day and Yom Kippur holiday in the U.S. yesterday and a national holiday in Japan today tempered any significant moves. 

But traders said bidding for the dollar is firm, despite interest rate increases in Europe that were expected to depress the U.S. unit by drawing funds away from dollar-denominated instruments.
Even speculation that the Federal Reserve could soon ease short-term rates has failed to damp investor demand for the currency. 

According to Bank of America's Mr. Madison, demand for the dollar remains healthy because, in the longer term, the U.S. unit is "cheap" and in the view of many players remains a sound investment.
Other analysts attribute the dollar's resilience to turmoil in eastern Europe and Japan's delicate political balancing act. 

In the face of the dollar's vitality, some market observers foresee a one-quarter percentage point drop in the Federal Funds rate as early as this week.
Others say the Fed will likely wait until Friday's reports on the producer-price index and retail sales for September. 

The producer-price index is believed to have risen about 0.7%, due largely to a jump in energy prices.
Retail sales are expected to have eked out a 0.1% gain due to weaker auto sales. 

Dealers said the dollar may be heading into a period of consolidation this week with traders more concerned with cross-currency dealings.
Several senior dealers said they see the dollar holding a steady range in between 1.82 marks and 1.92 marks for at least the near term. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $363.10 an ounce, down 60 cents.
Estimated volume was a light 1.1 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Tuesday, gold was quoted at $362.85 an ounce. 

