.START 

Lobbyists working for Puerto Rico are sweeping through Congress with the force of Hurricane Hugo. 

In the eye of this political storm is pending legislation calling for a referendum in 1991 on whether Puerto Ricans want independence, statehood or to continue their commonwealth status, but with a bit more autonomy.
The bill has attracted scant attention here, but the stakes are high -- not only for Puerto Rico, but for scores of U.S. companies that enjoy big tax breaks by maintaining subsidiaries there. 

The largest lobbying contingent represents Puerto Rico's Popular Democratic Party, also known as the Commonwealth Party, which has been in power since 1985 and is committed to keeping Puerto Rico a commonwealth.
On its payroll are more than a dozen law firms, lobbyists and consultants, including two former U.S. senators, Democrat John Culver of Iowa and Republican Marlow Cook of Kentucky; the powerhouse law firm of Covington & Burling, which receives approximately $2 million in annual payments from the commonwealth government; the politically well-connected lobbying firm of Black, Manafort, Stone & Kelly; a pair of prominent Democratic National Committee activists; former top officials from the Treasury and the Department of Energy and a constitutional-law expert from Harvard Law School, Laurence Tribe. 

"We need all the help we can get," explains Jaime Fuster, Puerto Rico's non-voting delegate to the House of Representatives.
The commonwealth side also draws sustenance from a potent business lobby of 70 U.S. corporations that are fighting for retention of Section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code, which allows mainland companies that have subsidiaries in Puerto Rico to repatriate their profits without paying taxes.
Statehood would put an end to their tax-free status. 

Puerto Rico's New Progressive Party, also known as the Statehood Party, is also well-fortified here.
Its most potent ally is President Bush, who is a vocal supporter of statehood and a longtime friend of former Governor Luis Ferre, the patron saint of Puerto Rican statehood. (The president personally inserted into his State of the Union address strong language supporting statehood.) Harry McPherson, an influential Democratic lawyer, along with former Bush press spokesman Peter Teeley, are both lobbying on the statehood side.
And the statehooders have their own constitutional-law heavyweight, Yale Law School's Paul Gewirtz. 

So far, the Independence Party, the small but vocal minority that favors Puerto Rican independence, hasn't hired a Washington lobbying team and is relying on volunteer lawyers and law professors.
But the referendum bill would provide $500,000 to each party, so that situation could change. 

The well-heeled Section 936 business alliance backing the commonwealth cause includes virtually all the major pharmaceutical companies (among them Eli Lilly & Co., Johnson & Johnson, Merck & Co., Pfizer Inc., Squibb Corp., G.D. Searle & Co.) as well as PepsiCo Inc. and General Electric Co., which have formed the Puerto Rico, U.S.A. Foundation.
The foundation flies key lawmakers down to the islands so they can see the fruits of the tax loophole first-hand, while they enjoy Puerto Rico's beaches. 

Peter Holmes, whose Washington law firm houses the foundation, says that his organization is officially neutral on the referendum bill, but that the loss of Section 936 would sour investment and "cause unemployment in Puerto Rico to skyrocket." Covington & Burling's Richard Copaken paints an even bleaker picture. "People thrown off the payroll will find their way onto the welfare rolls," he warns. "The net result will be a substantial increase in the federal deficit." Another likely casualty of statehood, unmentioned by Mr. Copaken, would be Covington's seven-figure billings, since a new government presumably would hire different Washington lawyers. 

The Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, which approved a 1991 referendum measure in August, has proposed a gradual phasing-out of Section 936 if Puerto Rico opts for statehood.
But the commonwealth lobbyists are brandishing a legal opinion by Harvard Law School Prof.
Tribe that says a phase-out -- as opposed to immediate termination -- would violate the tax-uniformity clause of the Constitution. 

Because of the sensitive tax issue, the Senate Finance Committee is poised to review the referendum bill.
The fight over Section 936 is a replay for the tax-writing panel, since the provision was targeted for extinction during the 1986 tax-overhaul debate.
It was saved after furious lobbying by Michael Deaver, the former Reagan White House aide turned lobbyist, among others. 

Lacking voting representation in Congress, Puerto Rico has for years retained politically potent lobbyists to defend its interests here.
During the 1985-86 fight over Section 936, Mr. Deaver was joined by Frederick Bush, a former aide to and fundraiser for President Bush (no relation).
Frederick Bush's lobbying firm was paid $60,000 to set up meetings with top government officials, including then-Treasury Secretary James Baker.
Last summer, one of the commonwealth's chief lobbying firms, Black Manafort, was ensnared in the influence-peddling scandal at the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Among the HUD projects on which the firm reaped huge consulting fees were several in Puerto Rico.
But Jose Martinez of the Puerto Rico Federal Affairs Administration says Black Manafort is still lobbying on the referendum bill "and helping iron out problems with the hurricane." 

Critics of the referendum bill complain that it slants toward statehood.
Mr. Fuster says it "front-loads" benefits and that Puerto Ricans could be bribed into voting for statehood because the legislation would immediately entitle them to receive mainland levels of welfare and other social programs (which are limited in Puerto Rico now) and to defer paying federal taxes until 1994.
Other critics say Congress has failed to spell out the true cost of Puerto Rican statehood to the U.S. Treasury. 

Under the bill, whichever option receives a majority vote in a referendum (or a runoff, if there isn't a majority) would automatically take effect without further congressional action.
The last Puerto Rican referendum was in 1967, when commonwealth supporters won by a large margin.
Recent public-opinion polls show Puerto Ricans closely divided between commonwealth and statehood, with less than 5% favoring independence. 

But before Congress approves holding a vote in 1991, there will be even more lobbying over the wording of the three options. "This would be the time to cash in and work on building some trust funds for my grandchildren," jokes a Democratic congressional staffer who has worked closely on the Puerto Rico referendum. 

Puerto Rico Lobbying Blitz 

Covington & Burling (Washington law firm) 

Black, Manafort, Stone & Kelly (Washington lobbying firm) 

John Culver (former Democratic senator from Iowa and Washington lawyer) 

Marlow Cook (former GOP senator from Kentucky and Washington lawyer) 

Mark Siegel (former Democratic National Committee member) 

Anne Campbell (Democratic National Committee member) 

Roger Mentz (former assistant Treasury secretary and Washington lawyer) 

Lynn Coleman (former deputy energy secretary and Washington lawyer) Laurence Tribe (Harvard Law School professor) 

Harry McPherson (former adviser to President Johnson and Washington lawyer) 

Peter Teeley (former press spokesman for George Bush and consultant) 

Paul Gewirtz (Yale Law School professor) 

