.START 

Everybody loved Cincinnati Milacron eight years ago, when the machine tool maker's stock hit a high of nearly 47.
America was ready to be retooled.
As a pioneer in robotics, Cincinnati Milacron had an extra measure of sizzle. 

Now nobody loves the stock.
While the Dow Jones Industrial Average has tripled since 1981, Cincinnati Milacron now languishes at 18 1/2, less than half its level back then.
In the past month, it has hit a series of one-year lows.
America got retooled, all right, but the West Germans and the Japanese did much of the job.
And for many U.S. manufacturers, Cincinnati Milacron's fancy robots were too much, too soon. 

But some patient, contrarian investors are beginning to nibble at this out-of-favor stock. 

"It's a long-term call," says David A. Hunter, equity manager for Hartford Insurance Group, which bought 128,000 shares earlier this year. "Capital goods stocks are the place to be on a longer term basis." 

Mr. Hunter doesn't promise investors any rose garden for the next year or so.
In fact, he believes that "we are either in or headed into a recession" that will hurt machine tool makers' profits.
But he expects a major boom in the machine tool industry after the next recession ends. 

And he thinks Cincinnati Milacron's specialties -- plastics forming machinery and robots -- will be in demand then. (Plastics machinery accounts for about 45% of profit now, with the rest split between machine tools and other industrial products.
Robot operations are running at around breakeven levels.) 

Wall Street expects Cincinnati Milacron to earn about $1.06 a share this year (the range of estimates is from 90 cents to $1.40, according to Zacks Investment Research).
For next year, the consensus is $1.70.
Clearly, unlike Mr. Turner, the Wall Street consensus doesn't expect a recession.
This means the stock is selling for about 17 times estimated 1989 earnings and about 11 times predicted 1990 earnings.
In its best years, 1979 through 1981, the company made $2.47 to $3.35 a share. 

"You've seen a real shrinkage" in the capacity of domestic machine tool companies, Mr. Hunter notes. "They've shut down and written off a lot of plants." That move, plus a long-term dollar decline, has made U.S. machine-tool makers more price competitive in the world market, he says. 

Another fan of Cincinnati Milacron shares is Pioneering Management Corp., which operates the Pioneer family of mutual funds.
The Pioneer funds have bought close to 300,000 shares this year and now hold about 427,000 shares. 

Richard Herder, an analyst who helps select stocks for the Boston-based funds, says Cincinnati Milacron has been "struggling for several years now" with losses in 1983, 1985 and 1987. "People have sort of lost patience," he says, yet "slowly but surely they're getting their act together." 

Mr. Herder likes the company's new emphasis on "focused factories," meaning that each factory will specialize in a particular type of machine, from assembly to marketing.
Previously, two or more plants often contributed sub-assemblies to a product, which might be assembled in a third or fourth plant. "It took them a while to get around to it," he says. 

Like Mr. Turner, Mr. Herder cautions that "next year might not be all that great," but he's willing to be patient.
He thinks Cincinnati Milacron is the strongest of the U.S. machine tool makers, regards plastics machines as "a very good business," and wants to buy now while "the price is down." 

Wall Street, of course, often has shorter time horizons.
Of 11 brokerage firms with opinions on the stock, according to Zacks, eight call it a "hold" and two call it a sell.
McDonald & Co. in Cleveland rates the stock "undervalued," which is one step below an outright "buy." 

John E. McGinty, analyst at First Boston, is in the "hold" camp.
Mr. McGinty, the top-rated machine-tool analyst in Institutional Investor's annual ranking, notes that the focused-factory program is taking longer to implement than planned, and that "machine tool orders are not great." 

But he believes that U.S. machine tools are equal to German and Japanese ones in quality, and now are ready to compete in price as well. "The issue is not whether {Cincinnati Milacron} is a good value long term," he says. "Long term, sure.
The issue is what happens in the near term.
Will they get their problems solved before the next recession comes?
I don't know." 

Cincinnati Milacron 

(NYSE; Symbol: CMZ) 

Business: Machine tools 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Sales: $857.8 million 

Net income: $37.1 million*; $1.52 a share 

Second quarter, June 17, 1989: 

Per-share earnings: 21 cents vs. 34 cents 

Average daily trading volume: 

45,117 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 24.3 million 

*Includes extraordinary credit for tax benefit of $12.1 million. 

