.START 

Here in Margaret Thatcher's Britain, there is a revival of the blood sport of kings.
The latest wrinkle in the Empire at Play has the cognoscenti bypassing Wimbledon, sidestepping stables and laying aside shotguns to follow Stephen and Emma Ford -- the Jim and Tammy Bakker, as it were, of falconry.
This inspirationally glamorous couple (she of the suede trousers and gilded tresses, he of the lambskin jacket and opaque Ray Bans) has taken what was the equivalent of a quick 18 holes for such successful heads of state as Henry VIII, Mary, Queen of Scots, and Napoleon and ferreted out a whole new market share.
The result: blood sport for busy executives, the natural way. 

"Everyone is going Green at the moment," says Mr. Ford from behind the Ray Bans and at the wheel of his gold Mercedes. "And working with birds of prey is a way of preserving an endangered species." As if to emphasize his point, Mr. Ford brakes at a sheep crossing. "Besides," he adds, shoving in a tape ("The Eagles"]), "raptors are at the top of their food chain and we're at the top of our food chain, so a lot of our problems can be charted through theirs." 

Dispensing such wilderness folk wisdom like a hipper version of Marlin Perkins, the 31-year-old Mr. Ford races along Canterbury's back roads en route to the British School of Falconry -- the hawk and falcon training center that he and his 27-year-old wife opened in 1982.
The school, which consists of the Ford's own home, another building housing the students and all those chicken-wire hawk houses, or mews, has become the largest of the two dozen or so hawking centers in Britain.
Every year, the Fords introduce about 200 stout-hearted enthusiasts to the 2,000-year-old sport (according to Mrs. Ford, the historian half of the duo) for about $400 per six-day course.
A crash course in all five of the school's falconry classes (which cover everything from how to clip an eagle's toenails to dismembering the dead day-old chicks for feed) will have one soaring from novitiate to fledgling expert -- or sufficient to join the ranks of Britain's 2,500 other registered falconers, one of the highest concentrations outside the Arab world. (By comparison, the U.S., which regulates the sport with a myriad of federal hunting regulations, has only slightly more than 2,600 registered falconers.) 

And the ranks appear to be growing.
The British Falconer's Club, one of a handful of hawk-hunting societies here, has seen its membership rolls go from 800 in the early 1980s to more than 1,100 this year.
Why the increase? "Oh, the boom in country-life sports, I would say," says Jeremy Scratchard, the club's director. "That and the interest from the corporate sector.
That's the new phenomenon." 

Indeed, the corporate-entertainment business in Britain is a burgeoning growth industry and according to the Fords, it is one ripe for the plucking. "People are bored with taking their clients to Wimbledon," says Mrs. Ford, with a shake of her blond mane. "They want to do participatory sports and more exclusive activities now.
And falconry has always had a mystique of exclusivity.
It is also a way of imparting several management techniques." 

Whatever those techniques, the Fords have learned them well.
Their school runs at near capacity, they have plans to open a second instruction center in Scotland and they are embarking on their latest raptor venture -- "Executive Hawking Breaks," one- and two-day hawking parties that are part exhibition, part participation and all-exclusive.
Sponsored by some of Britain's toniest resorts at equally tony prices, these blood-sport Whitman's samplers can run as high as $1,900 a person for a hawking weekend at Leeds Castle Estate.
At that price you get all the birds you can fly and the singular chance to learn management techniques by watching a falcon "stoop" or plummet from a great height and kill its prey in midair. (Hawks, or "shortwings," take their quarry only on the ground.) 

"This appeals to the yuppie element that's been up in a balloon, that's been skiing," says Mark Deere, the general manager of Sales & Space Management Ltd., a North Yorkshire-based merchandising company and one of the Fords' most satisfied Executive Hawking customers. "The English warm to the old English sense of tradition.
Unlike the Americans who power breakfast and play squash, over here, if I want to get a client on a better footing, I'll take him on a weekend outing.
And the beauty of falconry is that he's probably never done it before." 

"Oh, we've had forklift truck drivers, nuclear scientists, a couple of titled people, even a few vegetarians," says Mrs. Ford about her burgeoning roster of pupils.
Seated in her spotless living room, Mrs. Ford is overseeing lunch (tiny meat sandwiches with their crusts trimmed) served to the accompaniment of a videotape (in German for some reason) about grouse hunting with falcons.
Or flying falcons at grouse, if you want the right raptor rap. 

After several of the sandwiches and a play-by-play analysis of the tape, it becomes clear that the Fords know their birds. (They own more than 60, including a pair of rare Fish Eagles, which they are breeding.) The Fords have taken what was essentially a childhood hobby for each of them ("We could afford a hawk, not a horse," says Mrs. Ford) and parlayed it into an international raptor training, breeding and consulting business. 

In addition to their school and the Executive Hawking weekends, the Fords have helped establish bird of prey conservatories (including Singapore's Jurong Birdpark -- the fowl equivalent of Sea World), advised Arab potentates on their flocks, and supplied trained raptors for rock videos (Pink Floyd), films ("Willow") and advertisements (Sanyo). 

In addition, Mrs. Ford has authored several falconry books, including her coming "Falconer's Kitchen." ("There will not be a recipe for mice on kebabs," adds Mr. Ford.) She has also appeared on the Terry Wogan Show (the British equivalent of Johnny Carson) with Sebastian, the Ford's immense golden eagle.
Mr. Ford, meanwhile, has designed a limited-edition, solid-gold chess set (the pieces are various raptor species) that goes for a cool $1 million-plus. "We only have to sell one," says Mr. Ford with a smile. 

The sandwiches devoured, there is time for a quick tour of the school before heading out to the fields with two Harris hawks and a pocketful of chicken parts.
Mr. Ford whisks us through the surprisingly minimalist camp, including a turn through the hawk-hatching nursery, located upstairs, adjacent to the couple's tanning bed. "You really don't need much space for a falcon, only the mews, a grassy area and a freezer and weighing room," he says. (A trained raptor must be weighed each day to determine its correct flying weight -- a sort of Weight Watchers "in extremis.") 

I am hustled by cages containing various breeds of belled and be-thonged eagles, hawks and falcons.
Then we reach the freezer room where a locker full of rock-hard rabbits, pheasants and other game fowl lie in state. "This is why the sport originated," observes Mr. Ford, tossing a rabbit like a football. "Just thaw 'em, gut 'em and eat 'em." 

Backing up the food chain slightly, we next make an assault on a nearby sheep meadow armed with Gilbert, our Harris hawk, and Clueless, an albino ferret used to flush out the recalcitrant rabbits -- today's prey of choice.
It's all pretty tame stuff tramping about the wind-swept Sussex countryside, our hawk flying picturesquely "en pointe." Like a slightly more aggressive game of golf.
That is until Gilbert sets upon a particularly hapless rabbit and Mrs. Ford, as the sport demands, steps in for the final kill by stomping on its head. 

Suddenly it is my turn.
Raised in a pet-rabbit-raising household, I simply cannot sic Gilbert on a bunny, no matter how "au courant" this is.
Instead, I merely wag a severed chicken head in my gloved hand signaling our eagle-eyed hawk to return to home base, which at the moment is my forearm swathed in heavy-duty suede.
Landing with a feathery thump, Gilbert proceeds to his B.F. Skinnerish duties -- downing the chicken head. "Confess you're an anti, aren't you," murmurs Mrs. Ford silkily in my ear.
I can only agree and fix my gaze on that other end of the food chain, the nursing lambs. 

Ms. de Vries reports frequently from Britain. 

