.START 

OPA-LOCKA, Fla. -- In this town on the northern edge of Miami, there are five blocks that the local police call "The Front." Men with loaded guns pace nervously along rooming-house balconies, guarding the business inside.
The street lights are routinely shot out for greater privacy.
Prostitutes, whom the police call "AIDS on the hoof," turn tricks on pieces of soggy cardboard, sometimes out in the open.
Last year, there were 11 murders in these five blocks alone. 

The Front's business is crack.
Addicts know that narcotics prices in Florida are among the country's lowest, so they flock here for the bargains.
Many are so close to the edge of subsistence they seem like tumbleweed, blown by the wind and living on air.
Hard up for cash, they find other ways to finance deals.
Crack is traded for sex.
Crack is traded for scavanged pieces of aluminum.
And last June 3, according to a police report, a mother took $3 for crack and handed over her four-month-old baby. 

The story of the mother, Wonda McNeal, against whom criminal charges were brought and then dropped for lack of a reliable witness, is extreme.
While there are thousands of crack-using mothers nationwide, only a few have ever been charged with criminal negligence under similar circumstances. 

But in many other respects, Wonda McNeal's story is chillingly commonplace.
It illustrates how destructive this drug can be to any ordinary notion of motherhood, and, particularly, to the growing numbers of poor, single-parent households in this country headed by women.
Crack has plunged many of these families into a cultural no man's land almost entirely alien to the American mainstream. 

Even in the womb, Wonjerika McNeal, now a plump eight-month-old infant, was badly treated.
Her mother, an intense, outspoken 28-year-old, apparently knew some of the risks she was running by taking drugs.
She admits that "when they told me the baby had 10 fingers and 10 toes, I nearly fainted." 

Crack, she says by way of explanation, "makes you do some wild things." Ms. McNeal, a sturdily built woman wearing turquoise pantaloons and a white sweatband around her head, says she became pregnant while working as a prostitute in order to pay for her cocaine habit.
With a trace of pride, and a mention of how she has "some style," she claims she could get $40 from each customer, enough for eight small "rocks" of crack.
She says she doesn't know who the baby's father is. "I know the street life," she says matter-of-factly. "I was living on the street when I got pregnant with her." 

Sitting on a curb in Opa-Locka, the gutter littered with light-blue plastic envelopes that once held small quantities of cocaine, she tries to explain how she got in so deep. "Crack made me feel good.
After one time though, you spend all your money trying to get that same kick.
You can't do homework, you can't go to work, you can't clean the yard.
You can't do anything but think about getting some more." 

Like many women, Ms. McNeal was attracted to crack in a way that she wasn't to other drugs. "I don't like to put things in my nose, and I'm afraid of needles," she says with a girlish smile. "I like the hit that goes right to my brain.
It makes your eyes pop out and your toes wiggle.
You can't get enough of it.
After a while, your heart starts pounding.
It makes you relax and enjoy life, and that's what life's about -- enjoying it." 

Ms. McNeal's reminiscences about her crack highs sound like the few parts of life she has enjoyed.
She was raised in Atlanta, number 11 in a family of 17 children.
Her father was an alcoholic and her mother was often sick.
Although Ms. McNeal says she graduated from high school, her mother and sister say she was expelled for fighting. "Wonda fought like a boy," says her younger sister Sonia, who has recently finished high school and plans to study psychology at a junior college. "My mom didn't have much time to give my older sisters, so {Wonda} had to go out and hustle for herself.
I think it was a lack of attention.
She was always a troubled child." 

Ms. McNeal's mother is a gray-haired woman with hollow eyes who is almost entirely bedridden with muscular dystrophy.
Most of the windows in her $450-a-month basement apartment in Atlanta are boarded over with plywood.
She starts to cry when she tries to explain what has happened to her life and her 17 children.
One son was murdered.
Another is in prison.
At least four of her daughters, according to Sonia, are heavy users of crack.
Wonda once cashed her mother's food stamps to buy the drug, leaving the invalid without money to buy food for a month.
Mrs. McNeal says she never wanted to have so many children. "But in them days, I was pretty scared of their daddy.
He was a mean man.
You just had them." 

At an early age, Wonda left home and married.
But she says her husband beat her and forced her to take drugs with him.
The couple had a son, but when the boy was six or seven years old, according to Sonia, he was locked in the apartment so long he became scared and escaped out of a window.
The police picked him up.
According to his aunt and grandmother, the boy is now in the Devereux Hospital and Children's Center, a psychiatric hospital for severely emotionally disturbed children in Melbourne, Fla.
State-financed treatment there costs $97,000 a year, the hospital says. 

"I want my son back," says Ms. McNeal, refusing to say anything more about the situation. "I'd like to have three more babies too," she says. "I'd like five in all." 

Although Ms. McNeal says she is unsure who her baby girl's father is, she named it partly after her long-time boyfriend, Jerald Johnson, a former police officer in Atlanta who was fired two years ago after an explosive fight with her.
Sonia McNeal says that during the fight, he pulled his service revolver on Wonda when she had a crack-induced fit.
Mr. Johnson doesn't want to talk about it. 

Mr. Johnson, now looking for work, lives with his mother in Miami, and believes he is the baby's father.
He is currently caring for the child, and hopes to raise her. 

It was on the night of another fight between the couple last June that Ms. McNeal took the four-month-old infant and set off to The Front in search of crack.
Mr. Johnson says he threw her out because she wanted to get high, and he didn't approve. "I didn't know that she would just leave the child with a stranger," he says. "That surprised me." 

Many of the details of what happened that evening are disputed, and none of the witnesses are reliable.
But as Ms. McNeal tells it, "I was feeling good, and I wanted some more." But she was completely broke.
At some point that night she met Johnnie Wynn, known locally as "Geech," an elderly derelict with badly decaying teeth, bloodshot eyes and a mass of wild, pointy braids.
Mr. Wynn lives in an airless, turquoise, cinderblock hovel on the main street of The Front.
He is well-known to the local police as an alcoholic with a minor criminal record, but until that night, he was unknown to Ms. McNeal. 

Mr. Wynn says that a young woman whom he didn't know, but later found out to be Ms. McNeal, walked up to him and threatened to kill her baby unless he gave her $3 to get another hit of crack. "She said she would throw it down on the street," he says.
He took the child, and gave Ms. McNeal three dollars.
With the little money he had left, he says, he bought diapers and milk for the baby. 

But by early the next afternoon, the baby was crying and wheezing so badly, Mr. Wynn called the police for an ambulance, afraid it might die.
Opa-Locka Detective James Smith spoke with Mr. Wynn.
The police report, filed on June 4, quotes Mr. Wynn saying that he "bought a baby for three dollars" from a woman who "stated that she have a baby she will kill if she don't get three dollars." 

Mr. Wynn, apparently afraid that he might be charged with a criminal act himself, has subsequently denied literally buying the baby. "I got eight children myself I can't take care of as it is," he says. "What do I want with buying one more?
I was just trying to help out.
She said she was going to kill it, and I didn't know what she was going to do." Ms. McNeal returned to Mr. Wynn's house nearly 24 hours after leaving her child.
Detective Smith was waiting, and interviewed her for about two hours. "She was so bad off, she would have done anything to get more crack, including hurting that baby," says the detective. 

Ms. McNeal calls allegations that she sold her baby after threatening to kill it "damn lies." She says she was merely leaving the child in exchange for some money while she went off to get high.
She says of Mr. Wynn, "He was good, like a father, so I trusted him.
He gave me money for the next hit.
Three dollars.
He said he'd hold the baby.
I knew him." Asked how long, she says, "Six or seven hours.
He was drunk, but I didn't know he was a drunk." 

Ms. McNeal was arrested and charged with criminal negligence and desertion of a child.
She spent 21 days in jail, although criminal charges were eventually dropped because of a lack of evidence.
As one prosecutor put it, "We couldn't put the old alcoholic on the stand." 

Ms. McNeal says she has struggled to stay away from crack since her release. "Each time God puts me in jail so that I can come to my senses," she says.
Far from a deterrent, jail had some appeal to Ms. McNeal. "They talk to you wrong," she says, "but they feed you real good.
They give you three good meals, cake, vegetables, chicken and two boxes of cereal at breakfast.
A lot of girls like it." 

While she was in jail, the baby was briefly taken into protective custody, but soon turned over to Mr. Johnson.
Once she was released, Ms. McNeal moved in again with her old boyfriend, where she, too, had care of the child.
Since then, however, she has moved out and is "staying with friends," Mr. Johnson says.
On Oct. 25, she faces custody proceedings in the Juvenile Dependency Court. 

Ms. McNeal says she loves the baby "more than I love drugs" and wants to keep her. "I want my baby to have everything.
A nice high school diploma.
I want her to be close to God.
I want her to be a beauty queen.
Everything I wasn't." As for herself, she says she wants a job and help kicking her crack habit, something she says she knows "I can't do on my own." 

But it's questionable whether she can do it at all.
Treatment, an ordeal at best, requires a tremendous amount of willpower.
Although Ms. McNeal says she has never had help before, both Mr. Johnson and her family say she underwent drug treatment in Georgia, but relapsed.
Recently, Mr. Johnson says, he made several appointments for her to be screened for treatment at a local hospital. "But when it came right down to the day, even though she said she could be strong, and was trying to give her life to God, she never did it," he says. 

Ms. McNeal is angry that the government could conceivably take her child, saying bitterly: "White women want to take other people's kids because they think they can rear them better.
White women are scared to have their own babies because they're thinking more about their shapes and their careers." 

But if the past is any indication, Ms. McNeal isn't likely to lose parental rights.
Family courts have long leaned toward keeping families united, except when the children are in clear physical danger.
Steve Levine, the Dade County Juvenile Justice Court judge expected to hear the case, says he can't recall an instance in the county where parental rights were ended simply because of drug addiction. "The parent would have to refuse treatment, and it would have to be unsafe for the child in the home," he says. 

"Some people think we should remove children permanently because of crack, but I don't agree with that," the judge says. "Terminating parental rights can be very traumatic.
And people can have serious alcohol and drug problems, and still be able to meet their children's needs." Nonetheless he says he finds such cases "personally disturbing," and adds, "If you thought about each one it could drive you insane." 

Similarly, Clifton George, the Florida social services department investigator on the case, thinks Ms. McNeal and Mr. Johnson should be given another chance so long as she is ordered to undergo drug treatment.
He says she is already getting counseling, although the clinic he names says it has no record of her, it turns out.
Moreover, he argues, "If you took away the baby, it would devastate Wonda and send her right over the brink." 

In Florida, where crack has been a problem for nearly five years, such arguments anger some children's-rights advocates, who say crack has changed the equation by which parental rights should be determined. "The judges say give the mother a chance, but I say you're not giving the child a chance," says Gwen Wurm, a pediatrician who sits on the Florida Bar Commission for Children. 

"It would be great if we had the programs to save the mothers and the children," she says. "But as it is, I think we have to perform triage.
Why wait until there's more neglect, and more abuse, and the child is a couple of years older?
When do you say enough is enough?" 

Yet social-services workers such as Mr. George, who spend much of their time working with children like Wonjerika McNeal, believe the answer isn't so simple.
Instead, society faces a terrible bind. "You can't take these kids away simply because there's drug use," he says. "And even if you could, in reality, what would you do with all of them?" 

