.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

THE RUSSIANS COULDN'T.
THE AMERICANS WOULDN'T.
The British and French did.
That's how Capt. Brian Walpole, former manager of British Airways' Concorde division, sums up the world's only supersonic commercial airliner and the businessman's super-status symbol. 

The prestige-sentitive French were the driving force that put the needle-nosed, 100-passenger SST into the air early in 1969.
The language barrier was only one problem.
Specifications were in inches for the British, centimeters for the French.
The French got the hydraulics, the British the electrical work.
Britain built the engines, France added the afterburners.
Half the components came from the U.S. 

The Russians and Americans also got into the supersonic act.
Boeing and Lockheed spent an estimated $1 billion on blueprints and mockups before Congress cut off funds in 1971.
The Russians actually produced an SST, the Tupelev-144, a Concorde lookalike.
One prototype crashed at a Paris air show in 1973 and the rest eventually were scrapped. 

The Concorde braved seven years of flak from environmentalists and others before it could begin flying the lucrative trans-Atlantic route.
It still can't fly over American air space at supersonic speed, so it restricts its flights to Washington and New York. 

Today, the six British and French Concordes in service make money, mainly because London and Paris absorbedthe $2 billion or more consumed in research and development costs for the plant. 

Concorde's legacy, aside from the prestige it gives those who can afford $2,400 to London or $3,200 to Paris, is the lesson it taught in international plane-building.
The Airbus, Europe's answer to Boeing's jets, was built by Britain, France, Germany, Spain and Italy.
And if the world ever sees hypersonic planes rocketing from New York to Tokyo in three hours, the aircraft can be built only by a concord of nations, according to Jean Claude Baumgarten, U.S. general manager for Air France. 

