.START 

Ryder System Inc. said it will post a $57 million charge for the third quarter, causing a loss for the period. 

The transportation-services concern wouldn't estimate the size of the loss.
Ryder had net income of $55.3 million, or 68 cents a share, a year earlier. 

M. Anthony Burns, chairman and chief executive officer, said the charge results from several actions.
Chief among them is a "substantial adjustment" for higher-than-expected worker compensation loss reserves, and anticipated losses on the disposal of idle commmercial rental trucks in the Vehicle Leasing & Services division, Ryder's huge truck leasing and rental operation.
Together, they make up more than half of the charge, some analysts estimate. 

The surprise move could put further pressure on Ryder's management to restructure, analysts said.
Investors, they said, may begin questioning management's ability to get Ryder through troubled times.
Anthony Hatch, an analyst at PaineWebber Inc., New York, said, "It's another question mark for a company that doesn't need another question mark." 

Mr. Burns characterized the move as an attempt to "go into 1990 clean," with room to bounce back from this year's lackluster earnings performance.
He said the cost-cutting actions won't influence earnings in the fourth quarter, but will begin to improve the company's profit in the first half of 1990. 

Mr. Burns said Ryder is still wrestling with economic and competitive pressures in the Vehicle Leasing & Services division.
Also, he said, lower auto output is hurting the Automotive Services division, which transports new autos. "We're looking at our core businesses to see what steps need to be taken," Mr. Burns said. 

He said the charge also includes a write-down on some unprofitable parts of Vehicle Leasing & Services and expected losses on the disposal of slow-moving aircraft parts in Ryder's aviation-services businesses.
The charge also covers continued staff and facility reductions, and costs associated with Ryder's exposure to recent developments at Braniff Inc., an aircraft-engine-maintenance customer. 

Braniff filed to reorganize under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
Under Chapter 11, a company is protected from creditors' lawsuits while it works out a plan to pay its debts. 

Mr. Burns wouldn't be specific on how much of the charge was related to each. 

News of the charge wasn't disclosed until after the market's close.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Ryder closed at $27.375 a share, down 12.5 cents. 

Earlier, Ryder agreed to sell most of its Insurance Management Services division to Skandia International Insurance Corp.
The price of the cash deal, which is expected to close by year end, wasn't disclosed.
Mr. Burns said the gain would be applied to fourth-quarter earnings. 

The insurance division is the one of four businesses Ryder put on the auction block in February.
The other businesses, which included a freight-hauling operation, have been sold.
Mr. Burns had said at the time that the divestitures were expected to net more than $100 million in cash, some of which would go toward a purchase of as much as 15% of Ryder's stock during the next two years. 

