.START 

Legislation on Benefits 

Likely to Be a Mixed Bag 

FOR MANAGERS of corporate benefits, this session of Congress promises one Valentine -- and probably a couple of big disappointments. 

Now that it is almost certain that Section 89 of the tax code will be repealed, "I'm seeing happy faces on people I haven't seen smile in years," says Henry Savath, a principal with A. Foster Higgins & Co., a New York-based benefits consulting company. 

The tax provision, which never went into effect, would have required companies to compile detailed records to make sure highly paid employees' benefits weren't out of line with those for the rest of the company. "It was more a test of an employer's ability to gather data than a test of discrimination," says Mr. Savath. 

Tempering the joy, however, is a legislative proposal that would make it difficult -- if not impossible -- for a company to terminate a pension plan in order to take back any excess funding. 

And another proposal, which in theory would allow companies to use pension-plan overfunding to help pay for retiree health benefits, isn't seen helping much.
Before any excess could be used for health care, companies would be required to vest all non-vested participants and then buy annuities to cover all participants. 

"A lot of employers are looking forward to this," says John N. Erlenborn, a Washington lawyer. "But they haven't read the fine print." 

Some People Can't Stop 

Dealing, Even in a Game 

SETTING OUT to teach the art of negotiation, Leslie Levy wound up learning a lot about negotiations herself. 

"If you want a free, weeklong course in negotiations . . . this is how to do it," says Ms. Levy, president of Institute for Research on Boards of Directors Inc., a Brookline, Mass., group. 

Ms. Levy was enlisted by Fordham University's business school to create a simulated takeover attempt -- using investor Carl Icahn as the raider; Robert O. Anderson, ex-chairman of Atlantic Richfield Co., as the chief executive; the Rev. Jesse Jackson as an activist, and many other high-level players. 

The problem was, everyone wanted to cut a special deal before the session at the World Management Council Congress in New York even began. 

"Everyone was telling me that I had made his or her situation impossible," says Ms. Levy. "The takeover team said the company couldn't be taken over.
The defense team thought they were sitting ducks.
Negotiations were going on among the participants up to the last minute to get me to change the case." 

At the rehearsal dinner the night before, Ms. Levy and a colleague tried to placate participants: "We said, 'Hey, remember guys, this is just a game. '" Replied one of the participants: "The hell it is." 

Says Mr. Anderson: "I've chaired many board meetings, but none with quite this makeup of rugged individuals." 

But Fred Joseph, chief executive of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., who played the investment banker, says the game let him be himself. "It's a lot easier," he says, "than making a speech." 

This Survey Sounds 

Too Good to Be True 

THE NEWS couldn't have been more encouraging for American executives. 

At the fifth annual National Quality Forum, the American Society for Quality Control last week released a Gallup survey telling executives their hard work was paying off: U.S. companies now overwhelmingly feel their fellow Americans -- and not the Japanese -- present the greatest competition on quality. 

The only problem was, many of the heavy hitters attending the meeting simply weren't buying it. "They're totally mad," says David Luther, senior vice president and corporate director of quality at Corning Inc. "How can they say that Americans are our stiffest competitors?" he asks, when the Japanese "are absolutely killing us in a number of areas." 

Nearly three-quarters of the senior executives Gallup polled last summer at 601 companies -- almost equally divided between big and small companies -- said that over the next five years, they most fear the quality improvements by Americans.
That's up from just 54% in 1987. 

Only 9% said Japanese assaults on quality would be most important to them, down sharply from 22% in 1987. 

Robert Stempel, president of General Motors Corp., suggested that the response reflects good cheer over the progress that American companies have made in improving their own products.
Still, he says, "We haven't taken our eyes off Japan." 

John Ryan, the survey's project manager for the quality-control group, theorized that smaller companies and service companies were more likely to be worried about firms in their own back yards.
Still, "we were surprised" by the results, he acknowledges. 

Odds and Ends 

JOKE FROM MIT's Sloan School of Management: How many Harvard M.B.A.s does it take to screw in a light bulb?
One.
The M.B.A. holds the bulb and the universe revolves around him or her. . . . While the cat's away?
When a supervisor was out, some employees at ADV Marketing Group Inc. began straggling in late.
So the Stamford, Conn.-based ad agency began offering prizes simply for showing up on time: A $100 dinner certificate after 13 on-time weeks and an $800 vacation plus two days off after a year of on-time performance. . . . Technology guru John Diebold writes to India inviting the Dalai Lama to address a management conference in New York.
The exiled Tibetan religious leader accepts -- by fax. 

