.START 

His voice is hoarse and his spurs drag in the mud, but "George Dickel" slogs through the drizzle and cold wind, bravely shouting his lines in a staged shootout with a dastardly gunfighter, archrival "Jack Daniel." 

"Show Jack how smooth you are," shouts an onlooker.
As the crowd cheers, George mercilessly guns down Jack. 

What a man won't do to sell a little bourbon. 

On this recent afternoon, Dale Turner -- who plays "George Dickel" in the melodrama -- is doing his gunfighter thing for 150 members at the inaugural meeting of the George Dickel Water Conservation Society, a bourbon fan club gathered outside a distillery here.
The sharpshooter is actually the president of Schenley Industries' American Whiskey Group, the maker of George Dickel bourbon.
For the sake of bourbon sales, he has practiced gun twirling until his fingers bled, but shootouts are just part of his derring-do. "If it's around to be done and it's legal, we'll do it," Mr. Turner says. 

Selling bourbon these days requires the feistiness of a gunfighter.
In today's renewed era of temperance, brown goods -- bourbons, scotches and other whiskeys"have been a hard, hard sell," says Tom Pirko, president of Bevmark Inc., a Los Angeles consulting firm.
U.S. sales of domestic bourbons totaled just 17 million cases last year, down from 36 million in 1970.
Sales fell 6.3% in 1988 alone. 

Given this setting, Dallas-based Schenley has done something entirely unexpected: It sold more bourbon.
Sales of its I.W. Harper brand grew 59% to 270,000 cases last year, and George Dickel sales increased more than 18%, according to M. Shanken Communications Inc., a beverage industry publisher.
Schenley, a unit of Britain's Guinness PLC, says sales of its Old Fitzgerald brand rose 50%. 

Overall, the fourth-largest domestic bourbon seller has captured about 11% of the market (7.2% when blended whiskies are added in).
Sales of its bourbons -- which retail for slightly more than the industry average -- were estimated at $125 million last year. 

Can Schenley perpetuate that success?
Distributors and analysts say much of the company's growth has been at the expense of smaller, middle-priced brands, which will soon stabilize or disappear.
Meanwhile, bourbon isn't growing in trend-setting coastal states and it still has little appeal outside the South. 

What's more, bourbon makers never attracted today's younger drinkers, who prefer light beers, fruity vodkas and wines.
Nearly 70% of bourbon is imbibed by people over 40, says Frank Walters, research director for Shanken.
As Mr. Turner puts it, "our drinkers are dying off just like country music fans are." 

Without growth, Schenley and its rivals are reduced to battling for each other's market share.
But getting bourbon drinkers, a ferociously loyal bunch, to switch brands is a tough, tough business. 

Many bourbon sellers, therefore, are beefing up marketing efforts.
Early Times, produced by Brown-Forman Corp., changed its recipe to appeal to lighter tastes.
Others, most notably Jack Daniel's Black and Wild Turkey, have gained market share by raising prices and promoting a higher-quality image. "Americans are drinking less and they're drinking better," says Arthur Hancock, executive vice president of marketing for Jack Daniel's, echoing the industry's rallying cry. 

For distillers looking to attract the younger generation, the role model is Jack Daniel's, made by Brown-Forman.
Back in 1954, the company formed the Tennessee Squires, a club of Jack Daniel's devotees, and made them owners of a piece of a Tennessee hollow.
As part of its marketing campaign, the company frequently sent out phony jury-duty and property-tax notices to the "property owners." 

"We figured that the world is made up of lonely people and we could attract them," says Mr. Hancock.
They were right.
The young male audience that was drawn to the promotion -- which is still going on -- boosted Jack Daniel's sales from about 170,000 cases then to 3.4 million cases by 1988. 

Now Dickel, with only 355,000 cases in sales in 1988, is trying to mimic that success with its Water Conservation Society, whose name implies a reluctance to dilute the drink.
With newsletters and special offers, it's "marketing taken to a one-on-one level," says Ralph Dupps, retired Dickel president. 

Schenley's recent successes stem largely from such strategies.
Analysts and the company's distributors point to the company's strengths in in-store promotions and attention to regional differences. "They're very, very good merchandisers," says Mr. Pirko. "They're good at toughing it out on the street." 

Without TV, which the industry shuns voluntarily, brands must do more to sell themselves at the liquor store and the bar, Mr. Turner says.
In that vein, Schenley last year introduced the Dickel Duel, bar-staged taste tests to promote George Dickel over segment leader Jack Daniel's.
The pub promotion has been so popular that Schenley has run out of duel kits, which included shot glasses and coasters. 

In another recent promotion, Schenley put peel-off playing cards on bottles of its Old Charter brand; consumers got rebates for collecting poker hands.
Some 114,000 customers responded, far exceeding company expectations.
Schenley brands also sponsor country music concerts, hunting-gear giveaways and car sweepstakes. 

The company also recently boosted its field staff.
Schenley reps worked with Louisiana distributors to create special T-shirts, displays and local advertising during the Republican National Convention in New Orleans.
They helped create in-store displays for the Super Derby, a high-profile, million-dollar horse race at Louisiana Downs, which distributors say won Schenley extra shelf space. 

Mr. Turner is the general of Schenley's grass-roots attack.
The 42-year-old official learned his stuff on the other side of the retailing fence.
He grew up in his dad's Dallas grocery, managed drug stores for an Eastern chain, worked on the sales staff at Dr Pepper and directed merchandising for the Navy's 90 commissaries. 

The experience, he says, helps him understand retailers' and wholesalers' problems.
For example, he says, he'd never authorize Christmas promotional packaging that leaves stores with dated bottles in January.
Instead, seasonal ribbons and other doodads are detachable. 

And though he's moved to the executive suite, he still feels the best merchandising ideas come from retailers.
Storekeepers, for instance, told him to keep stand-up displays short so shoplifters can't hide behind them. 

But for long-term success, Mr. Turner knows Schenley's bourbons must upgrade their image.
In the past, Schenley used rough-hewn country singer Merle Haggard to peddle George Dickel.
By contrast, the new Dickel print ads feature classy color pictures of "Great Places," such as old rural barber shops and hunting cabins, that the company hopes will strike nostalgic chords with a range of consumers.
Slick color ads in regional and sports magazines push a quality image for W.L. Weller, considered the Schenley brand with the most growth potential. 

Mostly, though, the company is looking for more ways to attract younger consumers.
To that end, George Dickel recently added a hip, young comic, David Naster, as a spokesman.
And Mr. Turner is talking to Keith Richards of the Rolling Stones about promoting Schenley's Rebel Yell.
The brand is a known favorite of the rock star -- who incidentally fits the bourbon profile: He's 45. 

Tennessee and Kentucky whiskeys 

