.START 

Now that the Brady Plan to rescue Third World debtors from their heavy burdens has failed, where do we go?
The problem is more than academic because now that the commercial banks see their loans as a solvency problem and are reserving against them, loan portfolios of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are coming under pressure. 

Both institutions confront growing arrears, as their lending in recent years has increasingly been to the least creditworthy and most heavily indebted countries.
Over the past year, the World Bank's total loans outstanding to countries with overdue payments rose by 9.2%.
During the same period, the IMF's credit outstanding to overdue borrowers rose by 30%.
The IMF has now accumulated about $4 billion in doubtful loans on its books.
Some critics believe that the World Bank is "round-tripping" funds, or lending money to pay interest in the guise of controversial "structural adjustment" loans, in order to keep down the arrearages in its loan portfolio. 

Last year, Congress agreed to enlarge U.S. guarantees of World Bank loans.
But it is getting cold feet as the $30 billion in accumulated U.S. guarantees ("callable capital") begins to take on the visage of budget expenditures.
Similarly, IMF director Michel Camdessus's recent call for a doubling of the IMF's capital fell on deaf ears at Treasury. 

The debt problem has gone unresolved for so long because, for face-saving reasons, it was treated as a temporary liquidity crisis that could be handled with more lending.
Policy makers wasted several years making unserviceable debts even larger.
When the J.P. Morgan bank recently incurred a huge loss in order to reserve 100% against its non-trade-related Third World loans, the procession of Treasury schemes designed to keep the debt afloat with more bank lending came to an end.
This should force the policy makers to finally face the real issue. 

Third World countries are in trouble because, at the advice of the West, they followed a debt-financed development strategy that concentrated investment decisions in the hands of government.
Much of the money disappeared in private bank accounts and political patronage for relatives and supporters.
Not all of the World Bank's efforts came to nought, but in general the money actually damaged the poor countries by implanting the wrong incentives and deflecting energies away from economic development.
In the end, the loans did not generate revenues to service the debt. 

The large state enterprises that lending helped to build have become enormous drains on Third World budgets, leading to the printing of money to cover the deficits of socialized enterprises.
The resulting inflations spawn massive capital flight, which shrinks the private equity base of the economies and diminishes their prospects of development.
For example, Brazilian economist Clarice Pechman expects a 1,000% inflation rate to help chase $12 billion in capital out of Brazil this year. 

The postwar assumption that politicians and government bureaucrats would make more successful decisions than private investors was one of mankind's greatest mistakes.
Now that this development policy has been humbled by its results, we must substitute a different one. 

The greatest obstacle to Third World economic development is not the countries' debts, but the indigenous and external institutions bequeathed by development planning: the politically powerful parastatals and the multilateral lending institutions that underwrite unsuccessful government policies. 

The entrenched institutional debris needs clearing out.
Instead of adding to Third World debt burdens by making new loans, the World Bank ideally should swap all its loans for equity and sell the equity to private investors, domestic or foreign.
This would give privatization a great boost and break the deficit-inflation-capital-flight cycle. 

The funds raised from the sale of equity should be used to redeem World Bank bonds, with the remainder of the bonds apportioned to the rich countries to be exchanged for government bonds and become part of the national debts. 

This would be a grand act of debt forgiveness, one much more appropriately made by public authorities than by private commercial banks responsible to shareholders.
Banks can be expected to grudgingly write off bad loans, but to gratuitously forgive debts that they have any prospect of collecting would violate their obligations to shareholders.
The effort by the Treasury and multilateral institutions to turn our private commercial banks into instruments of state policy must be strongly resisted.
The idea that money-center banks are "statesmen" with world obligations that take precedence over their shareholders' interests is extremely dangerous to our free banking system. 

Holding public policy accountable does not mean a bailout for the private banks.
The banks must confront their mistakes.
At the same time, the banks should not be required to bail out with loan forgiveness and new money both a mistaken public policy and the loan portfolios of multinational government lending institutions.
After all, it was public policy makers and an inattentive public who saddled the poor countries of the world with socialized development planning in the first place.
Once the World Bank uses its portfolio to privatize Third World economies, it could then close its doors, and its bureaucracy could better employ its skills in making money in the newly emergent private sectors.
Alternatively, on a reduced basis the World Bank could subsidize infrastructure construction in the Third World.
However, should the Third World countries ever get their policies in order, they would be in little need of the bank.
The prospering Asian countries have already disengaged from the development banks, finding cheaper money and better terms from commercial banks. 

Just as Mikhail Gorbachev is winding down the Soviet Union's 70-year experiment with central economic planning, it is time for us to terminate our 45-year romance with debt-financed development planning.
Once private initiative is allowed to become the basis for the economy, the Third World can begin to accumulate the private institutions and social attitudes that are the prerequisites for economic development. 

Mr. Roberts holds the Simon chair in political economy at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. 

