.START 

Investors are starting to take their search for higher yields abroad again, by investing in global bonds. 

But although some countries' bonds offer the lure of double-digit yields, experts warn that currency swings can make them extremely risky. 

Thanks to the dollar's recent sharp decline against other major currencies, foreign government bonds staged a big turnaround in the third quarter following two consecutive weak quarters. 

Salomon Brothers Inc. 's nondollar World Bond Index, which tracks 750 foreign government bonds issued by nine countries, posted a total return of 5.1% for the third quarter, a big improvement from 0.78% in the second quarter.
Total return measures price changes plus interest income. 

The performance has sparked a mild resurgence in investor interest in foreign government bonds, which tend to rise in value when the dollar weakens, making foreign securities worth more in dollar terms. 

At T. Rowe Price International Bond Fund, for example, assets have started to rise for the first time in more than a year.
T. Rowe Price said these assets now are $265 million, up from $250 million earlier this year.
While that's a long way from the $500 million in assets the fund had in the first quarter of 1988, it nevertheless is a positive sign. 

"There's been a steady trickle back," says David Boardman, executive vice president at Rowe Price-Fleming International in London. 

He attributes the pickup in activity to the relatively high yields that the bonds produce relative to U.S. Treasury bonds.
Also, he says, "there is a perception that international efforts to drive the dollar down will continue," further boosting the value of foreign securities relative to the U.S. currency. 

Yields on U.S. Treasury notes and bonds average about 8%.
Meanwhile, yields are 9% in France, 10% in Denmark, 13.5% in Spain and as much as 17% in Australia. 

Offsetting these tempting yields is the currency risk.
Foreign bonds have been highly erratic performers in the past two years.
They were star performers in 1988 when advocates praised their strong track record and called them conservative diversification moves that would also allow investors to take advantage of what appeared then to be a shaky dollar. 

But this year, as the dollar climbed on foreign exchange markets, holders of foreign government bonds were badly burned.
Small investors exited international bond funds in droves. 

The latest reversal came in the last two weeks in September when the Group of Seven major industrial countries -- the U.S., Japan, West Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada -- decided that the dollar was too strong.
The central banks used heavy coordinated intervention to dump dollars on foreign exchange markets. 

In their latest dollar attack, many European central banks last week raised interest rates.
From its high point in intraday trading on Sept. 15 to the end of the month, the dollar fell 6.6% against the West German mark and 6.7% against the Japanese yen. 

"The only thing that bailed out nondollar bonds was the G-7, and that happened at the very end of the quarter," says Ken Windheim, portfolio manager and director of fixed-income at PCM International, an affiliate of Prudential Insurance Co. "Had it not been for intervention, the returns would have not looked so good.
It could have been an ugly quarter." 

But many money managers and economists maintain that circumstances have changed in foreign markets and could make the fixed-income securities in those markets top performers in the current quarter. 

"It's still a treacherous market, but there are a number of things that are really positive about investing abroad," says Thomas Prapas, managing director of fixed-income investments at Clemente Capital Corp. 

Among other things, Mr. Prapas contends that most foreign interest rates have probably peaked, inflation abroad appears under control, and economic growth there is beginning to slow down, conditions that should boost the price of foreign government bonds.
Most foreign bonds' prices at the end of the third quarter were little changed from the start of the year. 

The double-digit foreign yields could be upstaged if the value of the dollar suddenly picks up strength again. 

"The dollar is another story," says Mr. Prapas. "There are many opportunities out there, but you have to worry about the currency." 

To protect against further currency erosion, many money managers are using sophisticated currency hedging techniques.
For example, Mr. Prapas is buying West German government bonds, expecting to earn hefty capital gains as the bonds appreciate in price.
However, he's less sure how the West German currency will perform against the dollar.
To hedge against a possible erosion of the mark against the dollar, he's selling the deutsche mark forward by agreeing to deliver the currency in the future at current prices.
Essentially, he's betting that the value of the currency will fall. 

If that happens, "my underlying position will deteriorate, but my forward contract will be worth more.
If the mark remains the same, it's a wash.
If the mark rises, I will have gained from my bonds and from the currency." 

Statistics from Salomon Brothers show how currency hedging can greatly affect the performance of foreign bonds.
In the first nine months of the year, for example, the total return on a group of French government bonds was negative 0.05%.
But the return was positive 5.08% for portfolios that were fully hedged. 

Of course, hedging can be a slight drag on performance when the currency moves in the opposite direction.
For example, an unhedged portfolio of Canadian bonds rose 10.88% in the nine months compared with a return of 7.60% for a fully hedged portfolio. 

"In the same way you make premiums when a currency is declining against the dollar, you would lose those same premiums when the currency is appreciating against the dollar," says Carol Russo, a bond market analyst at Salomon Brothers. 

Monday's Market Activity 

Activity in U.S. bond markets was exceptionally light yesterday because of the Columbus Day holiday. 

The Treasury bond market here was closed for the holiday.
In the debt-futures market, which opened for a short trading session yesterday, Treasury bond futures prices ended higher in a follow-through to Friday's bullish sentiment. 

December bond futures rose 5/32 to settle at the session peak of 98 14/32, after trading as low as 98 3/32 earlier in the day. 

The gains were most pronounced in the short end of the market on growing speculation that the Federal Reserve could soon lower interest rates to counter fresh signs of economic weakness. 

"The short end is expecting a Fed easing imminently," says Karen Gibbs, a senior financial futures analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in Chicago. 

Expectations of falling interest rates were sparked by Friday's release of weaker-than-expected September employment data. 

In European trading, U.S. Treasury bonds ended modestly higher in very slow trading. 

The benchmark 30-year bond rose nearly 1/4 point, or about $2.50 for each $1,000 face amount, while its yield slid to 7.99% from 8.01%. 

*Return on portfolios that traded futures contracts to avoid negative impact from currency swings. 

Source: Salomon Brothers Inc. 

