.START 

Congressional Democrats are modestly reshaping President Bush's anti-drug initiative, but are blowing an opportunity to reshape their own image in the process. 

Under the prodding of Congress, the drug plan will spend more money, most of it for education and treatment.
If that money can be spent wisely, the need is certainly there.
But the Democrats have lost an opportunity to toughen the president's package in the area where they are politically weakest: crime. 

The Bush administration's policy is long on law enforcement, but short on cops.
The president proposes to double federal spending on prisons, increasing capacity by a whopping 85%, and to sharply increase the numbers of prosecutors, marshals and drug agents.
But the administration sought only a $200 million increase in Justice Department grants for state and local law enforcement, which the Senate has increased to $300 million. 

Privately, top administration officials say that more police aren't a top priority.
The argument, as articulated by one of the very top policy makers, is that even where there already are mass sweeps of drug-infested areas, there aren't enough prosecutors or jails to handle those arrested. 

That misses the point.
Drug czar Bill Bennett convincingly asserts that a top priority is to reclaim blighted inner-city neighborhoods so that kids can go to school without ducking bullets and residents can play and work without the constant threat of drug thugs.
In the short run, that can be achieved only with more and better officers on the streets. 

"The Bush administration has it all backwards," complains Adam Walinsky, a New York lawyer, former antiwar activist, and student of crime and police. "Their argument is like Vietnam.
They say what we need to do is . . . go in on sweeps and wipe places out.
Instead what we need to do is give people in these communities more of a sense that they're part of the country, and they need more and better police to do that." 

Mr. Walinsky and a colleague, Jonathan Rubinstein, a former cop, offer the Democrats an opening on this issue that the party, so far, has failed to capitalize on. 

Specifically, the two propose a national police corps aimed at adding as many as 100,000 cops around the country at an annual cost to the federal government of about $1 billion.
All kids entering the police corps would receive four years of guaranteed federal loans for college expenses of up to $10,000 a year.
On a competitive basis, 25,000 young men and women -- with special emphasis on minorities -- would be selected each year.
Between their junior and senior years of college, they would undergo an intensive training program. 

Once graduated, they would enter a local police force for a four-year commitment.
When that was fulfilled, the government would pay off the college loans. (If they abandon police work, they're responsible for the loans.) 

In essence, this idea, which has been around for a while, would be ROTC for cops.
There currently are about 488,000 local police officers, so this would increase those levels by more than 20%.
More significantly, as the graduates would be placed almost exclusively on foot patrol, and not add to the police bureaucracies, the proposal should increase cops on the front lines by about 40%. 

In inner-city neighborhoods, the chief problem isn't drugs; it's crime, a condition worsened considerably by drugs.
In city after city, the ratio of police officers to violent crimes -- homicides, robberies, rapes, serious assaults -- has dramatically plunged over the years, from 3 or 4 to 1 in favor of the police to 3 or 4 to 1 in favor of the criminals.
In 1951, there were 1,229 police officers in Buffalo, N.Y., and 361 violent crimes there; by last year, the Buffalo police force had shrunk to 970 officers, while violent crimes soared to 3,555. 

There are objections to the Walinsky-Rubinstein proposal.
The administration claims that in a time of scarce resources, the $1 billion could be better spent on other anti-drug or anti-crime measures.
And in a recent column on this page, criminology professor Lawrence Sherman argued against this scheme, reasoning that police work is too complex for inexperienced men and women, as younger cops sometimes are too aggressive. 

Sure, some younger cops may be more aggressive; that's exactly what's necessary in crime-ridden areas.
But it's a good bet that police corps college graduates would not only be more aggressive, but also more sensitive to community relations and less prone to corruption. 

Indeed, there's compelling circumstantial evidence that more, and more sensitive, cops significantly change the drug and related crime problem in inner-city neighborhoods.
In those few places where the drug threat has been driven out, such as the Winzer Park neighborhood in Houston, almost invariably the major factor is better police-community relations. 

If crime were cut by only a small fraction, the return on that $1 billion investment each year would be enormous.
No doubt, there are root causes that have to be addressed, but it's clear that the vicious cycle facing the underclass starts with crime. "Victimization causes and perpetuates the other ills of our underclass neighborhoods," criminologist John DiIulio argues in a recent essay in The Public Interest.
And Isaac Fulwood Jr., the new police chief in Washington, D.C., notes that if government can't assure people that it's safe to go about their lives, then "the rest is hopeless." 

Congressional Democrats ought to think back only a year ago to the famous Willie Horton attacks on Michael Dukakis.
In part they may have worked because of racist appeals, and in part they may have worked because Gov. Dukakis was a stiff candidate.
But they also worked because many middle-class Americans really have less confidence in the Democrats on values questions, such as crime and cops.
Here's a chance for Democrats to counter that image and do some good in the process. 

Mr. Hunt is the Journal's Washington bureau chief. 

