.START 

All three major U.S. auto makers may report losses for the third quarter on their core North American automotive businesses.
It would be the first time this has happened since the recession year of 1982. 

General Motors Corp., Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. are likely to post net income for the period thanks to earnings from diversified businesses, notably financial services, and from international operations.
But because their core businesses appear to have run in the red, several analysts say, third-quarter net for the Big Three as a group could have dropped as much as 50% from last year's unusually strong $1.83 billion. 

The third quarter is traditionally the weakest for auto makers, because factories take time off for maintenance and to install machinery to manufacture new models.
Nonetheless, the plunge in profits markedly illustrates Detroit's vulnerability to industrywide excess production capacity.
Japanese auto makers are rapidly expanding their manufacturing base in the U.S., in response to the import-restricting measures that Detroit helped put in place earlier in the decade. 

The most striking part of the third-quarter earnings picture is the prospect that Ford may have had a loss on North American auto operations.
The last time the No. 2 U.S. auto maker did that was in the fourth quarter of 1982.
On Wall Street, Ford is regarded as the U.S. auto maker best prepared to weather hard times in the domestic market. 

But now, several analysts say that Ford's North American business had a loss or broke even during the third quarter.
Analyst David Healy, one of the most bearish industry observers, estimates Ford had a deficit of as much as $104 million on North American auto operations.
Besides being burdened with heavy sales-incentive costs, Ford was forced by slow sales to cut production at several of its most profitable factories.
Those include the plants that build the midsized Mercury Sable and Ford Taurus models as well as light trucks. 

Some analysts believe Ford did manage a profit on its North American auto business, but not much of one.
Prudential-Bache analyst Philip Fricke estimates Ford's pretax North American auto profit fell 32% to $384 million in the third quarter. "Production in the U.S. and Canada is down significantly," he says. 

Analysts estimate Ford's overall net income dropped as much as 50% from $856 million, or $1.78 a share, a year earlier.
Estimates range from $415 million, or 90 cents a share, to about $600 million, or $1.30 a share. 

Ford officials, following company policy, declined to comment on the earnings estimates. 

At GM, analysts estimate profit in the third quarter fell as much as 49% from record year-earlier earnings of $859.2 million, or $1.23 a share.
Estimates range from $435 million, or 50 cents a share, to $644 million, or 90 cents a share.
Analysts said they expect all of GM's profit for the September quarter came from the auto maker's financial arm, overseas operations and technology units. 

"I think they're going to lose $290 million for the year" in North American auto operations, says Prudential-Bache's Mr. Fricke. "They have a long way to go." 

A GM spokesman said the company had no comment on the earnings estimates. 

At Chrysler, which has relatively little overseas business, most analysts expect third-quarter profit before extraordinary gains fell about 50% from year-earlier net income of $112.5 million, or 50 cents a share. 

Chrysler is expected to report a $310 million, or $1.33-a-share, special gain from the sale of 45% of its stake in Mitsubishi Motors Corp.
But earnings from operations are expected to fall to between 20 cents and 25 cents a share, or $45 million to $60 million, most analysts say.
Some, like Mr. Healy, say the figure could be even lower. 

Chrysler officials wouldn't comment directly on the earnings estimates.
But Robert S. Miller Jr., executive vice president and chief financial officer, said in a recent interview that if the analysts' estimates for Chrysler do prove correct, it would indicate that the company earned virtually nothing from automotive operations during the quarter. 

So far this year, total U.S. car and truck sales are running only 3% behind a year ago.
But production at Japanese auto plants in the U.S., some of which are joint efforts with the Big Three, is sharply increasing.
These plants accounted for 12.3% of U.S. vehicle production in the third quarter, compared with just 8.5% a year earlier. 

One result: An increasing number of temporary plant shutdowns by GM, Ford and Chrysler to keep inventories from getting out of hand.
GM, for example, cut its third-quarter car output to the lowest of any quarter since late 1970, when a strike closed most of the company's assembly lines.
Meanwhile, the No. 1 auto maker's third-quarter truck and van output slipped 3% from a strong year earlier.
That pushed GM's total vehicle production to its lowest third-quarter level since 1981. 

What's more, because the appeal of Japanese cars remains high, the Big Three are being forced to discount their vehicles heavily to achieve the sales they do get.
In the third quarter alone, analysts estimate, Big Three buyer "incentives" totaled $2.4 billion -- or about $850 for each vehicle sold by GM, Ford and Chrysler. 

These twin problems are likely to continue for a long time, industry officials and analysts believe.
Says Scott Merlis, auto analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co.: "We look for the third and fourth quarters {of 1989} to be the prototypes for 1990." 

from overseas and non-automotive operations 

