.START 

Most of the nation's major railroads are expected to report third-quarter earnings declines, reflecting weakened shipments of industrial freight. 

CSX Corp., the first of the group to release results, reported last week that its third-quarter net income dropped 21.7%.
Analysts expect Norfolk Southern Corp., Consolidated Rail Corp., Union Pacific Corp. and Burlington Northern Inc. to report moderately lower earnings. 

However, Santa Fe Pacific Corp. officials said business rebounded somewhat in the third quarter and that it expects to report a profit from continuing operations.
In the 1988 third quarter, Santa Fe had a net loss of $646.8 million, including a $644.4 million loss from discontinued operations. 

Analysts estimate that rail traffic fell between 3% and 3.5% from its strong performance in the 1988 third quarter. "We're seeing a reflection of weakness in two very important segments of the economy, automobiles and steel," said Graeme Lidgerwood, an analyst at First Boston Co. "Housing starts have been weak, so we're seeing weakness in lumber shipments.
We're also seeing the effects of last year's drought on shipments of corn." 

But the sharpest traffic drops occurred in July when a strike against Pittston Coal Group Inc. depressed coal traffic for some eastern railroads.
Since then, the traffic declines have moderated, allaying fears that the rail industry was slipping into a recession.
Meanwhile, tight cost controls at some railroads blunted the effects of the business drop. 

"We had our soft landing," said Robert Krebs, Santa Fe Pacific's chairman. "The impression I have is that business is picking up a little." 

Michael Lloyd, an analyst at Salomon Brothers Inc., said third-quarter rail traffic was "weaker than most people had expected, but it seemed to stabilize as the quarter ended." Mr. Lloyd said rail freight rates increased an average of only 1% in the past 12 months, providing little help to carriers.
That partly reflects keen competition for merchandise freight from over-the-road truckers. 

"The early recognition of the tonnage trends resulted in cost-reduction efforts at all the major railroads," said Andras Petery, an analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co.
In addition, some carriers, notably Conrail and CSX, said they planned to cut capital spending next year. "Rather than throw more money into their physical plant and equipment, they want to increase the utilization of their existing assets," said Mr. Petery. 

When it reported that third-quarter net income dropped to $94 million from $120 million a year ago, Richmond, Va.-based CSX cited overall weakening in the economy's industrial sector, the coal strike against Pittston and service disruptions caused by Hurricane Hugo.
However, per-share earnings rose, to 91 cents from 75 cents, reflecting an decrease in CSX's common shares outstanding to 99.7 million from 156.3 million a year ago.
CSX added that improved earnings at its ocean shipping and inland barge units failed to offset a 35% drop in rail operating income. 

Norfolk Southern expects third-quarter earnings to decline about 15% from the record $179.4 million, or $1 a share, achieved in the 1988 third quarter, according to John Turbyfill, executive vice president for finance.
He added that fuel prices, casualty and insurance costs increased during the third quarter, while traffic declines depressed corporate revenue by 3% to 4%. 

Union Pacific officials said they are "comfortable" with analysts' projections that third-quarter earnings from continuing operations will be between $133 million and $137 million, compared with year-earlier earnings continuing operations of $140 million.
The year-ago figure doesn't include profits from the company's refinery operations, which were sold late last year. 

The Union Pacific officials said the earnings decline largely reflects additional interest expense related to a share-repurchase program.
They added that cost-cutting efforts at the Union Pacific Railroad more than offset a "slight" traffic decline in the third quarter.
And they said earnings at the company's oil and gas unit are strong, reflecting higher energy prices. 

Conrail declined to comment on analysts' projections that it will report third-quarter net income between $1.10 and $1.15 a share compared with net income of $83 million, or $1.21 a share, in the year-ago third quarter.
James Hagen, Conrail's chairman, said last month that the company is "clearly going through an economic slowdown." He added: "We will manage our way through this period successfully with stringent cost controls." 

