.START 

originally from Parsons, Kan., not a renowned jazz center -- was leading a big band in Shanghai.
He was 23 years old.
It was two years later, however, as a sideman with Count Basie, that Mr. Clayton began to develop an international reputation as a jazz original. 

Even in a band with such nonpareil improvisers as Lester Young, Dickie Wells and Herschel Evans, Mr. Clayton was equally distinctive.
He effortlessly created clear, singing melody lines, and his sound was both full and crisp.
He was one of those players who, if asked to demonstrate how not to swing, couldn't have done it.
Even the silences in his solos pulsated. 

Buck Clayton had something extra-musical going for him as well.
An exceptionally handsome man, he could have become -- had the Hollywood studios then been of a mind to integrate the silver screen -- the first black matinee idol.
As it was, traveling with Basie back then, he knew there were two nations long before the Kerner Commission did.
Being in Charles Delaunay's jazz discography didn't help. 

Mr. Clayton stayed with Basie until 1943.
Then he went on tour with Jazz at the Philharmonic and various groups overseas, and headed his own combos.
He had done some arranging and composing during all those years but, in 1978, he learned that if he were to stay in jazz, it would be solely as a creator of lines and harmonies for other people to play.
A dental condition had made playing increasingly painful with a bridge cutting deeper and deeper into his lip.
An operation didn't help, and the sound of that singing horn could now be heard only on records. 

In the years since, Mr. Clayton has written for various ensembles, but always hankered for a group of his own that would play his music the way he heard it.
Three years ago, he assembled a 13-piece band -- four saxophones, three trumpets, two trombones and a rhythm section.
It has performed at the Village Vanguard and the Cat Club in New York and the Nice Festival.
A tour of France is a possibility, maybe with side trips to Spain and Switzerland, and Buck Clayton and His Swing Band have been booked again at the Village Vanguard after the first of the year. 

Both live and on the band's first album, "A Swingin' Dream" (Stash Records, 611 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10012), Buck Clayton distills the essence of swinging.
The musicians are in their early 30s, with impressive jazz resumes, and although they grew up in the bop era, they play Mr. Clayton's scores with manifest delight.
One test of whether a band is cooking, as musicians used to say, is whether the players smile a lot during a set.
Some of Mr. Clayton's musicians seem to find it hard to stop grinning. 

Such originals by the leader as "Margaux," "Beaujolais," "Avenue C" (which he wrote for Basie), and the deep, slow, sensuous "Black Sheep Blues" invite the players to swing.
The writing is spare, with emphasis on deceptively simple and hummable melodies.
And with all the space that Mr. Clayton leaves, it's impossible for soloists to hide behind thickets of notes.
When each stands up alone, he has to have something personal and melodic to say. 

By contrast, much of the newer jazz has been described admiringly by New York Times critic Peter Watrous in a review of a saxophonist who began a solo "that contrasted blunt, drawn-out melodies with inkblots of sound, flurries that ran off into split tones." Also in the set were saxophonists that "rant and rave ferociously" and a "duet, tense with clashing microtonal inflections." 

Nearly 78, Buck Clayton is regarded with respect by some of the younger musicians but is considered to be of another time.
Yet the music I heard at the Village Vanguard was not in the least anachronistic.
Indeed, after listening to many "ink blots of sound" and other "microtonal inflections" in advanced jazz performances where the beat can't be felt, let alone heard, I find Buck Clayton's jazz as fresh as an April day after a cold and crabbed winter. 

Also, and I suppose this is anachronistic, Buck Clayton's music actually can, easily, be danced to.
One problem is finding clubs where there still is dancing, and then people who know how to dance to a swinging beat rather than moving as if they'd been plugged into a light-bulb socket. 

Mr. Clayton, in any case, is pleased at having his own band to write for.
He sits at a table next to the bandstand, rising to announce each number, and then giving -- as in his scores -- only as much direction as is needed. "I get such a kick," he told me one night, "out of having what I write played by musicians who feel the music the way I do." 

Of other jazz, the advanced kind, Mr. Clayton says that he wonders at the absence, by and large, of melody, and the presence of so much writing. "They don't know what notes to leave out," he said, which reminded me of Dizzy Gillespie saying awhile ago, "It's taken me most of my life to know which notes not to play." 

One afternoon, Buck Clayton told me of a conversation he had with Count Basie about a year before Basie died in 1984. "We were talking about trumpet players who used to be in the band.
Me, Harry 'Sweets' Edison and others.
Then Basie said, 'Damn it, I'd give a thousand dollars to find a trumpet player who doesn't play so many notes. '" 

Mr. Hentoff is a New York-based writer and jazz critic. 

