.START 

EAST GERMANS MARCHED in Leipzig to demand democratic freedoms. 

As many as 70,000 people marched through the southern city urging the government to ease its hard-line Communist policies, witnesses said.
A massive number of police were deployed, but violence wasn't reported.
In East Berlin, a pro-democracy vigil was held, and protests also were reported in Dresden and Halle.
The demonstrations followed weekend clashes in six East German cities.
Many of the hundreds arrested reportedly have been sentenced to jail terms of as long as six months. 

Lutheran Church leaders issued an appeal in East Berlin calling on the government to approve broad democratic changes and to refrain from force. 

HUNGARY'S RULERS ELECTED Nyers as leader of a revamped governing party. 

Delegates to a special party congress in Budapest chose the 66-year-old ex-Communist Party leader to head the new Western-style Socialist Party's collective presidency.
The new party, which voted over the weekend to disband the Communist Party and recreate itself as a party of social democrats, also approved a manifesto pledging to bring democracy to the East bloc nation and to abandon the Marxist-Leninist orientation of its predecessor.
It also expressed its commitment to a free-market economy. 

The ruling party's move toward a Western-style party is considered an attempt to survive multiparty elections after four decades of one-party rule. 

The Nobel Prize in medicine was won by two U.S. researchers.
The 50-member panel of Sweden's Karolinska Institute cited J. Michael Bishop and Harold E. Varmus of the University of California, San Francisco, for their work on a family of genes that has helped scientists understand how cancer develops. 

The Soviet legislature approved a measure that bans strikes in almost a dozen industrial sectors, but also provides other workers with a legal framework under which to strike.
The law, which replaces a resolution cleared by lawmakers last week, is the first to be passed by the new Supreme Soviet since its formation in the summer. 

Police in Lebanon said that two Red Cross workers abducted last week are being held by Palestinian guerrillas led by terrorist Abu Nidal.
Meanwhile, thousands of students returned to classes as Lebanon's state schools, most private schools and the American University of Beirut reopened after being closed for six months. 

The White House said that a cyst removed Friday from Bush's right middle finger wasn't cancerous.
A presidential spokesman said a routine pathological examination was performed on the half-inch growth following the 25-minute surgical procedure at Walter Reed Army Medical Hospital. 

Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew said he would step down as prime minister by the end of next year, ending three decades of nearly one-man rule in the island nation.
The 66-year-old Lee, in an interview with the British Broadcasting Corp., said he would hand over power to his deputy, Goh Chok Tong. 

Environmentalists endorsed a proposal to declare Antarctica a permanent wilderness reserve.
The U.S. opposes the plan, which was cleared by representatives from 39 nations gathered in Paris for a 10-day biennial review of the 1959 Antarctic Treaty governing territorial claims on the continent. 

Britain's Conservative Party prepared to open its annual conference today with its popularity at an eight-year low, the economy in trouble, and polls showing voters increasingly disenchanted with Prime Minister Thatcher's recent programs.
The four-day forum in Blackpool, England, follows a gathering last week by the Labor Party. 

Yugoslavia's Premier Markovic traveled to the U.S., where he is expected to seek $1 billion in assistance to bolster his economic and political restructuring plans.
Markovic is to meet with Bush and other administration officials as well as with commercial bankers during his six-day visit. 

South Africa said escalating violence between rival political groups in Namibia could jeopardize a U.N. independence plan for the territory.
U.N. officials are expected to urged Namibia's political leaders to halt the "mob behavior" by supporters, which resulted in two deaths over the weekend. 

The San Francisco Giants captured baseball's National League pennant, beating the Chicago Cubs, four games to one.
The Giants will face the American League's Oakland Athletics in the World Series. 

