.START 

Soybean and grain futures prices fell in relatively light holiday trading as continued dry weather created near-perfect harvest conditions across much of the Midwest. 

Profit-taking by speculators who sold contracts that they had purchased last week when prices were being supported by export sales also depressed prices, analysts said. 

"Soybeans finally succumbed to the pressures of the harvest," said Ted Mao, a futures analyst with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in New York. 

Farmers aren't only finding it easy to bring in the harvest this season, they are often finding more to bring in than they thought. "Many farmers are finding that their yields are better and in some cases much better than they expected," said Daniel Markey, a futures analyst with Agri Analysis Inc. in Chicago. 

Soybean futures for November delivery skidded 10.75 cents a bushel to close at $5.5675 a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade.
While the futures markets were open yesterday, trading was relatively light as some participants appeared to be taking a holiday in observance of Columbus Day and Yom Kippur, the Jewish Day of Atonement. 

Corn and wheat futures prices fell less sharply.
December corn futures dropped 3.75 cents a bushel on the Board of Trade to close at $2.35 a bushel.
Board of Trade wheat futures for December delivery fell 5.25 cents a bushel to close at $4.0625 a bushel. 

Last week, the government announced four corn export sales to the Soviet Union totaling 3.7 million tons of corn.
The purchases supported grain and soybean prices last week as speculators appeared to expect the imminent announcement of additional sales.
But analysts said that prices fell yesterday in part because some analysts had predicted nearly twice the amount of sales to the Soviets. 

While some analysts predicted that further Soviet sales would be announced soon, they said it would take an extraordinarily large sale to reverse the downward trend in the market. "It will be difficult to generate much strength in the markets unless we see some outstanding demand development," said Mario Balletto, a futures analyst with Merrill Lynch & Co. in New York. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

ENERGY: Crude oil prices rose modestly, but the gains were exaggerated by extremely light holiday trading.
Prices opened the session mixed and languished around Friday's levels most of the day.
In the final hour of trading, aggressive buying by a few brokerage houses boosted prices by the close.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, West Texas Intermediate for November delivery ended at $20.02, up 15 cents a barrel.
Gasoline and heating oil futures also rose. 

PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices eased in quiet trading.
December delivery gold was off 80 cents an ounce at $367.40, while December silver declined 6.7 cents an ounce to $5.1230.
January platinum fell $1.80 an ounce to $491.30.
Weakness in agriculture markets, which was regarded as anti-inflationary, was a factor, said one analyst.
Another analyst said that the Columbus Day observance along with the Yom Kippur religious holiday and the Canadian Thanksgiving Day sharply reduced the volume of trading. 

COFFEE: Futures prices continued to sink to levels not seen since before the July 1975 frost devastated the Brazilian coffee crop.
The December contract fell below 70 cents a pound to end at 68.72 cents for a loss of 1.67 cents.
According to one New York coffee dealer, prices continued to reflect the disappointment over the inability of producing and consuming countries to arrive at agreement on a new price-stabilizing pact. "Everyone is absorbing and assessing the ramifications of what has happened and where the coffee industry goes from here," he said.
There doesn't appear to be any possibility of a return to export quotas in the near future, he said. "Producing countries are becoming increasingly reluctant to offer coffee at current sinking levels," he said. "Brazil just refuses to sell, Colombia doesn't know what to do and the Central Americans are still a month away from the beginning of their harvest, and they aren't offering coffee." Analysts and dealers recently have noted that roasters, who normally begin buying green coffee around this time to meet peak winter consumption needs, haven't been aggressive buyers as prices have fallen, and are believed to be waiting for indications that prices have bottomed before beginning to make significant purchases. 

