.START 

For Fyodor Pyzhyanov, a teacher and longtime resident here, this remote little island could be a rainy paradise. 

Kunashir doesn't suffer from the usual Soviet problems of pollution and food shortages.
The sea is so rich that thousands of herring and crab are washed up on the pebble beaches during every storm.
Braving the year-round damp weather, Mr. Pyzhyanov spends his leisure time hiking up the volcanoes, wandering through the fields of wild magnolia or relaxing in the steaming hot springs. 

But the idyll is marred by a rather special problem: the folks next door.
They think the island belongs to them, and they insist on getting it back. 

"What are we supposed to do?" Mr. Pyzhyanov asks indignantly. "Knock everything down and move?" 

The neighbor in question is Japan, and that is precisely what it wants the 13,000 islanders to do.
Tokyo considers Kunashir and three nearby Soviet islands, Iturup, Shikotan and Habomai, to be its "Northern Territories." It doesn't miss a chance to press for their return. 

The Soviets, who occupied them at the end of World War II and kicked out all the Japanese residents, call them part of the Kurile Islands.
They are just as adamant that they are the rightful owners. 

The territorial dispute has frozen relations between the two nations, and provides plenty of work for diplomats, propagandists and lawyers on both sides.
But here on Kunashir, residents view the strained ties with dismay. 

Living next door to an economic giant that eschews all contact isn't easy.
Every month or so Japanese fishermen do drop in, but only because they've been caught poaching in Soviet waters by the coast guard. 

Moscow would like nothing better than to persuade the Japanese to help salvage the island's ailing economy.
For their part, the islanders dream of driving Toyotas along the bumpy dirt roads past the giant burdock, a rhubarb-like plant covering the island. 

In this Gorbachev era, with cooperation the new slogan of Soviet policy, the chances of realizing these hopes seem better than they have for years.
And the island's residents want to help the process along. "We want our islands to become a bridge between the U.S.S.R. and Japan," says local governor Yevgeny Soldatenko. 

It is easier said than done.
Mr. Soldatenko reckons the solution might be mass tourism, but acknowledges there are some problems.
One is the damp clouds that shroud the island for most of the year.
The other is what to do about the estimated 10,000 troops armed with tanks, helicopters and missiles that Moscow has stationed on the islands.
Anxious to keep military secrets, it has designated the area off-limits to foreigners and only accessible to Soviets with special permission. 

Sitting in the nature reserve that takes up one-third of the island, Mars Khustndinov, a government official, has other ideas.
Finishing off a hearty picnic lunch of bear stew washed down with "chaga," a tea made from black tree fungus, he describes his efforts to attract Japanese investors.
But, he sniffs, "the Japanese Foreign Ministry just keeps saying no." 

So far, only Mr. Pyzhyanov, the teacher, has come up with a successful plan.
He hit on the idea of proving before the eyes of the world, and especially of Japan, that Kunashir is in fact Russian. 

And so it was that one recent Sunday morning, Viktor Korobytsin, a local tractor driver, and his accountant wife Valentina stood on a beach here, rough bathrobes thrown over their jeans and towels tied around their foreheads, pretending to be "ayni," the island's original inhabitants. 

Behind them was a green army tent that supposedly represented their 18th-century abode.
In the distance, seven strapping youths from the local collective farm rowed a small boat towards them.
As they reached the shore, their leader, resplendent in a blonde wig and red kneebreeches, climbed out and presented the Korobytsins with a box of plastic jewelery, a brass band struck up, several hundred onlookers applauded and members of the local bikers club roared their engines. 

Delving in the library, Mr. Pyzhyanov discovered that an obscure explorer named Martin Spanberg landed on the Kuriles in 1739 while in the service of Peter the Great, the adventure-loving Russian czar.
The pageant celebrated what the islanders called "the 250th anniversary of the Russian opening of the South Kuriles." 

Not content with just holding a local event, they got permission to invite a boatload of Japanese and two other foreign journalists. 

The event was a little spurious.
For a start, nobody is sure whether Spanberg landed in 1738 or 1739.
He wasn't the first to do so; even the Soviets admit that one explorer arrived some 25 years earlier.
And Spanberg was in fact Danish and not Russian at all. 

The propaganda effect of the pageant was almost a disaster.
Most of the Japanese TV crews and newsmen who had been invited canceled at the last minute after the Foreign Ministry in Tokyo told them not to go.
The ministry said that visiting the islands on a Soviet visa is tantamount to recognizing Soviet ownership.
It was infuriated when the Hokkaido Shimbun paper sent two reporters to the island earlier in the year, the first foreigners to visit in four decades. 

Japanese-style "glasnost" saved the day, however.
Sensing the opportunity of a money-making scoop, one small Japanese TV agency, NDN, braved the official wrath and turned up anyway. 

The islanders applauded them for coming, but reacted less warmly to the remark of their correspondent that "the entire Kurile chain should rightfully be returned." 

History might be on his side.
The question of which country first found and occupied the islands is controversial.
But it is indisputable that the Russians conceded them to Japan in treaties signed by both nations in 1855 and 1875. 

Moscow claims that Japan renounced its ownership of the islands after the war in the San Francisco Peace Treaty of 1951, a claim Tokyo rejects.
The Soviets, however, didn't sign that treaty, thereby undermining their own argument. 

The nearest the two sides came to settling the dispute was in 1956, when they agreed to restore diplomatic relations.
At the time, Moscow offered to hand back two of the four islands.
But it withdrew the offer when Japan later allied itself with the U.S. 

Putting aside their disagreements over ownership, the Japanese TV crew set off to search for remaining traces of their national culture.
They didn't find much. 

When the first Soviet civilians arrived in 1946, they rebuilt most of the houses.
A few Japanese tombstones lie in the island's unkempt cemeteries, and two old Japanese metal-working machines are still used at the island's only factory.
They remain in perfect working order, unlike the Soviet machines that keep breaking down. 

But local inhabitants haven't the slightest doubt as to who is the rightful owner of Kunashir.
At dinner one night at the veterans' club, Grigory Kochitov, a 78-year-old pensioner who was among the first Soviet civilians to arrive, reminisced about the Japanese couple who had once lived in the house next door.
He remembered his wife giving them pastries as they packed and left for the Japanese mainland. 

Was it wrong to kick them out?
Mr. Kochitov, slightly deaf, wanted the question repeated.
He paused for a moment and then roared: "Everyone has a homeland.
But this is ours.
It's Russian." 

