.START 

The Nobel Prize for medicine was awarded to two researchers at the University of California at San Francisco for their work on oncogenes, the seeds of cancer contained in the genetic code of all animals and humans. 

But the award sparked controversy in France, where a scientist associated with the project but not included in the prize claimed he had done much of the original research. 

The hints of discord marred a day of otherwise ebullient celebration.
Yesterday morning, Harold Eliot Varmus received a pre-dawn telephone call from Stockholm announcing that he and his longtime colleague J. Michael Bishop had won the prize for their work on the genes that cause the growth of malignant tumors. 

The Nobel committee -- recognizing an achievement that science-watchers speculated had been near the top of Nobel nominations for several years -- cited the two scientists for their "discovery of the cellular origin of retroviral oncogenes." That discovery has transformed scientists' understanding of the development of malignant tumors as well as of the normal processes of cell growth and differentiation.
It has offered doctors new focal points for cancer prevention and treatment. 

The pair discovered that cancer-causing genes, first found in viruses, can be found in the cells of all animals, from flies to fish to human beings.
When damaged by chemicals, radiation or viruses, such genes, called proto-oncogenes, can spark the development of cancer. 

The 49-year-old Dr. Varmus and the 53-year-old Dr. Bishop -- both M.D.s -- have jointly spent a total of 41 years studying retroviruses, which are viruses that pass their genetic information in a backward or "retro" manner from RNA to DNA.
Their course was set in 1976 when they published a landmark paper in the British journal Nature, showing that an oncogene in Rous sarcoma virus, which is responsible for causing cancer in chickens, is actually found in normal cells.
They reasoned that such sinister genes must also have a normal role to play at times, such as the regulation of cell growth and development, to explain why they are conserved in the species.
Since then, as many as 100 oncogenes have been discovered, of which 40 appear to have a role in the formation of tumors in humans. 

In France, Dominique Stehelin, a co-author on the Nature paper, expressed disappointment that he wasn't included in the award.
Dr. Stehelin, a director of research at the National Center for Scientific Research at the Pasteur Institute in Lille, said he worked in the San Francisco lab "from 1972 to 1975, at a time when nobody other than me was working on the subject," the French news agency Agence France-Presse reported. 

Earlier yesterday, Dr. Varmus said Dr. Stehelin was "part of the winning team." But a University of California spokesman later said that Dr. Stehelin had been a postdoctoral fellow in Dr. Bishop's laboratory.
While postdoctoral fellows do important technical work, carrying out ideas of the senior scientists, they are rarely included in such awards. 

The two Americans denied feeling that their work was epochal in its significance -- at least until the awards started coming in the early 1980s.
Perhaps the most telling was the Albert Lasker Medical Research Award, which is often seen as a harbinger of future Nobel Prizes, and which the two shared in 1982. 

"Until the Lasker Award, I didn't realize how highly {the work} was regarded," the elegant, silver-bearded Dr. Bishop said yesterday. "I didn't know that people took it seriously." 

Day to day, Dr. Varmus said, experiments are like "cornerstones in an edifice" whose dimensions one has to stand back to appreciate. 

Currently, the two are continuing to probe the role of oncogenes, by creating transgenic mice endowed with extra copies of such genes.
Their work has touched upon neuroblastoma, a nerve-cell tumor, and Dr. Bishop is investigating the skin cancer squamous cell carcinoma, and T-cell leukemia.
Dr. Varmus is investigating the mouse mammary tumor gene INT-1, as well as the genetic code of HIV, the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or 

The lanky Dr. Varmus, who came to his Nobel news conference in jeans and running shoes, says that he'll also continue riding his bicycle to the lab. "Some things," he said, "don't change." 

