.START 

THE LABOR DEPARTMENT backs off on one of its loan proposals. 

The department stirred up a hornet's nest in July when it decided that companies must let retirees, other former employees and beneficiaries -- along with active workers -- borrow against accumulated balances in 401(k) and similar savings plans.
Companies feared they would get inundated with requests for the tax-free money.
And they fretted they would have to set up new machinery for collecting the debt; companies can't use payroll deductions to collect from debtors who aren't workers. 

Now the Labor Department says never mind.
In a letter to Frederick Rumack of Buck Consultants, who battled the proposal, loans can be limited to "parties in interest," which generally means current employees.
But the department is sticking with two other changes that take effect Oct. 18.
Loans have to be made at market rates, rather than the cut-rate charges that are assessed currently.
And a worker can't borrow more than 50% of the plan balance; at present, workers with vested accounts of less than $10,000 can borrow it all. 

Companies "can live with" these remaining Labor Department restrictions, Mr. Rumack says. 

KEEPING WORKERS HAPPY gets tougher.
But companies search for ways. 

Bell Atlantic Corp. says employee surveys conducted every two years show a "vague uneasiness" or a decline in what it calls "favorableness" among its workers.
It lays the shift to corporate downsizing and a switch in emphasis: "We're changing our image from a 'Ma Bell' cradle-to-grave industry to a business that is competitive." 

To ensure satisfaction, Altron Inc. pays heed to the basics: good wages, benefits and working conditions.
Rogers Corp. gives employees greater control over their work lives; bosses, it says, have to be "less directing." Baldor Electric Co. judges managers on the number of problems raised by subordinates.
But Cigna Corp. says "satisfaction isn't the bottom line.
Our primary motivation is performance." 

DU PONT CANADA dangles cash and stock bonuses for workers to stir profits. 

The incentives are tied to the company's goal of a 16% return on equity, which it says it has exceeded in four of the past five years.
If the target is met, its 4,000 workers the following year will get a "performance-sharing cash award" equal to 4% of pay.
They'll get nothing if return drops below 11%.
But the bonuses could reach 10% if return tops 28%.
Workers get a start-up bonus of at least 4% of pay in early 1990.
And they can take up to half their bonuses in the company's common stock, with Du Pont Canada adding 20% to the investment in each of the next five years if the shares are held. 

Workers could end up with 25% of profits over the 16% goal, the company says.
But at least some of the money will come from converting part of expected raises into bonuses, and that will need the approval of unions representing 2,000 workers.
The program goes beyond the incentives that the U.S. parent initiated this year in its fibers division.
Those workers get smaller raises but they can earn more if the unit exceeds its profit target.
No stock is involved. 

Du Pont's Canadian unions say it's too early to comment.
Its U.S. union members mostly backed incentives. 

SALARIES AND BONUSES paid chief executives at 231 large and medium-sized industrial companies jumped an average of 17.4% this year, to $631,300, consultant Hay Group says.
But nearly one in five of the CEOs actually is earning less. 

OPEN DOORS to managers aren't really open, many workers believe.
Consultant Towers Perrin finds one in three workers is reluctant to go over a boss's head. 

ANCHORAGE SLIPS on oil.
After leading the nation in average annual pay since the late 1970s, paychecks there dropped to fourth place last year, with wages of $28,715, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says. 

FEMALES SERVE as directors at the nation's top 10 industrial companies but only six of the top 10 service companies, says Catalyst, which fosters women's careers. 

BEING THE BEST on somebody's list does attract talent. 

Merck & Co., named the nation's most admired company by Fortune magazine and one of the 10 best companies for working mothers by Working Mother magazine, says the accolades are a definite assist. "Let's face it, Merck is not a household name," a spokesman allows.
Being Fortune's most admired for three years, he says, has help draw in "over 100,000 applications for jobs from New Jersey alone." 

Syntex Corp. brags about its Working Mother listing in recruiting and its annual report.
PepsiCo Inc. boasts of its Fortune seventh-most-admired ranking in employee publications.
Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. cites its Working Mother mention to job candidates.
Predictably, Bank-America Corp. doesn't find much public relations value in being named Fortune's fifth-least admired. 

A bank spokesman, though, hints the citation may have stirred some internal soul-searching. 

THE CHECKOFF: Who's auditing whom?
The average cost of a homeowner transfer at an accounting firm is $56,500, more than double the cost at an engineering company, the Employee Relocation Council says. . . . Byting your way to the bottom: 29% of the chief information-system managers surveyed by CPA Touche Ross got their jobs when their predecessors were either demoted or fired. 

