.START 

American Express Publishing Corp., in a move intended to set the stage for greater expansion in magazine publishing, named its first editorial director and shuffled top editors at its consumer magazines. 

Thomas O. Ryder, president of the American Express Co. unit, said Pamela Fiori would become the company's first editorial director and a company executive vice president.
Ms. Fiori, for 14 years editor-in-chief of Travel & Leisure magazine, will remain as chairman of the editorial board of American Express Publishing Corp. 

"We are building a structure that will support a much bigger company," said Mr. Ryder. "I envision that American Express will be publishing as many as 20 magazines in five years." 

Ms. Fiori is credited with transforming Travel & Leisure from a giveaway publication for American Express card holders to a respected travel and affluent life style magazine.
In recent years, Travel & Leisure has twice been a finalist for a National Magazine Award.
A growing group of glossy travel magazines from publishers such as News Corp. 's Murdoch Magazines and Conde Nast Publications Inc., have mounted challenges to the entrenched Travel & Leisure, but it maintains the lead in the field.
In 1988, Travel & Leisure had advertising revenue of $45 million and a paid circulation of 1.1 million. 

Besides Travel & Leisure, American Express Publishing Corp. is publisher of Food & Wine, L.A. Style, New York Woman and Departures.
Two weeks ago, American Express acquired the monthly Atlanta magazine from Philadelphia-based MetroCorp Inc. American Express Publishing is also developing a magazine for college students, and a publication for owners and partners in small businesses with fewer than 100 employees. 

American Express Publishing has been one of the most active U.S. magazine publishers in acquiring magazines.
Mr. Ryder said that, with an editorial director in place, the company would be considering more acquisitions in the next year as well as starting up new consumer magazines. 

The publishing unit's magazines will have revenue of about $130 million in 1989.
Mr. Ryder estimated that revenue will rise to about $175 million in 1990. "Our goal is to build a company that will be about a half billion in sales," he said. 

