.START 

James Rill's appointment to head the Department of Justice's Antitrust Division has met an enthusiastic approval that other Bush administration nominees must surely envy.
From all points of the political compass, private practitioners, legislators and academics have welcomed Mr. Rill's ascent. 

The current wisdom is that Mr. Rill will arrest the rightward swing in federal antitrust activity and will renew enforcement in terrain largely abandoned by the Reagan Antitrust Division and Federal Trade Commission.
The tone and content of Mr. Rill's own statements since joining the Justice Department reliably indicate that the center of gravity of federal enforcement activity is about to move to the left. 

The doubtful issue, however, is not the direction of adjustment but its degree.
Though tougher speeches do foreshadow some noteworthy changes in federal policy, Mr. Rill will probably conserve and consolidate the core elements of the Reagan antitrust program. 

The Reagan antitrust agencies adopted a single-minded focus upon large horizontal mergers and output-restricting agreements among direct competitors.
This reorientation entailed a break with several past antitrust practices. 

First, the Reagan enforcement agencies largely removed the government from the business of scrutinizing exclusionary or abusive conduct by dominant firms.
From 1981 through 1988, the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission initiated three cases enforcing the Sherman Act's ban on monopolization and attempted monopolization.
This level of federal enforcement activity was the lowest in any eight-year period since 1900. 

Second, the Reagan enforcement agencies stopped enforcing rules that limited a manufacturer's choice of distribution methods.
So-called vertical distribution restraints, such as resale price maintenance, had been a recurring target of federal enforcement in the post World War II era, but the Reagan Justice Department filed no vertical-restraint cases.
Reagan officials often said they would prosecute "economically sound" vertical-restraints cases, but they seldom concealed their belief that such matters were as common as unicorns. 

Third, the Reagan antitrust agencies substantially redirected public merger enforcement.
The administration frequently declined to challenge mergers that increased market concentrations beyond thresholds established in its own guidelines.
Parties to proposed transactions also benefited from extremely favorable assumptions about the ability of new entrants or existing fringe firms to defeat any effort by the merged entity to reduce output and raise prices. 

Finally, the focus of Reagan non-merger enforcement activity shifted heavily to smaller firms.
From 1973 through the arrival of Reagan appointees in 1981, the federal antitrust agencies brought a total of 108 non-merger cases involving Fortune 500 companies.
From 1981 through 1988, that number fell to 11.
This trend was particularly evident in the federal government's efforts to prosecute horizontal price-fixing, bid-rigging and market-allocation schemes.
From 1973-1981 to 1981-1988, the number of such cases involving Fortune 500 firms dropped from 47 to 8.
Critics argue that the Reagan administration pursued an aggressive campaign to collar a hapless, economically trivial parade of asphalt suppliers, lawyers for indigent criminal defendants, moving and storage firms, bakeries, individual physicians, obscure trade associations and a host of other commercial pygmies. 

The Rill Antitrust Division will not likely depart significantly from these enforcement approaches.
The most immediate and fundamental constraint upon a dramatic reinvigoration of forsaken antitrust approaches is the success of the Reagan reduction of the government's antitrust infrastructure.
Mr. Rill and FTC Chairman Janet Steiger have inherited organizations that are roughly half their size of 10 years ago.
Today, both agencies have their hands full keeping abreast of the existing flow of merger investigations and horizontal-restraints matters.
Current and forseeable resource limitations will preclude the pursuit of more than a handful of new cases designed to attack dominant firm exclusionary conduct or vertical restraints. 

Even if Congress were to increase antitrust expenditures, the Antitrust Division would find it difficult to recruit and retrain talented attorneys to pursue an expanded enforcement agenda.
Joseph Schumpeter noted that "A good bureaucracy is a slow growth and cannot be created at will." The opportunity costs for bright law-school graduates considering a job with a federal agency are staggering.
The entry-level Justice Department wage of about $29,000 lags roughly $40,000 to $50,000 behind the going rate at major law firms in Washington or New York.
Even with promises of a role in a "rejuvenated" antitrust program, Mr. Rill faces a daunting task in getting the upper strata of the talent pool to join, and remain with, the Antitrust Division.
Indeed, Mr. Rill's biggest challenge will be to reverse an erosion of human capital that, unless impeded, will turn the division into a second- or third-rate law office. 

A second reason to expect general consistency between Reagan and Bush enforcement policy is Mr. Rill's awareness of modern antitrust enforcement history.
Despite calls for more aggressive enforcement against single-firm conduct, Mr. Rill knows that the government fared poorly in the 1970s when pursuing large-firm attempted monopolization and monopolization cases.
Not only have these cases often exceeded the institutional capabilities of the enforcement agencies, but federal judges have endorsed relatively permissive standards governing large-firm pricing, product development and promotional behavior.
These cases are high-risk, resource-intensive ventures, and it would be surprising for the Bush Antitrust Division to undertake more than a few of them. 

Although important personnel and policy considerations point away from substantial adjustments in enforcement policy, modest expansion in merger enforcement is likely.
Experience with the government's merger guidelines during the Reagan administration resembled the typical baseball umpire's interpretation of the strike zone.
The Reagan merger guidelines established a nominal strike zone that extended from the letters down to the top of the knee, but the enforcement agencies rarely called strikes on pitches above the belt.
The Rill Antitrust Division seems likely to revive the high strike. 

Bush antitrust officials may not attack a substantially greater number of mergers than the Reagan administration, but their choice of cases will signal an intent to apply a tighter mesh.
The Antitrust Division's treatment of Coors's proposed acquisition of Stroh Brewing will indicate where Mr. Rill plans to draw the line. 

Like the Rill appointment at the Justice Department, Richard Schmalensee's confirmation as a member of the president's Council of Economic Advisers suggests a moderation of the Reagan antitrust program.
Though sympathetic to the modern retrenchment of antitrust, Mr. Schmalensee has cautioned that some concepts have been carried to unsupportable extremes.
Two years ago, for example, he suggested that defendants in merger cases bear a heavier burden of proof when claiming "ease of entry" in an industry in order to gain approval for transactions in concentrated markets. 

A second area destined for some expansion is vertical-restraints enforcement.
The prosecution of an occasional vertical-restraints case would coincide with Mr. Rill's pledges to enforce existing prohibitions against distribution practices such as resale price maintenance.
Unlike Reagan antitrust officials, Mr. Rill's specifications for an acceptable case will generate genuine enforcement possibilities.
Bringing an occasional case also would permit the federal agencies to reassert control over a field of enforcement that has fallen by default to increasingly active state attorneys general.
Because recent Supreme Court decisions have increased the burden that plaintiffs must bear to challenge vertical restraints, the output of new federal cases probably will be small. 

The Antitrust Division's enforcement net also may begin to yield a greater number of large companies in non-merger cases.
For several years, the Justice Department has been examining the conduct of major defense-industry firms.
Attention to collective or single-firm behavior in this and other procurement markets could ensnare companies of considerable size.
The U.S. might wisely channel some resources toward studying how competition policy might be used to improve the weapons-acquisition process -- arguably the most overlooked and most important candidate for deregulation experiments today. 

Mr. Kovacic, formerly with the FTC, teaches law at George Mason University. 

