.START 

In his Sept. 22 editorial-page article "A Jimmy Carter for Transportation?" Thomas Gale Moore likened some of my actions at the Department of Transportation to a former president's overly interventionist centralized policies.
I agree that large-scale governmental interference in competitive markets is ill-advised in concept and doomed to failure in practice.
If someone insists on comparing my policies with those of a former president, I prefer one whose visionary transportation policies have reaped huge dividends: Dwight D. Eisenhower. 

Eisenhower initiated the planning and construction of our nearly completed interstate highway system, which spans more than 42,000 miles, accommodates millions of vehicles daily, and contributes mightily to economic vitality and national security.
It resulted from ambitious yet pragmatic policy making, sensible allocation of scarce resources, and a partnership among local, state and federal governments.
Eisenhower understood that the government has a responsibility to provide leadership in setting transportation policy. 

Today, Americans enjoy one of the best transportation systems in the world, but it is far from perfect.
The increasing number of passengers through airports, cars on highways, and commercial-goods movements overland, on the sea and through the air have outstripped the current level of investment necessary to maintain and enhance the system's efficiency.
As Eisenhower knew, investment in transportation is investment in America's future. 

That is why we have initiated the development of a coordinated national transportation policy.
Every large business in this country engages in strategic planning for the future, and government should be no different.
Strategic planning is especially important in a time of scarce resources for transportation needs. 

Mr. Moore missed the essential objective of our undertaking.
The points he makes -- the importance of market forces, the still-punishing costs of unnecessary regulation, the potential offered by privatization, and the appeal of user fees -- represent precisely the kind of contribution we are seeking.
Our first concern is safety.
Mr. Moore's contention that safety is unrelated to financial health is not credible.
We must continue to guard against a debt-ridden airline that may be tempted to scrimp on maintenance or security. 

For us to take a hard look at leveraged buy-outs and control by foreign citizens, especially foreign airlines, in the U.S. airline industry should not be surprising.
The Federal Aviation Act of 1958 charges the secretary of transportation with ensuring that U.S. carriers are "fit, willing and able" to provide safe and dependable service and that they are owned and controlled by U.S. citizens.
The option Mr. Moore apparently favors -- sitting back and doing nothing -- is not open to me. 

Our department has concerns about high levels of debt and foreign ownership in the airline industry.
Leveraged buy-outs can have positive effects on acquired corporations.
New ownership can bring a fresh outlook to stodgy companies and create new synergies.
But the airline industry is for many reasons different from others, and those differences require that we watch closely for signs of trouble.
Indebted airlines may fail, thus increasing market concentration and lessening competition.
Today, eight carriers account for more than 90% of the domestic market, and in some hubs one carrier carries about 85% of all traffic.
The high cost of servicing debt could result in large asset sales, service cuts or even bankruptcy.
Given the high degree of concentration in the airline industry, the department must do all it can to ensure healthy competition. 

Americans recognize that they have an unparalleled transportation system, but nevertheless are concerned about its durability, safety, cost and effect on the environment.
The government cannot solve all our transportation problems by itself, but it does have a responsibility to provide leadership.
The Department of Transportation should rely to as great an extent as possible on the forces of the marketplace in providing such leadership.
However, it can and should play a role in setting national transportation policy. 

Samuel K. Skinner 

Secretary of Transportation 

Washington 

