.START 

Like the little boy who laughed at the nude emperor, Federal Appeals Judge Laurence Silberman has recently declared that "public interest" groups are not necessarily wrapped in the public good.
Instead, they are enveloped in transparently obvious ideologies. 

Judge Silberman's opinion dismissed one of the thousands of lawsuits filed by these groups, and could be the wedge to free the nation's courts, businesses, government administrators and, yes, the public good from the sludge of unending lawsuits. 

Judge Silberman took his stand last month in a case with the typical name of Public Citizen v.
National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods.
The plaintiff, one of Ralph Nader's countless litigation shops, wanted a say over who would be on this Agriculture Department advisory group.
The Naderites most likely would want to see the committee ban foods containing a certain millionth of some microbiological organism. 

The law says these federal committees must be "fairly balanced in terms of the points of view represented." Of course when the movement's congressional allies inserted this language into original legislation, ensuring "balance" wasn't the point.
We have argued before that if the anti-market, job-destroying policies of this movement had any real standing with the public, its ideas would be winning rather than losing presidential elections.
But with the help of sympathetic congressional staff, judges and reporters, their interests have been imposed on the proceedings of the executive branch. 

In its lawsuit, Public Citizen argued for "consumer representatives," defined as a person who "works or is associated with a consumer or public health organization." In other words, the plaintiffs and their friends.
This prompted Judge Silberman to ask: "Why should an organization that labels itself a representative of consumers have any greater legal claim to placement on the advisory committee than any other individual American or organization who buys or eats food?" The Naderites, he said, apparently assume they have won a major political question of the day.
They share the "philosophical, ideological and political view of consumer welfare," he said, "that typically urges greater governmental regulation of the production of goods or services in the marketplace." Judge Silberman noted that some people "generally oppose government regulation since the cost incurred translates into higher prices for consumers and they believe those higher prices exceed the benefits." 

Judge Silberman neatly demolished Public Citizen's complaint that there were representatives of private industry on the committee.
He noted that any paid member of Public Citizen also "would have an economic interest in the work of the committee -- not shared by the public -- and therefore a special interest." There is no relevant difference, he said, between groups with "an ideological rather than an economic stake" in regulation; neither one necessarily represents the public interest. 

The Silberman opinion threatens an entire generation of cases where judges gave legal "standing" to sue to "public interest" groups on the illogical assumption that they truly represent the public.
Consider this week's "public interest" assault on NASA's space shuttle. 

The space shuttle Atlantis is scheduled to lift off Thursday, carrying the space probe Galileo, which will be sent to explore Jupiter.
Its mission of discovery is similar to that of the recently completed Voyager 2 mission.
But the Christic Institute, Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, and Jeremy Rifkin's Foundation on Economic Trends are in federal court to block the launch of the Galileo because it's powered by plutonium. 

In an important new book "Judicial Compulsions: How Public Law Distorts Public Policy," Jeremy Rabkin describes what these groups have in fact accomplished: Public policy, rather than reflecting the views of the general public, is now almost wholly in the hands of lawyers.
As a result, much of what the public would surely view as the kind of progress it expects from living in a successful, advanced society is simply stopped. 

If in the future the self-interest groups have a harder time getting into court to enact their agenda into law, they will be forced into the sunshine of electoral politics.
Conceivably they might even discover support at the polls for some of their ideas.
The important point is that in a democracy, the public ought to be given a more "balanced" picture of what these litigious public-interest groups are up to. 

