.START 

Hewlett-Packard Co. today will unveil a desktop computer that is the first to use a new computer standard aimed at unseating International Business Machines Corp. from its standard-setting role in personal computers. 

Called the Vectra 486 PC, the machine is built around Extended Industry Standard Architecture, or EISA, a Hewlett-Packard official said.
That standard was created last year by the so-called "Gang of Nine," a group of U.S. and foreign computer companies, as an alternative to IBM's Microchannel standard used in the IBM PS/2 personal computers.
The standards govern the accessories used in and with the machines. 

Hewlett-Packard also will announce today that it plans eventually to build all its work stations and personal computers around the EISA standard.
The Hewlett-Packard machine will be a catalyst for EISA, said Michael Heylin, an analyst with the market-research firm of Creative Strategies Research International. "It legitimizes EISA dramatically," said Mr. Heylin. "Now the world has an actual, physically available, alternative to the IBM PS/2." 

The Vectra 486, which Hewlett-Packard says is 33% faster than today's fastest personal computers, is also one of the first in the industry to use Intel Corp. 's 80486 microprocessor, a super-fast 32-bit "brain" chip that is expected to power the next generation of desktop machines.
The machine can hold up to 64 megabytes of random access memory, Hewlett-Packard said, and includes groups of chips that allow much faster routing of data within the computer. 

The machine will come in three base configurations, ranging from a $13,999 model with a 150-megabyte hard disk to a $19,999 model with a 670-megabyte hard disk.
Each comes with a standard two megabytes of memory and a floppy disk drive.
The more expensive models include hard disks that transfer 20 million bits of data a second, about 33% faster, industry analysts said, than other disks available today.
The move is a surprising one for Hewlett-Packard, analysts said, because the company has tended to be a follower rather than a leader in desktop computers.
But Hewlett-Packard has been trying to position itself as a high-end desktop computer company, said Leslie Fiering, research analyst at the Gartner Group. "Hewlett-Packard is taking a leaf from Compaq {Computer Corp. 's} book," she said, by being first to announce a working model of a new generation system. "Hewlett-Packard wants to make a statement about its technical innovation." 

"We really wanted to be first to market" with an EISA machine, said Robert Puette, general manager of HP's personal computer group. "It provides unbelievable leverage." 

Hewlett-Packard is targeting the markets for workstations used by engineers, for computers that manage huge databases, and machines that can handle huge financial calculations. 

The company expects to start shipping the machines by the first quarter of 1990, he said. 

