.START 

The United Auto Workers union is demanding that General Motors Corp. pay full wages and benefits to 3,200 workers at a Georgia assembly plant for at least six months after GM closes the plant next March. 

The move is one of the first signs that the union intends to take a far tougher stance than previously toward plant closings by GM, and may set an adversarial tone leading up to next year's national contract talks.
The union's willingness to cooperate with auto makers has been the focal point of much internal debate within the UAW, and it will play a key role in the effort by U.S. auto companies to compete against foreign auto makers. 

In a recent letter to GM officials, UAW Vice President Stephen P. Yokich accused the company of violating a contract provision that forbids plant closings when it announced last month plans to "indefinitely idle" its Lakewood, Ga. assembly plant next March. 

GM has consistently used the term "idling" when referring to such measures. "There's no mention of 'idling' in the contract," Mr. Yokich noted in an interview yesterday. 

He said the Lakewood workers should be placed in the company's "jobs bank," where they would receive full pay and benefits for activities ranging from attending retraining classes to doing public service work.
Mr. Yokich added that if the company and the union can't agree on a solution, he will take the matter to arbitration. 

A GM spokesman said the company's actions come under its right, which is allowed in its contract with the UAW, to lay off employees as a result of weak market demand for its cars and trucks.
Company officials are "studying" Mr. Yokich's letter, the spokesman added. 

As things stand, GM is planning to treat the Lakewood workers like others on temporary layoff, even though there's virtually no chance that the plant will ever reopen.
Such workers are eligible for supplemental unemployment benefits that provide up to 95% of a worker's take-home pay, but only if the fund is full.
Right now the fund is low and is providing most workers with only 80% of the maximum amount. 

The fund's depletion stems from frequent layoffs in recent years at GM, which has three to four more North American assembly plants than it needs, analysts estimate.
The layoffs include those of 10,000 UAW workers at three plants that have been "indefinitely idled" in recent years without much chance of reopening.
The idlings occurred after the 1987 contract, with its "no closings" provision, was signed, but the union didn't challenge GM's handling of those plants. 

Mr. Yokich, however, appears to be signalling a sharp change in the union's attitude.
Mr. Yokich's letter to GM seeks full pay for not only the 3,200 Lakewood workers, but all of those union members who have been laid off from "idled" plants. 

Mr. Yokich recently assumed leadership of the union's GM department from Donald P. Ephlin, who retired.
Mr. Ephlin was the UAW's most noted apostle of cooperation with the auto makers, and hundreds of top auto executives attended a retirement dinner for him last spring. 

The 54-year-old Mr. Yokich previously ran the union's Ford Motor Co. department, where he forged a solid working relationship with executives at the No. 2 auto maker.
But GM officials are deeply worried about Mr. Yokich's earlier history as a firebrand, which stems partly from his leadership of the UAW's 205-day strike against Caterpillar Inc. that began in 1982.
Already, Mr. Yokich has taken such symbolic steps as forbidding union staffers from accepting rides on GM company airplanes. 

Mr. Yokich did indicate yesterday, however, that his challenge to GM over the Lakewood plant isn't meant to scrap all cooperative efforts between the company and the union. "We're entitled to have an honest disagreement," Mr. Yokich said. "And I don't think this affects our working together in the future." 

