.START 

If you're thinking of starting a business, your chances of success may be better than you think, a large survey indicated. 

Previous managerial experience counted for surprisingly little in survival, the study also concluded.
And, fanfare to the contrary, holding a franchise or operating under a franchise name hadn't any connection at all with chances of survival, at least in this survey.
There was a connection between growth and operating under a franchise name, however. 

Commissioned by American Express Co. and the National Federation of Independent Business, the survey of 2,994 new businesses found 77% lived to celebrate their third birthday.
In some earlier, highly publicized studies, fewer than half of all new businesses survived five years, with the first few years being the most perilous. 

The favorable recent figures may have partly reflected the economic climate of the past few years, commented Roger H. Ballou, president of American Express's Travel and Travel Management Services Group, which is increasingly promoting services to small companies.
But the study still suggested that an entrepreneur's chances of success are greater than the "mythology" would have it, Mr. Ballou added. 

The study, conducted by scholars Arnold C. Cooper, William C. Dunkelberg and Carolyn Y. Woo, explored many reasons that surveyed companies failed or survived. 

Some study results, such as the failure of a franchise to boost the odds of survival, will surprise numerous entrepreneurs.
Many believe that a franchiser's name and proven methods are a sure-fire protection against beginners' mistakes. 

Similarly, 75% of new entrepreneurs with no prior supervisory experience survived three years -- almost the same as the 77% figure for those with extensive managerial experience.
More predictably, however, prior knowledge of the product proved very valuable. 

Trite as it sounds, "believing in yourself" turned out to be statistically significant.
Of entrepreneurs who felt when they started the business that their chances of success were at least nine in 10, 82% survived the first three years.
But of those who calculated their odds at six in 10 or less, only 67% survived. 

But most of the entrepreneurs were full of confidence.
One in three ranked his or her chances of success as "10 out of 10." 

Money talked too.
Of new companies whose initial investment exceeded $50,000, 84% survived.
But of those started with less than $20,000, only 74% made it.
Of companies starting with six or more employees, 82% survived, while only 71% of those starting with one employee saw the third anniversary. 

Industry mattered.
While 82% of the new manufacturers survived three years, only 73% of the retailers were so lucky.
On average, of course, a manufacturing operation requires more capital and a larger work force than a retail store. 

In this study at least, service was rewarded.
Of companies saying better service was the key to their strategy, 82% survived.
This compared with a 70% survival rate for those who competed mainly on price. 

"Hands-on" work apparently paid off.
Only 9% of the business owners surviving three years spent more than a quarter of their time supervising employees. "The typical successful entrepreneur spent more time either selling or working directly with customers than on any other aspect of running a new business," said William J. Dennis, an NFIB researcher involved with the project. 

But survival, alas, didn't equal growth.
Only 37% of the surveyed companies added employment in their first three years, while 15% reduced the work force. 

The growing companies were more likely than others to have outside investors.
The owners had more formal education and they were more likely to be "acting on a business idea that occurred to them while in a previous job," the survey said. 

The survey dispelled some notions about who starts businesses.
For all the discussion of disillusioned, jobless corporate executives turning to small business, these refugees are still a tiny minority of entrepreneurs.
Before starting his or her own company, only 16% of the sample worked in any capacity for a company with more than 1,000 employees. "The most common employer was another small business," the report said.
But 24% of the entrepreneurs were either forced out of their previous jobs or quit without any plans. 

Move to Vermont or Hawaii to start a resort?
Actually, nearly 80% started their businesses in or near the town where they already lived. 

About 22% of the new entrepreneurs were women.
Their three-year survival rate of 71% compared with 78% for males.
Minority group members -- 6% of the sample -- had a 66% survival rate, compared with 78% for nonminority owners. 

According to the survey, new entrepreneurs had a "reasonably good idea of what to expect." But there were still surprises: 54% found the small-business bugaboo -- government regulation and red tape -- worse than they feared, while 19% said it wasn't as bad as they had dreaded.
Some 46% found it easier than expected to get financing, while only 24% said it was tougher.
For all the gripes about banks, 45% of the new owners borrowed at least some capital from banks or other financial institutions.
More than a quarter got financing from friends and family.
But about a quarter financed entirely with their own resources. 

Nearly half of all businesses surveyed started with capital of $20,000 or less.
But after three years, the median investment reached the $60,000 range. 

Even in the greedy 1980s, money wasn't everything to the entrepreneurs.
Only 46% of the new entrepreneurs said "earning lots of money" was a key factor in their decision to start a business.
By contrast, 78% cited "having greater control over my life." 

Indeed, nonmaterial values came in handy.
Three years after starting their businesses, only a happy few -- 15% -- reported making more money than they originally expected. 

By contrast, a full 52% were earning less. 

Based on a recent survey of 2,994 new companies 

How old were you when you became owner or principal manager of your present business? 

How did you become owner or principal manager of your present business? 

How large do you expect your gross sales to be in two years? 

Does your firm operate under a franchise name, e.g. McDonalds? 

China, which dominates the world market for tungsten, has agreed to cooperate with other world producers in an effort to boost export prices. 

Representatives from six nations that produce tungsten, which is used to harden steel, met in Sydney last week in an effort to convince China to stop cutting prices and flooding the market with tungsten and tungsten products.
China has lifted its share of the world market to about 70% through these tactics.
Other producing countries say their tungsten industries have been hit hard or closed down by low prices. 

Besides China, countries at the meeting were Australia, Brazil, South Korea, Portugal and Peru; Canada attended as an observer.
At the session, China's delegates contended that the country's central authorities in the past haven't been able to closely control Chinese producers. 

Concerned about being accused of price-fixing and collusion, a statement from the meeting said the nations will examine their sales policies "on an individual basis." 

New weapons and equipment have given the Soviet Union an edge in tank forces that has allowed it to withdraw thousands of older tanks from the front line facing NATO, says the 1989-1990 edition of "Jane's Armor and Artillery." The Soviets no longer need so many tanks because their latest models are superior in some cases to those of the West in armor, mobility and firepower said Christopher F. Foss, the volume's editor.
Example: No NATO main battle tank has automatic gunloading, which all three new Soviet tanks have, enabling them to carry as few as three crewmen, the editor said. 

The Philippine Securities and Exchange Commission is permitting mutual-fund companies in the country after an absence of some 20 years as part of its campaign to develop the domestic capital market.
Mutual-fund operations have been banned in the Philippines since the mid-1960s, when small investors started complaining about fly-by-night operators.
The commission's new guidelines peg the minimum paid-in capital of mutual funds at 50 million pesos ($2.3 million), with the subscribed portion fully paid, while an investment manager must have an "unimpaired net worth" of 10 million pesos. 

In the first half of 1989, British companies made more acquisitions in Europe than in the U.S. -- 160 vs. 141 -- for the first time ever, according to statistics from two Translink International publications, the British-American Deal Review and the European Deal Review.
However, although Europe attracted a larger number of deals from the U.K., the U.S. continues to attract a larger value of acquisitions.
During the first half of 1989, U.K. acquisitions in the U.S. totaled $7.1 billion, against British acquisitions on the Continent worth $3.6 billion in the same period. 

Japan's Nomura Securities group and the Shanghai Jin Jiang Holding Corp. will open a joint hotel venture in Shanghai next Sunday.
Called the Garden Hotel Shanghai, the project involved the construction of a new 33-story structure and a renovation of the existing Shanghai landmark hotel of the same name at a cost of 17.5 billion yen ($122.8 million).
The new hotel will have a total of 500 units and will be managed by the operator of Tokyo's luxurious Hotel Okura. 

A week after Eurotunnel said it needed more cash to meet rising construction costs, the Anglo-French consortium announced the project should generate more revenue in the long term than previously projected. 

Revenue projections for the year 2003 were raised to #819.5 million ($1.31 billion) from #768.4 million and for the year 2013 to #997.4 million from a previously anticipated #923.1 million. 

As for the disagreement between Eurotunnel and the project's prime contractor, Transmanche-Link, over recent cost estimates, Alastair Morton, co-chairman of Eurotunnel, said he didn't expect the differences to have a negative impact on the project. "There is no row, no brawl or so on," Mr. Morton said. 

TML has estimated #4.27 billion will be needed to complete the project by June 1993, boosting total project costs to about #7.30 billion.
Its estimate contrasts with Eurotunnel's position that another #4.00 billion is needed to complete the project at a total cost of #6.96 billion. 

A Peruvian poll shows novelist Mario Vargas Llosa, a center-right candidate for Peru's presidency, holding a wide lead six months ahead of the presidential election. . . . Cuban President Fidel Castro has been invited to visit China in what diplomats in Havana see as another step toward increasingly stronger relations between the two countries. 

