.START 

Fed up with the tangled traffic, rampant crime and stratospheric housing costs of Los Angeles, Anthony Cordova moved to this booming metropolis 17 months ago to start anew.
But like many others who have made the same choice, he forgot to factor one thing into his plans: Caliphobia. 

Mr. Cordova, a human-resources professional now working for a temporary-help agency, says his hunt for a permanent job has been hampered by a virulent local prejudice against Californians.
He says he was turned down for three jobs because he didn't have, in the words of his interviewers, "local connections." 

The situation became so overwhelming, he confesses, that in one weak and desperate moment after the third rejection, as he stood in a downpour with his savings depleted and his car repossessed, he nearly hurled himself in front of an oncoming truck. "Everyone," he says with a sigh, "is putting down Californians." 

Hundreds of these expatriates arrive in the Seattle area each month, drawn by the region's relatively low-priced homes, plentiful jobs and beautiful surroundings.
Some are pushed out of California by its high cost of living; others want to cash in on real-estate inflation in their state and live like kings in this one. 

Whatever their motives, their sheer numbers have caused a backlash among locals, who blame them for Seattle's runaway growth, increasingly congested traffic and soaring home prices -- in fact, for just about everything they see wrong with their beloved city. 

Caliphobia shows up in bumper stickers reading "Washington Is Full.
Get Out," as well as in T-shirts picturing a California license plate that reads "BLAME ME" and lists 47 outrages Californians have allegedly committed against the good people of Seattle, including the introduction of tanning salons, disco and "beautiful people." 

Some Californians, in self-defense, try camouflage.
Charles Pollnow, who moved here from Palo Alto three months ago, tells people he's from St. Louis, his boyhood home, and quickly adds that his wife, Eleanor, is a native Seattlite. "I figured I needed all the forces with me," he says. "You don't want to get the natives angry." 

It may be too late.
In July, the Washington Supreme Court found that Maria N. Robinson, who had sued a Seattle grocery store after a display fell on her head, hadn't gotten a fair trial.
Her problem: She was a known Californian. 

After the trial ended, jurors told Ms. Robinson's lawyer that, during deliberation, the foreman had trashed Californians for their litigious ways and swayed other jurors to award the relatively miserly sum of about $9,000.
The high court, which said in its opinion that Ms. Robinson's argument about not receiving a fair trial was "well taken," has ordered a new one. 

Though there has always been a healthy and sometimes catty rivalry between California and its northern neighbors, the hostile behavior of Seattlites, many Californians believe, has been fanned by Emmett Watson, a columnist for the Seattle Times.
A column this summer entitled "Mount the Ramparts] Fight Californication]" described Californians as "nitwits," "sunbleached barbarians" and "neurotic." 

His diatribe, which he insists was written with tongue firmly in cheek, triggered a torrent of support from residents, who also lined up behind his "Keep the Bastards Out" campaign.
One reader, Patricia Scollard, wrote Mr. Watson to say: "I've traveled through the U.S. and found people in California to be extremely flaky.
Seattle already has enough idiots, jerks, airheads, bimbos, without this influx.
We don't need any more." 

As might be expected, Mr. Watson received as many letters from Californians, many of whom apparently missed the humor.
Kathy Ord, who moved to Seattle from the San Francisco area three years ago, sent off a blistering nine-page, handwritten letter to the columnist in which she railed about unaccommodating and unfriendly Seattlites. "I found myself being rebuffed time after time in my efforts to make friends outside of work," she wrote. "No one wanted to know me.
I just couldn't understand it.
Was it my hair color?
My clothes?
My deodorant, for Pete's sake?" 

Ms. Ord, who has been working as a temporary secretary and word processor, added that other California women she met told similar tales.
One, she recalled, "was so distraught over the isolation . . . she was considering seeking psychological help.
I cannot get back to my beloved California fast enough." 

Mr. Watson and his neighbors are fighting to preserve a low-stress life style that is rapidly changing, thanks to the city's robust fiscal health.
Seattle's economy is now so strong and diverse -- with flourishing high-technology, fishing and agricultural industries -- that local economists say the city could withstand even a month-long walkout at Boeing Co., where 43,000 machinists are currently on strike. 

And if a healthy job market isn't enough, there is always the pristine allure of Puget Sound, as well as the city's squeaky-clean image (jaywalkers are still ticketed by the police).
Money magazine recently named Seattle the most livable big city in the U.S. 

Money isn't the only one to notice.
Greater Seattle's population has grown by 300,000 this decade alone, to 1.5 million, with Californians now accounting for about 500 arrivals a month, according to Hebert Research Inc., in Bellevue, Wash. 

Among the newcomers are Stephen and Victoria James.
The Los Angeles couple, worn down by the snarl of life in Southern California, sold their home there for more than $250,000 last year and recently bought a place nearly twice the size in Seattle's pricey Queen Anne district for $175,000.
The Jameses' new two-story home has four bedrooms, a view of the Cascade Mountains and apple and cherry trees in the yard.
In L.A., the couple had three bedrooms, no Cascades, no fruit trees. 

"We truly fell in love with Seattle," says Mr. James, a private stock-market speculator.
But the Jameses' background hasn't gone over well with some neighbors.
One woman, he says, refuses even to speak to the couple. 

Mr. James is convinced their California license plates tipped her off. "We didn't even have tans," he says. 

In the housing market, stories abound of Californians besting Seattle bidders through such dirty tactics as paying a seller's full asking price -- or more.
Many can do this because they've just sold a house in the state with the highest median home price in the nation: $201,028. 

The buying binge has fueled price increases averaging 2% a month, a steep appreciation rate for this once-sleepy housing market.
Prices for "starter" homes, which a few years ago were in ample supply for $60,000 to $80,000, have cracked the $100,000 barrier and are climbing so fast that longtime Seattlites are having trouble finding something they can afford. 

"Last year, we could have bought a house," says Sharon Kelly, who didn't begin searching in earnest with her boyfriend until recently.
She says that, despite her working two jobs, they will have to settle "way out of the city," where they face stop-and-start commutes -- the likes of which are only now developing on Seattle's freeway system. 

"This never happened last year," says Paul W. Brendle II, a radio and television traffic reporter, as he points from his helicopter to a six-lane interstate below.
A weekday traffic jam at 5 p.m. clogs downtown interchanges and arterial roads snaking to eastern communities and suburbs that have been invaded by newcomers. 

Mr. Brendle swings his chopper to the east of Seattle, where thousands of acres of farm land now sprout skeletons of new houses, and evergreens standing astride hilltops have had their tips sheared to afford new homeowners unencumbered views. 

None of this sits well with Mr. Watson, the Times columnist.
Addressing Californians in another summer column, he wrote: "You are wanted back in California.
Take I-5 southward and don't stop until you see the first palm tree." 

