.START 

By 1992, Europe may be waving goodbye to the Marlboro man. 

That icon of cigarette advertising could well be chased into the sunset by European Community bureaucrats, along with the Virginia Slims woman and other tobacco-product symbols.
In their wake they may leave print and billboard ads showing nothing but cigarette packs and king-sized health warnings. 

As part of its wide-ranging plan to abolish internal trade barriers, the EC is trying to harmonize its 12 member countries' disparate rules for tobacco ads.
And it's taking the opportunity to tighten regulations sharply. 

Under proposals from the EC Commission, print and poster ads would be "restricted solely to the presentation of the tobacco product's packaging" and information about tar and nicotine content.
Health warnings would have to cover at least 10% of the total ad space, rising to 15% in countries with two official languages and to 20% in Belgium, which has three. 

Europe's ad industry, normally the loudest booster of the single-market project, is fuming.
Industry officials claim the proposed rules would snuff out creativity in cigarette ads and -- even worse -- set a dangerous precedent for clampdowns by EC bureaucrats on other types of ads. 

"It's the dark side of 1992," says Angela Mills, head of European affairs at Britain's Advertising Association, an industry lobby. "We favor harmonization of freedoms, not harmonization of restrictions." 

If enacted, the proposals would affect a big industry.
Some 600 billion cigarettes are sold every year in the EC, according to Infotab, a London-based research group sponsored by the tobacco industry. 

As in the U.S., print and billboard ads are about the only option for European tobacco manufacturers.
Over the years, nearly every EC country has banned tobacco advertising on TV. Britain still allows commercials for cigars and pipe tobacco, but even that avenue will close soon.
Last week, EC officials approved a separate directive prohibiting all tobacco ads on TV after October 1991.
Britain's ad industry is resigned to that move. 

But European ad and tobacco companies aren't taking the proposals for print ads so calmly.
They fear the EC action would limit tobacco ads to "pack shots," or pictures of tobacco-product packages plus the ubiquitous health warning. 

It's a big worry for an industry built around brand images.
Philip Morris Inc. believes the EC plan will exile its Marlboro man, making it much tougher to advertise Marlboro cigarettes in Europe. 

"Consumers don't read an ad which is just a list of technical things," complains Michael Horst, a vice president at Philip Morris's EC headquarters in Lausanne, Switzerland.
Because cigarette prices are determined largely by excise taxes, he adds, "the only tool we have for competing in the smoking market is creative advertising." 

What really steams the ad industry, though, is the EC's use of its single-market plan to achieve health objectives.
In unveiling its proposed tobacco-ad regulations last spring, EC officials said they had two goals: to harmonize advertising rules for publications that might cross borders and to help prevent cancer. 

EC health laws normally require approval from all 12 member countries.
But because the tobacco directive falls within the single-market program, it needs only majority approval to become law. 

"The commission is misusing its powers to create an internal market because it wishes to be seen to be doing something about people's health," says Alastair Tempest, secretary-general of the European Advertising Tripartite, a trade group representing agencies, clients and media. "It's all a bit bogus." 

He and other industry spokesmen fear the commission will use equally fancy footwork to restrict advertising of other products. "The next one on the list will be alcohol and, thereafter, pharmaceuticals, food and who knows what else," says Ms. Mills of the British ad organization. 

An EC official dismisses all the bellyaching. "The Commission is obliged to take into account health problems when proposing to harmonize (advertising) legislation," he says. "It's completely hypocritical to speak of creativity.
We are talking about a product which every year kills 440,000 people in the Community." As for fears of restrictions on other ads, he insists "there doesn't exist any such danger." 

The tobacco-ad proposals could be approved next year.
Although the ad industry is lobbying against them, "we're not at all confident of success," Mr. Tempest admits. "The commission has chosen its battlefield well.
Very few people are going to stand up and stick their necks up because of tobacco advertising." 

Ad Notes. . . . 

NEW ACCOUNT: Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey & Strauss Inc., New York, was selected to handle the $3 million to $4 million ad account for Frederick Wildman & Sons, a New York-based importer of wines and spirits, including the Folonari brand. 

