.START 

American Medical International Inc. agreed to the reduced $3 billion acquisition terms offered by IMA Holdings Corp., a group that includes the Pritzker family of Chicago and First Boston Corp. 

The price under the revised offer, which has been extended until Oct. 25, includes assumption of about $1.4 billion in debt. 

Reflecting the increasing difficulty of financing acquisitions using large amounts of borrowed money, IMA said last week it wouldn't be able to finance its previous $3.35 billion offer for the hospital company.
IMA then cut its $28-a-share offer to $26.50 a share and reduced the number of shares it is seeking to 63 million, or about 86% of the common stock outstanding, from 68.8 million.
However, IMA increased the amount of IMA Holdings common stock to be received by American Medical stockholders to 20% from 10%. 

The market apparently expected the sale of American Medical to be completed.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, AMI closed at $23.875, up 62.5 cents. 

Under the revised terms, American Medical is free to seek other offers for the company and may enter into an agreement with another suitor without penalty.
Earlier, a fee of 75 cents a share was to have been charged if the IMA offer was topped by another party.
IMA's original bid in July, for about 94% of American Medical's fully diluted shares, exceeded proposals made by at least two rival bidders. 

Under the new agreement, if IMA fails to secure financing by Oct. 30, its maximum reimbursement of expenses incurred in the merger would be slashed to $35 million from $50 million. 

IMA's financing difficulties mirror a tightening of the $200 billion market for high-yield, high-risk bonds, which have provided much of the financing for the binge of leveraged buy-outs and corporate acquisitions in recent years. 

IMA's original offer came apart when First Boston revised its lending commitment to IMA. Details of the investment banker's new offer weren't disclosed, but First Boston, a unit of CS First Boston already has about $1 billion outstanding in short-term loans to complete takeovers. 

Analysts also were sanguine about prospects for completion of the acquisition. "There is no one out there that is going to pay them any more," said Bob Dunne, an analyst with Labe Simpson & Co. in New York. "It's either take the offer or go back to where they were six months ago." 

IMA is a new company formed by First Boston and Harry Gray Melvyn Klein & Partners, a leveraged buy-out fund in which the Pritzkers are major investors.
Among other interests, the Pritzkers control the Hyatt Hotel chain. 

