.START 

THE BIG THREE CAR MAKERS may each report a quarterly loss in core North American auto operations, the first time that has happened since the recession year 1982.
GM, Ford and Chrysler are still likely to post an overall profit for the period due to other businesses, but earnings may be down as much as 50%.
The drop indicates the industry's vulnerability to excess production capacity. 

Corporate profits are slipping after thriving for two years.
The recent spate of disappointing earnings reports could signal turbulence ahead for the country's economy. 

Jaguar confirmed it is holding talks with General Motors about selling a minority stake and setting up joint ventures.
Such an alliance could be used against Ford, which Jaguar considers an unwelcome suitor. 

Wang Labs expects to return to profitability by the quarter ending June 30, said Richard Miller, who took over as president of the troubled computer maker in August.
Still, Miller said Wang is likely to post a loss for its current fiscal year. 

USAir expects lower quarterly profit, partly due to cut-rate fares.
USAir's stock surged on a report an investor group is raising its stake. 

A pharmaceutical joint venture of Johnson & Johnson and Merck agreed in principle to buy the U.S. over-the-counter drug business of ICI Americas for over $450 million.
It is the venture's first major acquisition. 

American Medical International agreed to be acquired for $3 billion by a group including the Pritzker family and First Boston.
The offer was reduced from $3.35 billion last week, reflecting the growing difficulty of financing highly leveraged buy-outs. 

Bolar Pharmaceutical will voluntarily recall an antibiotic because of government evidence suggesting the company passed off a brand name drug as its own to get federal clearance to market a generic version. 

Hewlett-Packard will unveil today a desktop model with a new standard aimed at challenging IBM's dominant role in personal computers. 

Compaq Computer's stock surged further amid continued anticipation about a notebook-sized computer expected to be introduced Monday. 

The United Auto Workers is taking a tougher stance on plant closings.
The union demanded GM pay workers at a Georgia plant for at least six months after the facility shuts. 

Stocks inched higher in quiet holiday trading, pushing the Dow Jones Industrials up 5.89, to 2791.41, a fifth consecutive record.
The dollar also rose.
The bond market was closed. 

Pacific Telesis scrapped plans to test a videotex gateway, saying there weren't enough potential customers and information providers. 

Thrift regulators are considering yet another device to raise funds for the S&L bailout without officially adding to the federal budget deficit. 

Markets --- 

Stocks: Volume 86,810,000 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 2791.41, up 5.89; transportation 1518.49, up 13.87; utilities 219.13, up 0.44. 

Bonds: Market closed. 

Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 129.77, off 0.91; spot index 129.31, off 0.51. 

Dollar: 142.80 yen, up 0.45; 1.8875 marks, up 0.0008. 

