.START 

Dare to be stodgy. 

That's the advice for investors looking for high tax-exempt yields. 

"You aren't being rewarded for taking risks, so go for quality," says Robert Boyden Lamb, a professor of finance and management at New York University's Stern School of Business. 

Over the past year, so-called high-yield muni funds that invest in tax-exempt junk bonds returned less than half a percentage point more than funds that invest only in municipal bonds with high credit ratings.
The average total return, including both price changes and interest income, of 28 junk muni funds tracked by Lipper Analytical Services Inc. was 9.29%; the return on 24 insured muni funds averaged 8.89%. 

"For the pros, a difference of half a percentage point makes a big difference in rankings and bonuses," says Neal Attermann, vice president and manager of municipal research at Kidder, Peabody & Co. 

But for many individual investors, the dollars-and-cents difference isn't significant.
On a $10,000 investment, for example, half percentage point represents a difference of only $50 a year in interest income. 

"You aren't getting paid much for the additional risk" of municipal junk bonds, says Mr. Attermann. 

As a result, advisers urge individual investors to go for quality. "We're definitely advocating that investors stick to high-grade munis, preferably double-A or triple-A {rated} issues," says Bruce A. Whiteford, a vice president in Chase Manhattan Bank's U.S. private banking division. 

Bond strategists say this safety-first policy will work especially well if the economy erodes or sinks into a recession.
They argue that signs of an economic slump could send investors scurrying to buy the highest-rated securities they can find, driving up prices of those bonds and leading to wider differences in yield between top-rated and lower-rated bonds.
Some investors have struck gold investing in municipal junk.
One of the best examples: Berkshire Hathaway Inc., headed by Warren Buffett. 

From October 1983 through June 1984, Berkshire's insurance subsidiaries bought large amounts of bonds of projects 1, 2 and 3 of Washington Public Power Supply System.
In the summer of 1983, WPPSS had defaulted on bonds issued to finance Projects 4 and 5.
It was a brilliant move.
In his 1988 annual report, Mr. Buffett wrote that the bonds were carried on the balance sheet at $247 million -- and had a market value of about $352 million. 

But Mr. Buffett's experience is exceptional. "My conclusion is don't buy muni junk bonds," says Robert S. Dow, a partner at Lord, Abbett & Co., which manages about $10 billion in fixed-income investments. "I just don't feel the extra yield you're getting is worth it to justify all the risks you're taking." 

Investment advisers say "high-yield" will probably continue to be a misnomer when applied to tax-exempt bonds.
A major reason, they say, is that the volume of new low-rated municipal issues is comparatively small. "It's slim pickings in the municipal junk bond market -- and not very rewarding pickings either," says Steven J. Hueglin, executive vice president at Gabriele, Hueglin & Cashman. 

Meanwhile, demand is strong from a growing number of funds competing aggressively to attract individual investors, who usually focus more on yield than on total return.
Earlier this year, Van Kampen Merritt cited the supply-demand problem when it quietly closed its high-yield municipal bond fund to new investors.
There just weren't enough "suitable" bonds to "fully satisfy the fund's current demand," the investment management firm explained. 

At the same time, however, some large mutual fund groups go out of their way to stress that they don't offer junk bond funds. "We don't have a high-yield bond fund because in many people's minds, high-yield equates with junk, and Dreyfus Corp. has not offered and does not offer any junk bond funds," says Richard J. Moynihan, president of the Dreyfus tax-exempt bond funds. 

Dreyfus also emphasizes this point in its advertisements, saying it offers "higher tax-free yields" from a "quality portfolio." The word quality is underlined. 

Investing in individual junk municipal bonds can be especially tricky.
Information about particular issues isn't generally easy to get, and analyzing it is difficult. 

Another pitfall is that it can also be hard to sell a junk muni in an emergency.
That's because many of the bonds don't trade actively in the secondary, or resale, market. "If something goes wrong," says Lord Abbett's Mr. Dow, "you've got a 'to-whom-er': To whom are you going to sell it?" 

Some investment advisers also say people should be wary of investing in junk municipal bonds through unit investment trusts. "Don't buy a unit investment trust that invests in below investment-grade bonds," says Richard Lehmann, president of Bond Investors Association, a nonprofit group in Miami Lakes, Fla. 

Unlike mutual funds, which are run by managers who watch over their portfolios and buy and sell securities as they feel necessary, unit trusts aren't actively managed.
That could be a problem for investors, says Mr. Lehmann.
Junk municipal bonds, he says, "do not lend themselves to being purchased without close management." 

Total return, including price changes and interest income, for municipal bond mutual funds in periods ending Sept. 30. 

Source: Lipper Analytical Services Inc. 

