.START 

Jaguar PLC said it is discussing selling a minority stake to General Motors Corp. and also is talking to the No. 1 U.S. car maker about joint manufacturing, marketing and other ventures. 

The announcement confirmed what the financial and automotive worlds have believed for three weeks.
It came three days after Ford Motor Co., which Jaguar regards as an unwelcome suitor, received U.S. antitrust clearance to buy as much as 15% of Jaguar.
Thus, a Jaguar-GM tie, which Jaguar yesterday said has quietly been under discussion for months, looms as a defensive alliance against Ford. 

In Detroit, GM also confirmed discussions over the past several months about the possibility of joint ventures with Jaguar. "In this connection," the U.S. auto maker said, "GM is discussing the possibility of acquiring a minority interest in Jaguar PLC to assist Jaguar in remaining an independent British-owned manufacturer." 

In Dearborn, Mich., a Ford spokeswoman said yesterday's announcement doesn't change Ford's plan to acquire up to 15% of Jaguar.
She said Ford has been aware all along that other companies could buy into the British firm and added that such acquisitions are "beyond our control." She declined to say how much of Jaguar's stock Ford already has acquired. 

It was Ford's Sept. 19 announcement that it wanted to buy up to 15% of Jaguar that triggered broad speculation that GM and Jaguar might be talking.
The Wall Street Journal on Sept. 27 reported that Ford's move toward a stake indeed was meant to pre-empt a GM-Jaguar accord. 

Jaguar's announcement came after London's stock market closed.
Before the announcement, Jaguar stock plummeted 46 pence (74 cents), to 685 pence ($10.99), in a declining London market, on volume of 10 million shares.
The stock had rocketed 62 pence on Friday on indications that Ford had begun adding to its stake.
Ford already had bought slightly more than 1% of Jaguar at the time of its announcement last month.
Jaguar was the most actively traded stock yesterday on the U.S. over-the-counter market, as it was Friday.
The stock fell $1 in the U.S. yesterday, to $10.875, on volume of 3.4 million shares.
On Friday it had risen 25 cents on volume of nearly 4.6 million shares. 

Of course, any rise in Jaguar's share price adds to Ford's costs.
But David Boole, a Jaguar spokesman, denied that yesterday's announcement was designed for that purpose or to check the decline in the company's shares.
The reason for the announcement, he said, was "simply because there's been so much speculation and uncertainty in the marketplace" and because "over the past few weeks the talks {with GM} have become more substantive." 

Because of British government restrictions, which lapse at the end of 1990, any GM stake in Jaguar initially would be limited to 15%.
However, the companies could arrange for GM to purchase warrants convertible into a bigger stake later. 

