.START 

Thrift regulators are considering yet another device to raise funds for the savings-and-loan bailout without officially adding to the federal budget deficit. 

Ever since President Bush presented his thrift rescue package in February, one of the government's major objectives has been to avoid the appearance of adding to the deficit.
The thrift legislation Mr. Bush signed in August partially accomplished the task by establishing the Resolution Funding Corp., an "off-budget" agency that will issue $30 billion in bonds over two years to help cover the cost of liquidating insolvent institutions.
Because the bonds will be backed by savings-and-loan funds, rather than by the government, they won't be counted as adding to government debt. 

An additional $20 billion will be raised "on budget" from the Treasury.
Of that amount, $12 billion was spent in the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30. 

But surprisingly, no decision has been made yet about how to raise the tens of billions of dollars of initial working capital for the Resolution Trust Corp., the agency that actually will dispose of failed thrifts. 

"No matter which approach we take, funding for (Resolution Trust) will be very complicated," William Seidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., told a Senate hearing last week.
The FDIC staff is handling the bulk of the Resolution Trust Corp. 's work. 

Resolution Trust needs the working capital to cover its short-term costs until it can liquidate the $100 billion in bad assets it is expected to acquire from failed thrifts.
The agency's net long-term spending on the bailout is projected to total $50 billion.
The total cost of the bailout, including interest, is expected to be roughly $166 billion over 10 years. 

The Treasury, which is still working on the prospectus for the first Resolution Funding Corp. bond issue, is conferring with Resolution Trust about whether the new agency can issue short-term debt without adding to the budget deficit.
Industry analysts say that if Resolution Trust issues notes that carry the full faith and credit of the U.S. government, which would allow it to pay the lowest possible interest rate, the amount of the notes would count as federal outlays and deepen the budget deficit.
But to avoid piling on to the national budget deficit, the regulators may create yet another off-budget agency to issue the short-term debt that would be backed by the S&L assets. 

"It's certainly something that we have to consider," a Resolution Trust spokesman says. "The lawyers are still playing with it." 

Under the bailout legislation, Resolution Trust is limited to issuing notes worth 85% of the value of the assets of the defunct S&Ls.
The new law is mostly silent on how the working cash must be raised. "There is absolutely nothing about who establishes fair market value for the assets.
And who knows what is to stop Resolution Trust from overborrowing against the value?" said industry consultant Bert Ely in Alexandria, Va. "The interesting thing is how little is known." 

