.START 

Two young men in business suits stride up to a cosmetics counter at Bloomingdale's department store in Manhattan.
A salesman dressed in a white lab coat guides them to a skin-care "clinic" complete with an interactive computer system.
Today's lesson: determining skin type -- oily or dry. 

Marketing executives in the cosmetics trade are hoping episodes like this will soon become commonplace.
But until recently, they've had little reason to be encouraged.
For more than a decade, industry officials have been hoping for a boom in upscale men's toiletries: skin cleansers, moisturizers and fancy shaving creams. "Because of the relatively small size of the market, it has not been a highly profitable business," concedes Byron D. Donics, president of the Aramis division of Estee Lauder Inc. 

Now, encouraged by some recent growth, the toiletries companies are polishing their marketing strategies, and the business is beginning to show signs of life.
Even Gillette Co., which has traditionally concentrated on mainstream products, says it's planning a "more upscale" line of men's toiletries, probably for sale through its traditional outlets, such as drugstores.
Department-store sales of upscale men's grooming products, not including colognes, grew last year to between $70 million and $80 million from about $40 million in 1983, according to Allan G. Mottus, an industry consultant.
For this year, the total will be an estimated 15% to 20% higher -- though still a fraction of last year's $1.6 billion in sales of women's skin-care products. 

Some retailers say they believe younger men are already far more accepting of such products then their fathers.
Sales of men's skin-care products at Marshall Field's department stores are up about 20% this year, according to John W. Stabenau, Field's divisional merchandise manager of cosmetics. "Society is changing," Mr. Stabenau says. "The resistance to these products has broken down." 

To keep the industry growing, manufacturers are rolling out new lines of men's skin-care products -- everything from coconut-lime shaving cream to a deodorant made from lumps of mineral salt -- that can cost five times more than their more-mundane counterparts.
They're also working harder to sell them.
In 1988, Gentlemen's Quarterly magazine ran 278.3 pages of ads for men's toiletries (including men's fragrances), up from just 145.7 pages five years earlier. 

What's more, toiletries makers say they spend far more on other promotions, with advertising typically accounting for only about 25% of their marketing budgets.
Estee Lauder's Clinique division, for instance, spends $1 million annually on advertising for its men's skin-care products, says Natalia Holynskyj, a consultant with market researcher Kline & Co.
And she says Aramis spends just slightly less than that. 

The most-obvious obstacle marketers face is that many men consider such products unmasculine. "They still have a feminine connotation," concedes Tony Michaels, a vice president, marketing and advertising, at Lancome, a division of Cosmair Inc. 

But lack of macho appeal isn't the only challenge.
Traditionally, as much as 70% of all cosmetics and toiletries purchases in department stores are spontaneous, industry executives say.
That presents a problem for makers of men's products, as most department-store customers are women.
In fact, women now buy about 60% of the men's products sold in department stores.
Industry executives contend that their products are still getting into the right hands -- men's.
But men who return for a refill of a product they received as a gift may be stunned by prices as high as $17.50 for a small tube of moisturizer. 

To make matters worse, many just don't believe they need special skin-care systems. "I had dry skin once," says John M. Malknecht, a stockbroker at Dean Witter Financial Services in Minneapolis. "I sneaked some of my wife's lotion out of the closet." Mr. Malknecht says he isn't likely to purchase an expensive moisturizer anytime soon. "Dry skin just isn't that big of a problem in my life," he says. 

For now, marketers are concentrating on finding ways to reduce the stigma associated with their products.
Gruene Inc., a small company based in Venice, Calif., doesn't sell any women's toiletries.
To distance its products from those of women's cosmetics makers, who favor gray, white or pastel packaging, Gruene's wares come in primary-color boxes with black lettering. "Selling cosmetics to men is tough" says Daniel C. Samakow, Gruene's chief executive officer. "Selling men upscale versions of traditional toiletries is not as hard." 

It's a lesson that hasn't escaped Gruene's well-heeled competition.
Aramis, which rolled out its Lab Series line of unscented men's grooming products three years ago, focuses on skin problems caused by shaving, such as razor burn.
It is seeking to install shaving "clinics" in department stores, like the one it now operates in Bloomingdale's. "If you stop a man in a department store and say I'd like to talk about the visible signs of aging, they're not interested," says Mr. Donics of Aramis. "But if you talk about getting a great shave, men are going to stop." Lancome, which has been selling men's products at its women's cosmetics counters since 1986, has also been fiddling with its strategy.
The company dropped its Anti-Wrinkle Creme, partly because it found the name made men uncomfortable.
Lancome also beefed up its approach at the counter, training salespeople to tell men the company's products will "condition" rather than "soften" their skin.
Men aren't insulted to be told they have "crow's feet" at the corners of their eyes, says Mr. Michaels of Lancome.
But mention the word wrinkles and they're likely to flee. 

To ease customers' embarrassment, companies are beginning to establish separate locations for their men's lines.
Clinique now sells men's products at counters near men's clothing departments.
That's a step in the right direction, according to Andrew Shore, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton.
The market for these products "would take off if men didn't have to ask a woman for them," Mr. Shore says. 

