.START 

European Community finance ministers agreed in principle to remove border checks on the shipment of goods subject to value-added taxes, in line with the EC's goal of freeing the movement of goods by the end of 1992. 

French Finance Minister Pierre Beregovoy called the unanimous decision "a decisive step toward the abolition of fiscal frontiers" in the EC. 

Although significant for the easing of intra-EC trade, the agreement marks a setback for Tax Comissioner Christiane Scrivener, who put forth a far more radical plan in May.
Yesterday's debate highlighted a continuing struggle between the commission, which alone has the power to propose EC legislation, and the ministers, whose approval is necessary to enact the rules. 

The ministers asked a panel of tax experts to produce a detailed study of VAT policy and present conclusions by the next meeting of EC finance ministers Nov. 13. 

Mr. Beregovoy said the system proposed by the ministers would mean "no more export formalities, no more clearing through customs and no more border checks," thus lowering the cost of cross-border business. 

The ministers agreed that VAT would continue to be levied in the country where the goods are sold to the consumer and at that country's rate.
As under the current system, goods would cross borders tax free.
Checks to make sure that the VAT is paid after export no longer would be required at the border, but to avoid fraud both the seller and the buyer would have to declare the transaction to authorities. 

The commission's original proposal, which was scrapped until further notice, was to levy the tax in the country from which the goods were shipped.
This, the panel contended, would greatly reduce the possibility of fraud, making checks superfluous.
The commission's proposal hinged on bringing the EC's widely varying VAT rates closer together. 

Harmonizing VAT, however, has proved unacceptable to some EC countries, notably Britain.
The British government contends that consumers should be allowed to seek the best buy, thus letting market forces come into play between high-VAT and low-VAT countries. 

The British view apparently has won some converts.
Mr. Beregovoy made it clear that the agreement reached yesterday makes the forced harmonization of the EC's VAT rates unnecessary. 

"The abolition of fiscal frontiers {by itself} will lead to fiscal harmonization," Mr. Beregovoy said.
Peter Lilley, the United Kingdom's financial secretary, called yesterday's agreement "a great breakthrough" toward lifting fiscal barriers. 

