.START 

Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. said it will voluntarily recall an antibiotic because of government evidence suggesting the company passed off a brand name drug as its own to obtain governmental clearance to market a generic version. 

Questions surrounding the antibiotic mark the third time Bolar has come under suspicion in recent months for submitting brand name drugs at an outside testing laboratory to win clearance from the Food and Drug Administration to market generic versions.
The company first came under scrutiny as part of a House subcommittee investigation of the generic drug industry.
Bolar denied the latest accusation. 

The recall is particularly troubling because some analysts who follow Bolar, based in Copiague, N.Y., believed the company had already sailed through the worst part of a storm involving questions raised about certain drug approvals. 

"This comes as a total shock," said Hemant K. Shah, a Warren, N.J., drug analyst. "This is scary for the company and scary for shareholders." Still, Mr. Shah said he isn't pulling his "strong buy" recommendation on the battered stock because the company remains fundamentally strong and investors would benefit from any upturn. 

Bolar fell $1.625 to $20.75 in composite trading on the American Stock Exchange. 

Bolar said the FDA hasn't raised any questions about the antibiotic's safety or efficacy, but in a meeting last Friday "presented evidence" that the product tested at an outside laboratory was the brand name drug. 

While the recall begins today for 100 mg capsules of a urinary tract antibiotic called nitrofurantoin macrocrystals, Bolar insisted that it didn't substitute the brand name product, called Macrodantin, in laboratory testing.
The brand name is manufactured by Norwich Eaton, a unit of Procter & Gamble Co., the Cincinnati consumer products giant. 

"The charges that have been made against this product and our company warrant this cautious move on our part while we investigate to determine where the truth lies," the company said in a statement.
Robert Shulman, president of Bolar, said in an interview that he has "very pointedly" questioned people at the company and said he can't believe anyone passed off Macrodantin as a Bolar product.
He said questions about the drug will be addressed in an audit of Bolar's drug approvals by an outside firm.
Bolar won FDA approval to sell a generic version in June 1988. 

"Bolar believes that the product tested by the FDA was not the same product it provided to the testing laboratory," Bolar said in a statement.
Mr. Shulman, however, stopped short of blaming the substitution on the company's outside testing laboratory or the FDA. 

Officials at the FDA couldn't be reached.
But an attorney for PharmaKinetics Laboratories Inc., of Baltimore, the testing laboratory, said any suggestion that it engaged in a switch "is utter nonsense, and the charge is unsupportable by any fact, document or logical motivation." 

Bolar's sales of its version of Macrodantin are "fairly small," said Mr. Shulman, who declined to be more specific.
Mr. Shah, the analyst, estimated that Bolar sells less than $2 million of the drug annually. 

As part of an ongoing investigation of Bolar, the FDA concluded that Bolar engaged in at least two switches, including the antibiotic.
The other switch in 1982 was detected by the testing laboratory.
Bolar eventually resubmitted its own product for testing and won approval. 

In the third instance, involving Bolar's version of a big-selling blood pressure medicine, the FDA wasn't able to conclusively determine whether a switch occurred.
However, the FDA downgraded the rating on Bolar's version of Dyazide so that it isn't any longer considered the therapeutic equivalent of the brand name drug. 

