.START 

Assume that Mikhail Gorbachev meant what he said in East Berlin on Friday evening -- that East German affairs are East Germany's business only and that today's problems must be solved through political means, for "there are no other means." Then the Soviet Army will not shoot down East German protesters as it did on June 17, 1953.
Then East Germany's chief of state and party, Erich Honecker, will have to face all protests on his own. 

Is he another Noriega, with an army brutal enough to gun down its countrymen because they want freedom and democracy?
If not, East German freedom is imminent.
That means German reunification, for there is nobody in East Germany except Erich Honecker's henchmen who wants the wasted and impoverished region to go it alone. 

But the less Mr. Gorbachev seems to worry about the future of East Germany the more, apparently, it becomes the fashion in France to worry about German reunification.
The Paris daily Le Figaro envisions a "German domination" endangering West European unity.
Le Quotidien de Paris also sees the European Community in peril and even calls up memories of German evil-doing five decades ago.
And so on. 

It is of course the French political class that is hot, bothered and bewildered -- so what's new about that?
Let it rest easy.
It is no more bewildered than are the German political class.
It seems that everybody in West Germany is afraid of German reunification too: socialists as well as conservatives.
For German reunification means a great new challenge -- fitting a partitioned country together, rebuilding former prosperity from the communist mess.
Of course that frightens your average hack.
But there is no indication that anybody in East Germany gives a damn for the nightmares of some hysterical French editorialists or equally hysterical German Socialists.
And there is no indication that the West Germans would reject their East German countrymen. 

Is France really endangered by German reunification?
Will a Germany of 75 million people overwhelm France economically and politically?
Or will a united Germany again become a power between powers, possibly joining the East for mischief against the West?
Should reunification therefore be prevented?
Can it be prevented?
Let's get a few facts straight. 

German reunification is coming.
There is no way to prevent it once the threat of Soviet tanks gunning down freedom is removed.
When and if the people are oppressed no more, they will exercise their right to self-determination.
According to international law, self-determination is not foreign determination or domination. 

That goes for the "rights of the victorious nations of World War II" as well.
All the treaties and provisions they concluded with the Germans or among themselves, beginning with the surrender documents, proceed from the assumption that the defeated Germany now under allied control is one undivided Germany which the Western allies especially have bound themselves to restore.
International law may provide for reparations, but it rules out "punishing" a people by splitting up their state and forbidding them to join up again.
Nobody has the right to stop the two Germanys' joining, nobody will have the means to stop them -- the French army is definitely not going to march into Germany to rebuild the wall and straddle it, firing right and left at Germans trying to reach each other. 

Some French commentators drag up another ancient bugaboo: A united Germany drifting eastward.
But this is also not going to happen, and not only because the Germans would not go back to what they just threw off, but because there will be no communist camp.
Even if there still is a Soviet Union and not yet a free Russia while East Germany is set free, at least the Poles and Hungarians will opt out of the Warsaw Pact and the Comecon.
Both are eager to join the European Community.
They will certainly not be refused if they adapt their economy.
Others will follow suit.
That will be the end of the Eastern Bloc -- but as for the future Western bloc, no one country will be big enough to dominate that conglomerate; not even Russia herself, should she knock on the European door someday. 

To be sure, rebuilding East Germany will take effort and money.
But if the West Germans can scatter largesse from Eastern Europe to Africa and back, they ought to have enough left for their own countrymen.
It is not so sure who will benefit whom.
The West Germans may have the money and the techniques, but the East Germans have the will and the drive.
That can be more important.
Will and drive turned a war-torn West Germany into a land of unforethought riches and freedom since the restoration of the market economy in 1948.
The East Germans are likely to revive that spirit among countrymen who have long become spiritless and pension-minded. 

But will that drive bury the Grande Nation?
That is entirely up to her.
Little Switzerland does not feel buried by the far bigger country of the French.
Nor does even smaller Luxembourg.
The grandeur of France is not affected by a lack of square miles (she is more than twice as big as West Germany) nor by a lack of citizens (she'd just have to invite more immigrants) but by her inability to sell more automobiles, etc. abroad.
But Mercedes-Benz, BMW and Volkswagen are selling well abroad not because there are more Germans than French, while American cars are not although there are more Americans than there are French and Germans put together.
Whatever it is, whether the competitive spirit is lacking, whether social policies encourage laggardness, whether financial policies discourage risk-taking and encourage feather-bedding -- it is not lack of size that hampers a country, but lack of spirit.
If a nation aspires to be "Grande" she either has the spirit to justify it or she had better settle for a mediocre nation.
Grandeur that depends on cutting down others rather than elevating itself is doomed to shrink. 

But the question is academic anyway.
The French are not afraid of the Germans.
French intellectuals habitually worry over crises that they usually invent themselves in order to have something to worry about.
As for the average Frenchman, every poll for years has shown a solid French majority for German reunification.
There is a simple explanation: The basis of French grandeur is pride, not defeatism.
It was Charles De Gaulle, proudest of Frenchmen, who always said that Germany will be reunited, because he who had fought for the restoration of France could not imagine the partition of another country. 

The EC was not founded primarily to promote better trade but to join France and Germany forever so that they would never be at each other's throats again.
The idea of democracy is that free people never opt for violence or war.
Those French editorialists who still suggest that Germany might do again as she did 50 years ago may cause some Germans to revive an ancient mistrust of France.
But they will not succeed in destroying the present and future union of the French with the Germans, established by many treaties, any more than they will prevent the coming union of Germans. 

Mr. von Loewenstern is the editorial page editor of the German daily, Die Welt. 

