.START 

Technology stocks returned to favor, and that was good news for the Nasdaq over-the-counter market, which advanced to its seventh consecutive high. 

Traders said money managers with cash to spend were snapping up computerrelated stocks, which they now view as cheap.
The buying greatly improved share prices of technology giants, including Intel, Apple Computer and Oracle Systems, as well as smaller issues, such as Conner Peripherals. 

The purchases fueled an afternoon rally by the Nasdaq Composite Index, which posted a gain of 2.09 to 485.73.
The 0.4% rise by the Nasdaq Composite was better than the 0.2% advance by both the New York Stock Exchange Composite and the Dow Jones Industrial Average. 

Traders said there was also plenty of buying by short sellers, who previously had borrowed and sold shares of some technology stocks.
Short sellers expect stock prices to fall and hope to profit by replacing the borrowed shares with stock bought later at the lower prices.
But if prices begin to rise instead, they often buy shares to avoid heavy losses, which usually aids the stocks' rally. 

Among Nasdaq's biggest technology names, Intel rose 1 1/8 to 34 5/8 on 1.9 million shares, Apple Computer jumped 1 3/8 to 49 1/2 on 1.7 million shares; Microsoft advanced 2 to 81 3/4 and Lotus Development gained 1 to 30 1/4 on lighter volume.
The action in those stocks contributed to the robustness of the Nasdaq 100 Index, which surged 4.76 to 

By comparison, the Nasdaq index of big financial issues added 0.80 to 475.82. 

Some smaller technology issues were higher, too.
Conner Peripherals gained 5/8 to 14 7/8 on 1.2 million shares.
Autodesk jumped 1 1/4 to 42 1/2.
James Tarantino, head of OTC trading at Hambrecht & Quist in San Francisco, said money managers are turning to the tinier technology stocks because they are undervalued compared with other groups of stocks.
The smaller stocks are "under-owned and their fundamentals are good," Mr. Tarantino said.
The resurgence in the technology group has many market watchers wondering whether the sector is ready to rally after having given a mixed performance so far this year. 

The OTC technology stocks woke up in the middle of last week, startling many investors who had abandoned the group as dead.
The group has lagged the broader OTC market.
By the end of the third quarter, the technology sector of the Dow Jones Equity Market Index had risen only 11.84% for the year, compared with a 24% rise for the Nasdaq Composite Index.
The group added 0.74% yesterday. 

"We have been buying," said Jack Laporte, portfolio manager of T. Rowe Price's New Horizon Fund.
He said T. Rowe Price has been concentrating on some of the smaller technology names. 

But the volatile sector has had false starts before, and many analysts are skeptical that the latest move will turn out to be anything more than a periodic game of catch-up for many of the stocks. 

While Mr. Laporte has bought the issues, and expects to see further gains in the group, he calls technology stocks "the ultimate trading stocks." He explained: "You can't buy them and hold them because the volatility is so great." 

David Bayer, software analyst at Montgomery Securities in San Francisco, called hopes for a technology-based rally "wishful thinking." 

"It's very selective at the moment," said Mr. Bayer.
He believes that investor interest might broaden to the second-tier stocks in the sector, if such leading issues as Microsoft and Intel continue to do well.
But, he added, "there have been enough disappointments to keep that from happening for some time." 

David Readerman, software analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton, said many technology stocks are currently trading off of 1990 earnings expectations, which could make them vulnerable to further disappointments. 

With many offices closed for the Columbus Day holiday, trading action overall was light.
Only 84.3 million shares changed hands on Nasdaq.
It was the OTC market's lightest volume since July 3 -- the year's slowest session so far -- when only 53.2 million shares traded.
Nasdaq's volume almost matched that of the Big Board, where turnover totaled 86.8 million shares. 

First Executive, which has attracted the interest of two investment partnerships recently, slipped 5/8 to 12 3/8.
Last week, Airlie Group, a Fort Worth, Texas, partnership said it bought a 6.7% stake in the Los Angeles insurer.
Another group, Rosewood Partners, has sought federal regulatory clearance to buy as much as 49.9% stake in First Executive.
Rosewood already owns more than 9% of First Executive. 

Jaguar's American depositary receipts slid 1 to 10 7/8 on volume of 3.4 million after the British car maker said that General Motors is considering taking a minority interest in the company.
The stake would be part of a cooperative operating pact covering certain manufacturing, marketing and other ventures the two concerns are mulling, Jaguar said. 

Disclosure of the talks with General Motors comes on the heels of Jaguar's rejection of overtures by Ford Motor, which has said it is interested in building a 15% stake in Jaguar.
The British company has interpreted Ford's interest as a prelude to a hostile takeover bid.
Last week, Ford received U.S. regulatory approval to proceed with its previously announced purchase. 

Jaguar has been particularly vehement about its desire to avoid a Ford takeover.
And it said last month that it would take action to fight a hostile bid for the company. 

Shares of 3Com added 1/2 to 15 1/8 on about 946,000 shares.
Last Friday, the computer networking company's stock surged 12% after 3Com announced that Digital Communications Associates, whose shares are traded on the New York Stock Exchange, plans to purchase more than $15 million, but less than 15% of 3Com's common. 

BMA gained 1 1/4 to 35 1/2 as 41,500 shares were traded.
Some analysts speculate that the holding company for insurance, laboratory testing, realty and broadcasting concerns might go private.
The company's chief financial officer said BMA continues to look at strategic alternatives, but wouldn't provide specifics.
Average daily volume in the stock totals about 17,000 shares. 

Daisy Systems, which last week said it expects to report an operating loss for its fourth quarter, ended Sept. 30, and said it is having significant liquidity problems, rose 5/8 to 1 3/4 on 1.1 million shares.
The maker of computer-aided engineering systems said its Daisy-Cadnetix unit sold $3.5 million of computer-aided engineering and design hardware and software to divisions of Rockwell International. 

Cognex jumped 1 1/2 to 15 1/4 on 144,200 shares, more than twice its average daily volume.
A spokeswoman told Dow Jones Professional Investor Report that a presentation by managers at an investment conference last week may have generated interest in the stock. 

