.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

THE ESTABLISHMENT, THOSE UNDEFINED POWERS credited with running the world of finance, came under assault during the go-go Sixties, when youth came to the fore.
No foray matched 29-year-old Saul Steinberg's raid on the 150-year-old, $9 billion Chemical Bank. 

Steinberg in 1969 headed a $400 million company.
At Pennsylvania's Wharton School, he had conceived the idea of buying and leasing IBM computers.
His Leasco Data Processing started a new industry.
He acquired an old-line Philadelphia insurance company that gave him access to $40 million in new capital.
He decided his next acquisition should be a major bank.
The result was the worst two weeks of his life. 

First came quiet acquisition: by January 1969 he held more than 1% of Chemical.
When the bank became aware of his plans for a tender offer, Chairman William Renchard, and archetypical banker, circled the wagons. 

After that, who did what to whom remains murky.
Chemical, for instance, discussed attacking the value of Leasco stock, though any such bear raid would have broken all the securities laws.
That very day Leasco began falling.
Bills were introduced in Congress blocking any acquisition of Chemical.
In Washington, Steinberg recalled hearing Sen. John Sparkman of the Senate Banking Committee ask his secretary for "that bill the lawyer for Chemical Bank sent in." 

At a bankers' convention in New York that February, Steinberg was Topic A. Renchard said he had talked to at least 300 bankers.
Steinberg remembers outraged bankers calling him to assail his takeover idea.
By mid-February, Steinberg gave up.
John Brooks, the Wall Street chronicler, reported Steinberg's comment on the whole thing: "I always knew there was an Establishment, I just used to think I was part of it." 

He certainly is now.
Forbes magazine estimated his net worth last year at more than $400 million -- and that was after the 1987 crash had halved his stock holdings. 

