.START 

Anti-abortion forces are expected to face an extremely tough fight this week as they seek state legislation to limit abortions in Florida. 

Today the state is scheduled to begin the nation's first special legislative session on abortion since the U.S. Supreme Court signaled in the summer that it will give states broader authority to regulate and restrict the procedure. 

Gov. Bob Martinez, a Republican who is stridently opposed to abortion, called in July for the four-day session, saying the high court's decision "opened the door to a new balancing of rights between unborn children and their mothers." 

But the Democratic leadership controlling both the state House and Senate says it believes it can defeat the anti-abortion measures in committee.
In addition, State Rep. Daniel Webster, an Orlando Republican who is supporting several anti-abortion measures, concedes: "It's going to be an uphill battle all the way." 

A host of restrictions are under consideration.
Some measures would bar the use of public funding and facilities for abortion.
One would require a woman to inform her spouse before an abortion.
Another would mandate that doctors advise women of the level of development and status of a fetus so they can make informed choices about abortion. 

One measure that has pro-choice activists somewhat anxious -- because it seems likely to draw the broadest support -- would require stricter health regulations at abortion clinics.
The issue received considerable attention in Florida, where state regulators recently closed several facilities for health violations.
Gov. Martinez pointed to problem clinics as justification for giving the state additional regulatory powers. 

The Florida session is of particular interest because of a landmark Florida Supreme Court ruling last week that struck down a law restricting abortions.
The ruling, which involved parental consent, said that privacy provisions of Florida's constitution protect a woman's right to an abortion, making Florida a stronghold for pro-choice activists. 

The decision will protect Florida women even if the U.S. Supreme Court overturns Roe vs.
Wade, which entitles women to abortion because of an implicit privacy protection in the U.S. Constitution. 

Abortion-rights activists say many of the measures under consideration in the special session wouldn't survive a court test in light of the Florida Supreme Court's ruling.
One bill, for instance, would require testing for viability of the fetus after five months and prohibit abortions of those considered viable.
That restriction conflicts directly with the state Supreme Court's ruling, which said viability isn't at issue until the third trimester of pregnancy. 

SAN FRANCISCO'S largest law firm revamps management. 

Pillsbury, Madison & Sutro is creating a more democratic management structure and naming a new chairman.
The 454-lawyer firm has suffered financial reverses recently despite its size and longstanding relationships with many large West Coast corporations. 

The management changes include vesting policy making in a five-person executive committee selected by all partners.
The committee will pick a new chairman.
George Sears, chairman since 1984, will relinquish the title Jan. 1, the firm said.
Mr. Sears couldn't be reached for comment. 

"It is a rather dramatic change," said a former Pillsbury Madison lawyer. "Pillsbury has been run basically as an autocracy for many years.
This is the first time in the history of the firm that there has been any sense of democracy." 

Pillsbury Madison, founded in 1874, is one of the oldest law firms in the West. 

The law firm's profitability was pinched earlier this year by a new computer system and other factors.
The support staff was trimmed and senior partners' compensation was suspended for a month. 

Fred Moon, executive director, said the restructuring didn't reflect Pillsbury Madison's financial problems as much as the partners' desire to develop an egalitarian management approach. 

BATTLE BREWS over order hampering lawyers who solicit clients by mail. 

The order is directed at Houston criminal-defense lawyers who routinely purchase the addresses of defendants from the county and then send letters offering legal representation at discount prices.
Since the U.S. Supreme Court ruled last year that lawyers may solicit business by mail, direct-mail campaigns have proliferated in Houston and other cities. 

But last month, state District Judge Charles Hearn ordered the Harris County, Texas, district clerk to stop disclosing information about criminal defendants until they hired a lawyer or had one appointed to represent them.
The order, which applies to felony cases, came after a defendant complained he was misled by promises made in a mail solicitation. 

Prior to the judge's order, lawyers could get addresses and phone numbers of recently arrested defendants by buying, for $1, a computerized list compiled and sold by the Harris County district clerk's office.
The revenue went to Harris County and covered the cost of the service. 

The conflict arose because Judge Hearn's order denies lawyers access not only to the computerized list but to defendants' case files.
Assistant County Attorney Frank Sanders asked a state appeals court to overturn the order, arguing that it violates the Texas Open Records Act.
The state attorney general's office, representing Judge Hearn, says judiciary records are exempt from the act and that the clerk is part of the judiciary. 

Some criminal-defense lawyers are contemplating legal action.
David R. McCormack, who says he has built his practice through mail solicitation, contends the judge's action burdens his First Amendment right to advertise. 

"If the objective of this is to take action against lawyers the judge feels are behaving improperly, the remedy is to bring them before the state bar, not issue blanket orders," he says. 

