.START 

As optimists, we continue to hope that someday a responsible environmental lobby might emerge in this country.
Watching the way the oil-spill cleanup bill is making its way through the U.S. Congress, we aren't holding our breath. 

The cleanup bill, or Oil Pollution Act, is Congress's response to the Exxon-Valdez oil spill earlier this year.
As so often happens on Capitol Hill, an idea reasonable enough in principle is being forged in practice into a hammer to beat up greedy, irresponsible, fill-in-your-favorite-epithet corporate America. 

The bill would impose a new tax of about five cents a barrel of oil to create a federal fund that can be tapped to clean up future spills.
Giant Exxon has already spent more than $1 billion trying to clean up the Valdez spill and its liabilities eventually could be billions more.
Such costs would immediately put most oil transporters out of business, so the bill sensibly imposes some limits on an oil carrier's liability.
The cleanup fund would pay for costs above those limits, thus spreading the risks associated with spills and creating what amounts to a kind of public insurance. 

Somehow this isn't punitive enough for the environmental lobby.
Backed by Representatives George Miller and Gerry Studds, two of the most anti-business Members of Congress, the lobby wants to remove the liability limits.
Under a version already approved by the Senate, such limits would be removed only in the case of "gross negligence." But Messrs.
Miller and Studds want to remove it for even simple negligence, which means for any mistake at all.
Since every accident results from some mistake, virtually every tanker that sails would be gambling with instant bankruptcy. 

Another purpose of the federal cleanup fund is to create a single liability standard that limits lawsuits and allows prompt compensation. (Exxon already faces 154 individual lawsuits, including nearly 60 class actions, and by one estimate the number could reach 1,500 by year end.) But both the Senate bill and Studds-Miller would let the states create their own cleanup funds, too.
We're as sensitive as anyone to states' rights, but since the federal fund would pay all reasonable claims, letting states duplicate the federal effort is little more than a honey pot for the plaintiffs' bar. 

The oil industry plans to spend $250 million on a new Petroleum Industry Response Organization to combat major spills, but Congress still wants to require each carrier to have an elaborate "contingency plan." A company that fails to meet the requirements in detail would be committing a crime. 

All of this is especially perverse because it would defeat the very purpose it purports to serve -- fewer oil spills and faster cleanup.
Edwin Roland, president of Amoco Transport Co., said last month that oil companies simply may abandon the oil-transport business.
Why take the abuse?
He called the Miller-Studds liability amendment "a disaster for the tank, barge and marine supply business and it will cause a major shakeup.
Insurance will become intolerably expensive and responsible owners will head for the hills." Instead, the oil carriers will be fly-by-nighters, or one-ship operators registered in places like Vanuatu.
In the event of a spill they'll be as traceable as Robert Vesco. 

It's enough to make us wonder whether Washington's environmentalists really care about the environment.
Or is their real goal simply to punish corporations and tap their "deep pockets"? 

