.START 

The recent spate of lousy earnings reports from U.S. corporations may signal turbulence ahead for the economy. 

After thriving for two years, corporate profits are wilting.
In the first two quarters of 1989, after-tax profits from current production actually declined, the government says.
Other, less sweeping measures -- such as the earnings per share of the Standard & Poor's 500, which include asset sales and write-offs -- show profits continuing to grow, but at a far slower pace than last year's growth. 

The third-quarter statements beginning to roll in suggest that no rebound from the slide is imminent.
Already, huge companies such as International Business Machines Corp. and Kellogg Co. have announced that earnings for the June-to-September period will be disappointing.
The extent of the weakness comes as a surprise to some analysts who have been heartened by the economy's continued steady growth in the face of the Federal Reserve's tight clamp on credit. 

But American businesses find themselves in a profit squeeze attributable to a variety of factors.
Although the economy continues to grow, most analysts believe growth has clearly slowed from last year, curbing demand for goods and services.
At the same time, labor markets remain tight in many areas of the country, nudging up wage and benefit costs. 

Meanwhile, the Fed's efforts to wring inflationary pressures from the economy by keeping interest rates high has increased the burden of most corporate interest payments.
The steep rise in the value of the dollar this year has cut into profits abroad because earnings in foreign currencies are worth less against a strong dollar.
A spike in energy costs after a run-up in oil prices early this year also swelled the overhead costs of many businesses. 

The result: corporate cash flow -- defined as net income before depreciation -- is thought to be at its lowest level in three years. 

In addition to being bad news for stockholders, lackluster corporate profits bode poorly for the economy, since earnings and cash flow influence a business's borrowing, buying and hiring plans. 

"The corporate profit slide will threaten the economy with recession by the first half of 1990," says Levy Economic Forecasts of Chappaqua, N.Y. "An increasing number of businesses are being pinched by narrowing profit margins." By mid-1990, the firm warns, prices, capital spending and employment will be cut. 

Others view such a scenario as extreme. "I don't think it's an indicator of cumulative weakness in the economy, but reflects a slower economy and some weakness in some sectors of the economy," says the Commerce Department's chief economist, Anthony Villamiel. 

"Profits are only a small percentage of GNP," adds Douglas Handler, an economist at Dun & Bradstreet Corp., referring to the gross national product, or the market value of all the goods and services the nation produces.
Weakness in corporate profits, he maintains, "would result in loss of dividend income, a small loss of investment.
But it wouldn't be important in and of itself." 

But the recent softness in earnings can't be dismissed, he adds, "given that stock prices are predicated on profits and so are economic decisions." 

Indeed, although the stock market is at record highs, the prices of some companies reporting weak earnings lately have taken a pounding.
And companies with weak earnings already are taking action.
Unisys Corp., the computer concern whose second-quarter earnings tumbled 67%, is laying off thousands of workers.
After its second-quarter profit fell 85%, Eastman Kodak Co., the photographic, pharmaceutical and chemical giant, said it would cut its work force by 4,500 and sell or consolidate about 20 ailing businesses. 

In a more typical case, consider closely held Xyvision Inc. of Wakefield, Mass., which makes computer publishing systems for magazines, books, journals, catalogues and other documents.
The market has been soft this year for Xyvision and its competitors, company officials say.
At the same time, the company has been introducing new products.
As a result, it took losses in the first two quarters of 1989. 

So two weeks ago Xyvision cut its 380-person workforce by 80.
The company aims to pare its research and development expenditures to around 12% to 14% of sales from the current 20%.
It will also "forget about" some of the markets it has been going after, such as magazine publishers.
It will scale back on training, as well as participation in trade shows and seminars. 

"What we have to do now is buckle down for the short term," says Steven Oremland, Xyvision's chief financial officer. 

Such decisions affect the long-term productivity of businesses and the overall efficiency of the economy.
Allen Sinai, chief economist at Boston Co., is worried that companies across the economy will begin scaling back their spending on new plant and equipment.
Capital spending, which has fueled the economy's growth for some time, "will grow less precisely at a time when most think it would be good to grow more to enhance productivity," he says. 

But some businesses contend that softening profits haven't influenced them at all.
Bethlehem Steel Corp. has been anticipating a slowdown in sales in the second half of this year. "Given that viewpoint, we haven't changed anything regarding our plans for major capital expenditures," says Gary Millenbruch, the company's chief financial officer.
Some $300 million in quality-improvement projects remain alive, he says. 

But Richard Berner, an economist at Salomon Brothers Inc., contends, "I think the weakness in corporate profits will have an effect on a variety of economic indicators, specifically employment and capital spending.
The great uncertainty is how soon it will have an effect." 

