.START 

Software producers are becoming alarmed about the slow acceptance of Microsoft Corp. 's most important new product -- the OS/2 operating system that is supposed to become the standard for most personal computers used in the U.S. 

The companies have invested millions of dollars in writing new programs for OS/2.
And some of them personally blame William Gates, chief executive officer of Redmond, Wash.-based Microsoft, the world's biggest maker of personal-computer software, for the product's lackluster performance to date. 

Their concern emerged at a recent personal-computer conference in San Diego when Jim Manzi, chief executive of Lotus Development Corp., assailed Mr. Gates for causing confusion by aggressively marketing a software program called Windows as an alternative to OS/2. 

Windows is used with Microsoft's older, supposedly outmoded operating system called MS-DOS and provides a look similar to that of the OS/2 system.
Windows has breathed new life into MS-DOS, rolling up significant sales among big corporate users at the expense of OS/2. 

Lotus and other big software producers have a lot to fear from Windows' success: Several have plowed millions of dollars into writing programs for OS/2, not for Windows.
They resent the fact that Mr. Gates's company comes out a winner no matter which operating system -- MS-DOS with Windows or OS/2 -- is chosen by computer users. 

"Microsoft hasn't been clear in the marketplace about which the customer should choose," says Fred Gibbons, chief executive of Software Publishing Corp.
The Mountain View, Calif., concern has spent $15 million developing OS/2 applications and plans to spend $10 million more in the next 12 months; it hasn't funded any Windows projects. 

Mr. Gates insists he hasn't pushed Windows at the expense of OS/2. "The worst thing you can say about us," he says, "is that we were over-optimistic" about how quickly OS/2 would gain adherents.
He continues to predict that Microsoft will sell one million copies of the software in 1990. "I guarantee you OS/2 will be a success," he says. 

The vast majority of personal computer users rely on programs written in MS-DOS, the operating system for International Business Machines Corp. 's original PC family.
Developed by Microsoft, MS-DOS has ushered millions of people into the computer age, but today it is increasingly seen as outmoded.
MS-DOS programs are generally difficult to learn because they require users to remember strings of numbers, and one mistaken keystroke can stymie a user for hours. 

OS/2 is designed to remedy the shortcomings of MS-DOS, employing a graphical interface popularized by Apple Computer Inc. OS/2 allows a user to point at icons, or pictures, with a pointing device known as a mouse and to select different functions from menus.
It also requires makers of different software applications to adhere to a single screen appearance so that users can more easily learn new programs.
With a powerful enough computer, OS/2 also can run programs simultaneously and easily exchange information between them. 

OS/2 program developers argue that the system ought to be marketed to users of the most powerful personal computers, based on Intel Corp. 's 386 microprocessor, and that MS-DOS with Windows is only suitable for older machines.
But things aren't working out that way.
Windows doesn't offer the multitasking capability of OS/2, but it does duplicate its easy-to-use graphical approach.
It only costs $99 for a machine based on Intel's older 80286 microprocessor and $195 for one based on the 80386.
OS/2 retails for $325 but requires costly hardware, including more internal memory and a larger hard-disk drive. 

Many customers don't agree that Windows is only for less powerful personal computers.
They say it's ideal for high-end 80386 machines.
BankAmerica Corp., for instance, is purchasing 80386 machines and outfitting them with Windows, according to Arnold Birenbaum, acting general manager of the bank's information center. 

"Windows is a way of moving forward," he says. "It certainly is much more userfriendly" than MS-DOS.
In contrast, even the 386 machines "aren't capable of exploiting the future advantages of OS/2," Mr. Birenbaum says. 

Often, users don't see a need for multitasking.
And without that need, they have trouble figuring out why they should buy OS/2 and make all the hardware investment that comes with it.
On a computer screen, MS-DOS with Windows and OS/2 "look very much alike," says Steve Morse, senior technology officer at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Corp. "You almost need a field guide to tell them apart." 

As a result, many have opted for Windows instead. "OS/2 is just Windows' younger sister," says George Miller, a personal computer specialist at BankAmerica, which owns 14,000 personal computers. "Like most younger sisters, maybe she's a little prettier.
But she hasn't grown up yet, so you're still dating Windows." 

BankAmerica has no plans to stop dating Windows any time soon.
Mr. Birenbaum thinks the bank ultimately will embrace OS/2, but not until 1991 or 1992.
Even then, 75% of the company's 14,000 personal computers "will never run OS/2," he says.
The remainder will require expensive overhauls to do so. 

Enough corporate users feel the same way that OS/2, initially the front-runner, has been overtaken by Windows in recent months. "We think this fall Windows is attaining critical mass," says Michael Keen, manager of internal PC support for Tandem Computers Inc., which owns 6,000 personal computers world-wide. "It allows us to put off the OS/2 decision for some time." 

Just how long that will be is hard to say.
When introduced by Microsoft in 1987, OS/2 was immediately hailed as the logical successor to MS-DOS.
Stewart Alsop, editor of the PC Letter, and other industry observers still say OS/2 ultimately will replace MS-DOS.
But now they say it will take years longer than first expected.
Some have even abandoned the faith, citing the growing popularity of both Windows and Unix, another operating system that has been exclusively used by engineers and scientists but is now seen as an alternative to OS/2. 

"It's crystal clear that OS/2 is not going to be a successor to MS-DOS," says Jeff Tartar, editor of Softletter, an industry newsletter. 

To date, Microsoft has sold only a few hundred thousand copies of OS/2, compared with more than 12 million copies of MS-DOS in 1989 alone.
David Bayer, an analyst at Montgomery Securities in San Francisco, estimates that this year Windows is outselling OS/2 by 7-1. 

The slow sales of OS/2 are worrying Lotus and other software makers who bet on the operating system's success.
They suggest that Microsoft privately either relishes their discomfort or doesn't care much about their predicament.
Microsoft could profit even more from Windows' success than from OS/2's, because it sells the leading spreadsheet program used on Windows.
The software makers' suspicions haven't been eased by the fact that Microsoft is demonstrating an improved but unannounced version to customers and software writers. 

Some software executives, however, have risen to defend Mr. Gates. 

Last week, Gordon Eubanks, chief executive officer of Symantec Corp., a software maker, agreed to give a speech in January on why Mr. Gates "is not the enemy." And Phillipe Kahn, whose Borland International Inc. fiercely competes with Microsoft, chided Mr. Gates's critics as "a bunch of whiners." 

Today in New York, Mr. Gates hopes to boost OS/2's prospects by unveiling the first important applications that exploit its features.
These include the popular Pagemaker computer publishing package and the Excel spreadsheet sold by Microsoft itself. 

"That should help," says Arthur Beckman, manager of information technology services at Pacific Gas & Electric Co. in San Francisco. "OS/2's future depends on the appeal of applications." 

But it seems hardly likely to break Windows' momentum.
And with customers, software developers and Microsoft still debating the relative merits of OS/2 and MS-DOS with Windows, the result "has been confusion," says Ruthann Quindlen, a vice president at Alex.
Brown & Sons Inc. "Nobody gains from that." 

