.START 

USAir Group Inc., citing effects of Hurricane Hugo and bargain-basement fares, said it expects to report third-quarter and fourth-quarter results "significantly lower" than year-earlier levels. 

The Arlington, Va., company's projections follow forecasts by industry analysts that airlines' second-half earnings will be hurt by recent slackening in passenger traffic and a softening in revenue. 

USAir released its forecast after the stock market closed.
During the day, trading in its stock was buoyed by a USA Today report that an investment group including New York-based Steinhardt Partners Limited Partnership is boosting its 8.38% stake of USAir's common shares outstanding to an amount that wasn't disclosed.
The report said Michael Steinhardt, a New York investor, hired Wertheim Schroder & Co. to explore ways of increasing USAir's stock price.
USAir closed at $52.25 a share, up $3.625, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
It was the most active issue. 

Mr. Steinhardt wasn't available for comment and officials of Wertheim Schroder couldn't be reached for comment.
USAir wouldn't comment on the USA Today story. 

The latest projections for second-half earnings are expected to damp sizable gains from the first half when net income rose 58% to $116.2 million, or $2.65 a share, from $73.7 million, or $1.70 a share. 

USAir said it is expecting lower results partly because Hurricane Hugo disrupted its operations for three days last month out of its Charlotte, N.C., hub of operations and other Southeast airports.
Also, it blamed increased labor costs and non-recurring operating costs related to its August merger with Piedmont Airlines. 

What's more, the airline has been matching a wave of costly fare promotions designed to generate traffic.
For example, USAir yesterday lowered the price on many roundtrip tickets to $158 and $198 to match an industrywide move.
USAir said its third-quarter yield -- or revenue earned for each mile its passengers fly -- softened because of a promotion that let children fly free this summer. 

Also, USAir said that during the third quarter it continued to have losses because of heavy discounting in California and an increase in the number of awards it issued through its frequent-flier program. 

In the 1988 third quarter, USAir reported net of $68.5 million, or $1.58 a share, on revenue of $1.48 billion.
In the year-ago fourth quarter, the company had net of $22.8 million, or 53 cents a share, on revenue of $1.48 billion. 

A USAir spokeswoman wouldn't say whether the company plans to restate its year-ago figures to reflect its merger with Piedmont. 

