.START 

Compaq Computer Corp. is expected to unveil its much-awaited notebook-size computers next Monday, and Wall Street seems to be reacting already. 

Rumors about the new product introductions have been pushing Compaq stock prices sharply higher.
Yesterday, its common shares rose $6.25 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, closing at $104.875, a record for the stock.
It marked the fourth consecutive day of large increases in the company's stock price. 

Speculation about Houston-based Compaq's entry into the market for notebook-size computers has been growing for weeks.
It was most recently sparked by the company's invitation to the news media, securities analysts and computer industry consultants for a product unveiling in New York City on Oct. 16.
The lightweight, battery-driven portables will strengthen the computer-maker's market presence in a niche that had been led by NEC Corp., Zenith Electronics Corp. and Toshiba Corp. 

Laptop computers, generally defined as portables weighing less than 15 pounds, are the most rapidly growing segment of the personal computer industry, with annual world-wide sales of more than $1 billion.
This year's sales will be 50% higher than in 1988, analysts estimate, while 1988 sales doubled those of 1987. 

Notebooks, the latest technical frontier, generally weigh six to seven pounds.
Thus far, the fledgling market has been dominated by Zenith's MiniSport, retailing for about $2,000. 

The two new Compaq computers weigh about six pounds each and feature hard disk drives; they also use standard 3 1/2-inch floppy disks.
One of the new models will be driven by an Intel 286 microprocessor.
Prices for Compaq's new machines have not been released, but industry analyst Jim Poyner, of Woodruff & Co. in Dallas, estimates the 286 model "would have to be priced for $3,500 or less if they really want to sell a lot of them." 

Mr. Poyner, who says Compaq was late getting into the laptop game, adds that the company has been "picking up a lot of steam" and that the notebooks will further accelerate the company's momentum in the fast-growing market. 

But Mr. Poyner is concerned about declining pretax margins as the company spends more on marketing. "At best, a new portable product adds just a fraction to Compaq's revenues, while the real issue is the strength of the personal computer market in general," he says.
The analyst said he expects a slowing in the personal computer market next year. 

Phillip E. Nalbone contributed to this article. 

