.START 

Wang Laboratories Inc. expects to return to profitability by the fourth quarter of fiscal 1990 ending June 30, said Richard W. Miller.
He took over as president and chief operating officer of the troubled computer maker 48 days ago. 

Nevertheless, Mr. Miller said Wang is likely to post a loss for all of fiscal 1990.
For fiscal 1989, the company reported a net loss of $424.3 million, or $2.59 a share, on revenue of $2.87 billion. 

Mr. Miller, 48 years old, developed his turnaround skills in the consumer electronics arms of RCA Corp. and General Electric Co., and has moved quickly to revive Wang.
Besides getting a handle on the financial outlook, he has started to rebuild employee commitment and solidify customer loyalty. 

He said in an interview that Wang will report a net loss for the first quarter ended Sept. 30 in the range of $30 million to $70 million compared with restated net income of $13.1 million, or eight cents a share, the year earlier. 

Results were hurt by a 13% revenue decline to an indicated $595 million from $684 million the year earlier, he said.
However, most of the deterioration occurred in the first two months, and revenue "appears to have stabilized" in September, he added. 

Wang's first-quarter loss is narrower than the record $374.7 million, or $2.29 a share, net loss for the fourth quarter of fiscal 1988, which led to the forced resignation of Mr. Miller's predecessor, Frederick A. Wang, son of Wang's founder.
Mr. Miller said he expects Wang will report a still narrower loss for the current quarter.
He declined to make specific forecasts. 

Mr. Miller's projections, which came in his first extended interview since taking office, are in line with those of most financial analysts who follow the company. 

Already, Mr. Miller has negotiated $175 million in new financing, spotlighted as much as $800 million in salable assets and has talked with 200 of Wang's customers.
He has also, according to employees, shaken Wang's hidebound hierarchical culture.
He eliminated the 500 reserved parking spaces for executives and managers; closed the executive dining room and ordered aides to eat with employees in the company cafeteria.
Mr. Miller has ordered the sale of the company jet.
He canceled the personal water cooler, a perk for top executives, and changed the official name of the 13th-floor suite where top officials have their offices to "executive offices" from "the Penthouse." 

And some of Mr. Miller's remarks are on their way to becoming Wang legends.
When a few officials straggled into one of his first meetings, he told them that if they couldn't make meetings on schedule, "they didn't have to come next time." When one manager questioned how he would make reality of Wang's frequent promises to improve customer service, he told her: "With a baseball bat." 

Mr. Miller recalls that when he first arrived at a hotel in Lowell, he overheard someone at a nearby breakfast table say, in reference to Mr. Miller's post: "I wouldn't take that job for anything in the world." However, he said some factors at Wang have been better than he expected, and that many of its problems are solvable by improved management. 

For example, he said "I didn't expect to find" the number of non-strategic assets and subsidiaries that can be sold.
He said he expects to have sold more than $400 million of assets within six months.
Proceeds will be used to reduce debt, which will "take the bank pressure away and reduce interest payments." 

Mr. Miller said that in surveying customers, he found "high regard for technology and products and mixed marks on service." He added: "I viewed that as good news because I can fix that." 

He also said that improved management will allow Wang to reduce its bloated work force.
One ex-employee jokes that at Wang "when the ship springs a leak, instead of fixing it, they hire more people with mops." Mr. Miller vows to stop that. 

During the last half of fiscal 1989, the company cut its work force 9.7% to 28,000 from 31,000.
Since then, it has cut another 10.7% to 25,000.
Mr. Miller said that by his calculation only about 10,000 of Wang's employees are directly involved in research and development, manufacturing, selling or servicing products.
The remainder are "helping them -- checkers checking checkers," he said.
He declined to predict the scope of further layoffs. 

Yesterday, in American Stock Exchange composite trading, Wang Class B common closed at $5, up 25 cents, on volume of 421,600 shares. 

Despite Wang's continuing losses, Mr. Miller said that he remains optimistic about the company's ability to revive. "I've never seen a $3 billion business that can't be made profitable," he said. 

He added that existing customers, after hesitating about placing orders during July and August as the company's problems unfolded, are starting to place orders again.
Referring to the sales downturn during July and August, he said:"The customers didn't leave us {for another supplier}.
They simply delayed" purchases. 

