.START 

Cash-strapped Healthcare International Inc. estimated that it had losses of more than $162 million in the year ended June 30 but said it won't be able to report final figures until late October or early November. 

The health-care concern also said it defaulted on $20.6 million of payments due Sept. 30 and Oct. 1 to secured lenders and subordinated debt holders, including HealthVest, its real estate investment trust affiliate.
It said it is continuing discussions with lenders and with HealthVest, which owns or holds mortgages on a majority of the facilities operated by Healthcare. 

Healthcare's problems continued to ripple down to HealthVest, which said separately that it issued nonpayment notices to Healthcare and may pursue available remedies, including termination of the leases.
But that wouldn't happen until a notice of default is issued.
HealthVest said it is negotiating a standstill agreement with Healthcare that would establish a payment schedule for the past-due rent and mortgage payments. 

HealthVest also said it received a default notice from Chemical Bank, the new agent under its credit agreement with several domestic banks.
The REIT had said that several contractors terminated construction on facilities that would have been operated by Healthcare because progress payments were past due. 

Healthcare said its financial difficulties and restructuring activities prevented it from filing its year-end financial report with the Securities and Exchange Commission by the end of last month, as required.
It plans to ask for an extension. 

In its preliminary estimate, the company said it expected to report losses from operations of about $12 million.
But it also had one-time losses of more than $150 million, including $120 million from the writedown of assets and reserves for loss on the disposal of assets. 

For fiscal 1988, net income was $1.1 million, or seven cents a share, after a charge of $752,000.
Revenue was $85.5 million. 

In American Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Healthcare shares closed down 25 cents, at 87.5 cents.
HealthVest shares closed down 75 cents, at $3.875. 

