.START 

A pharmaceutical joint venture of Johnson & Johnson and Merck & Co. agreed in principle to acquire the U.S. over-the-counter drug business of ICI Americas Inc. for more than $450 million. 

The acquisition is subject to a definitive agreement and includes cash and the assumption of certain mutual manufacturing arrangements.
In addition, Merck will turn over sole U.S. rights to market its prescription antidepressant, Elavil, to ICI. 

The acquisition also includes the ICI Americas' Pasadena, Calif., production facility, which employs about 350 people. 

ICI Americas, a subsidiary of Imperial Chemical Industries PLC of London, reported revenue last year of $125 million for its U.S. over-the-counter products.
The bulk of its non-prescription drug sales is dominated by its Mylanta antacid, which generated $90 million in revenue last year and Johnson & Johnson says it ranks among the top 25 over-the-counter drugs in the U.S. 

The acquisition is the first major step for Johnson & Johnson-Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals Co., a joint-venture company formed in March by Johnson & Johnson and Merck, two of the nation's biggest health-care companies.
The two companies, located in central New Jersey, joined forces to develop and market new over-the-counter medicines in the U.S.
The venture's primary objective is to market non-prescription medicines, such as Merck's anti-ulcer drug, Pepcid, currently being sold or developed as prescription drugs. 

A Merck spokesman said the joint-venture firm will continue to seek new products and licenses outside the two companies. 

Analysts generally agreed the acquisition is a savvy move for Merck and Johnson & Johnson.
Pepcid, they said, probably won't be approved for non-prescription sales for three or four years and the venture, meanwhile, wouldn't have any presence in the over-the-counter market. "If you add a new product to an existing business, it makes it easier to market that product," says Robert Uhl, an analyst with Salomon Brothers Inc. 

In addition, they viewed the Elavil product-swap as a wise move and creative alternative to straight cash deals.
Sales of Elavil, which were reported at $25 million last year, have been slipping about 15% to 20% a year, according to some analysts, and the drug's patent has expired, making it susceptible to competition from generic drug makers. 

For ICI, the move marks a strategic decision to focus on its U.S. prescription drug business and to abandon the non-prescription, or over-the-counter, sector.
The company said it is planning to begin marketing an intravenous anesthetic, Diprivan, in the U.S. next month, and hopes to get Federal Drug Administration clearance to start marketing a prostate cancer drug, Zoladex, by the end of the year. 

Industry sources estimate that ICI, an international chemicals and pharmaceuticals giant, which puts its annual earnings in the $1 billion to $2 billion range, last year earned less than $20 million from its U.S. non-prescription drugs. 

Said Charles Lambert, a securities analyst at Smith New Court PLC in London: "This is a good deal for ICI, but it won't make a lot of difference in the earnings numbers.
ICI was small in over-the-counter drugs in the States.
It decided to cash in its chips at a surprisingly good price." 

In London, John Edgar, an ICI spokesman, declined to estimate how much cash the company would get.
He said the $450 million figure is "a ballpark indicator" of the combined value placed on the Elavil rights and the asset sales to Johnson & Johnson and Merck. 

"Our main business is plainly in the ethical {prescription} area -- cardiovascular and cancer drugs," he said. "That's where we put research money and that's where our marketing and expertise is concentrated." 

Richard E. Rustin in London contributed to this article. 

