.START 

Gold bugs never die. 

The allure of the yellow metal still stirs a fire within these investment advisers.
But, whereas a decade ago they pursued gold with unbridled passion, they now see it more with ambivalence. 

Their North Star is gold stocks, for the most part, rather than gold bullion.
Some see the gold-mining shares, which have risen 26% since May while the price of gold stayed flat, as an indicator of what will happen to gold itself in the 1990s. "Gold stocks often lead gold higher," said Pamela Aden. 

Ms. Aden and her sister, Mary Anne, once predicted gold could zoom to $3,750 an ounce.
It climbed only as high as $875 on New York's Commodity Exchange on Jan. 21, 1980.
The Aden sisters are more circumspect in their forecasts these days, but like their fellow gold bugs, they see better days ahead.
In the 1990s, said James Blanchard and James Dines, gold could rise to $850 to $1,000 an ounce. 

It's far from there now.
Gold is having trouble trading much above $360 an ounce and acts like an immovable object.
There is very little investor demand for gold bullion.
Prices tend to rise only a little on bullish developments, and they fall more on bearish ones.
It's quite a contrast to the heady days of 1980, when prices fluctuated with breathtaking frequency and the gold bugs were making names for themselves. 

Here's how the gold bugs are thinking these days: 

Pamela and Mary Anne Aden 

In the heady days of the early 1980s, the potential of how high the gold price could go was limited only by the imagination.
Many gold traders fantasized about undreamed heights for gold.
So did a couple of sisters born and raised in the U.S., the Adens, who live and work in San Jose, Costa Rica, and publish "Aden Analysis" in Bethel, Conn. 

The difference was that they had the courage to put their prediction on paper.
That earned them undying notoriety when the price of gold peaked far short of their projection. 

"We predicted the rise to $850 an ounce in January of 1980 and then said it would drop to the low $300s over the next two years, which it did," said Pamela, in a telephone interview from San Jose. "At the time we said it would drop sharply, we were regarded as crazy by other gold bugs," she said. 

And, "We further startled people by saying that gold would subsequently recover and could go as high as $3,750 an ounce in a few years if the then-rampant inflation and soaring interest rates continued at the same pace," she said.
But the price rebounded only as high as $515 an ounce in 1983. 

More recently, "We've been bearish on gold for the past two years, and we've told our clients to get out of precious metals," said Mary Anne. "But now a more bullish scenario for gold is developing, although it hasn't as yet been confirmed." 

One factor is that the dollar may be topping out, Pamela said, and another is the recent strength in gold stocks. 

If the spot price of gold bullion rises above $387 an ounce, Mary Anne said, "prepare to buy it.
That's the first solid bullish sign for gold in almost two years.
If the price goes above $394, it's the final confirmation that a new bull market in gold has begun." 

James U. Blanchard 

Mr. Blanchard admittedly was one of the "$1,000 guys." Having guessed wrong on how high the price of gold would go, he also misjudged how far down the price would drop after reaching its peak. 

"I thought the price would drop back to $450 or maybe $500," he said, chuckling at the thought. "I bought as the price declined, but then I stopped buying at around $450 and got out of the market." 

Now Mr. Blanchard believes that most of the things that have been negatively affecting gold in recent years "are behind us." Among these, he said, are the heavy investment in mining triggered by high gold prices and a much slower rate of inflation than the 15% level of the early 1980s. 

"The government's trend now is to protect against recession, rather than inflation, and to have inflation cut back the deficit slowly but surely," Mr. Blanchard said. "The belief now is that we can live with a 3% annual rise in inflation." 

Mr. Blanchard thinks that gold could rise to $850 an ounce or better at some point in the 1990s.
The primary factor will be a rise in inflation rates greatly above today's levels, caused by the government's attempts to manage the national debt. 

According to Mr. Blanchard, the government will churn out more money and pay back those who bought government obligations with this cheaper currency.
That inflation will make gold more attractive, he said.
But he cautioned gold bugs to diversify their investments. "If I were investing $100,000, I would put a third each in gold bullion and in securities, including gold stocks, and a third in numismatic gold bullion coins, such as the American Double Eagle, which is selling at a historically low price of only 40% above its gold value," he said. 

James Dines 

Mr. Dines, editor of "The Dines Letter," of Belvedere, Calif., was one of the original gold bugs, if not the original one.
He was bullish on gold, by his own account, when it was only $35 an ounce, and he continued to be faithful to gold as it rose to historic highs in 1980. 

Mr. Dines was relatively conservative then, when he thought gold would rise only as high as $400 an ounce, but he's far more bullish now and thinks it could rise to a record level. 

After gold topped out in 1980, "I became deflationist because the oil, mining and Rust Belt industries were under pressure," he said. "But, starting in 1987, I sensed another inflation coming and began looking at gold-mining shares." 

He observes that gold bullion prices are still falling while gold-mining stocks are moving up. "One of them is lying, and I think it's bullion," he said. 

A bull trend is beginning not only for gold shares but in gold bullion as well, he said, adding, "This is the start of a tremendous bull market for gold during which the price can go over $1,000 an ounce in the next few years." 

Howard Ruff 

Sometimes a gold bug becomes disenchanted with gold in one form but still retains his affection for it in another. 

"I'm still bearish on gold," said Mr. Ruff, publisher and editor of "The Ruff Times" advisory letter in Pleasanton, Calif. "It's funny.
I'm thought of as a gold bug, yet I've been bearish on the metal since October 1987, and I haven't changed my position," Mr. Ruff said. 

In the short term, however, "maybe with a 55-45 probability, there's a chance we could see a counter-trend rally in gold, but the way to play it is in gold stocks, not in bullion," according to Mr. Ruff. 

Mining companies are performing well even though the price of gold is flat, he said. "Gold mines are expanding production, increasing sales and improving profits.
They're producing gold at about $180 an ounce in the U.S. and selling it at between $360 and $370." Mr. Ruff said. "As they open new mines and acquire others, their profits are going to continue to rise." 

"The rally in gold stocks is more logical than for strength to develop in gold bullion," he said. 

Richard C. Young 

Mr. Young doesn't see himself as a real gold bug.
He was a major trader, although not a spectacular one, in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
He still likes to call himself conservative. 

"I called the 1980 peak in gold, something that has been well-documented," he said.
Mr. Young is president of Young Research & Publishing Inc. in Newport, R.I. 

He thinks there are more attractive investments than gold bullion at the moment: gold-mining stocks, zero-coupon bonds, natural gas, and -- believe it or not -- baseball cards. 

"The best investment this year and in 1990 is zero-coupon bonds, which give you a specific return on a specific date, in contrast to gold, which can do anything during that time," he said. 

Zero-coupon bonds pay no interest but are issued at a deep discount.
Investors' gains come from the difference between the discounted purchase price and the face value received at maturity. 

Natural gas companies are the best inflation-hedge investments of the 1990s, according to Mr. Young, particularly because they hold an environmental edge.
Gas is cleaner than oil and coal and will attract greater use, he said. 

As for baseball cards, Mr. Young said, "Every good set of new cards -- not some, but every set -- will go up in price in the future.
They are the ultimate nostalgia investment." He cites 50,000 collectors who attend national card conventions and one 1952 card set that cost $20 back then and now commands $35,000. 

"Buy 'em]" he said. 

Ian McAvity 

Mr. McAvity said he has been a gold enthusiast since 1968, when the devaluation of the pound ended the Bretton Woods currency system.
In 1980, he stopped buying gold when it reached $600 an ounce because "at that point there was no telling how high it would go but it was clearly in a terminal stage," he said.
Since then, he said he has been bearish only during the downturn to 1982. 

Mr. McAvity, the Toronto-based publisher and editor of the "Deliberations" newsletter and president of MVP Capital Corp., a mining finance concern with interests in 40 gold mining and exploration firms, said his attachment to gold is strong because "gold is the only currency that has a 3,000-year history.
Other currencies have been around 200 years or less." 

Noting the sharp run-up in gold during the 1970s, he said, "I see the potential of the same thing happening again in the 1990s." 

How high gold will go depends on how low the dollar will drop, according to Mr. McAvity.
Of all those contacted, he was the only gold bug to tie gold's current plight directly to the action of the dollar. 

"The willingness of West Germany to hike interest rates by 100 basis points," which its central bank did last week, "indicates to me that a real commitment has been made to depress the dollar, far more than any intervention measures.
I think the efforts will succeed, and the only thing that remains to be determined is how much the dollar will drop," he said. 

