.START 

In the midst of a takeover battle for its parent, Farmers Group Inc. reorganized its management, naming company veteran William H. Braddock, 54 years old, to a new post that could leave him the eventual heir to the chairman and chief executive, Leo E. Denlea Jr. 

Any change of power at the helm of Farmers is a ways off, however.
Mr. Denlea, who's 57, noted in an interview yesterday that he isn't due to retire for another "eight or nine years." 

The shuffle comes as B.A.T Industries PLC, the London-based tobacco, retailing, financial services and paper giant that acquired Farmers last year, is battling a hostile takeover attempt by Sir James Goldsmith and his Hoylake Investments Ltd. Farmers has been a key player in the takeover battle because any change in control of the insurer needs the approval of regulators in the nine states where it has operations. 

Despite the venom spewed between Farmers and B.A.T during their protracted takeover battle last year, Mr. Denlea indicated that he and his new parent are getting along just fine these days.
B.A.T is "all in favor, and has been most helpful in encouraging" the management changes at Farmers, he said, and has given him the freedom since the takeover to "run the company as I have outlined to them." 

At a news conference last week to announce a corporate-wide restructuring to thwart Sir James's #13.35 billion ($21.14 billion) takeover offer, B.A.T said it has been encouraging its myriad operating units to develop their management succession plans.
But Mr. Denlea maintains that the Farmers plan has been in the works for several years, and was timed to coincide with the retirement of Robert R. McClintick, senior vice president of property-casualty operations, who turns 65 next month and leaves the company Nov. 1. "One of the charges I was given when I was elected chairman in 1986 was to do a management succession program," Mr. Denlea said. 

The new structure at Farmers will consolidate responsibility for the company's core property-casualty insurance operations under Mr. Braddock, who will serve in the newly created post of executive vice president.
Mr. Braddock has worked at Farmers since 1957, and was most recently vice president, marketing.
Mr. Denlea will nominate Mr. Braddock to the Farmers board at the November meeting of directors. 

Mr. Denlea will now focus his attention on the company's life insurance operations, which have had flat performance that he calls "disappointing"; on human resources; and on information systems.
Although Mr. Denlea describes property-casualty as "the guts of Farmers," and says that his eventual successor will "most likely" come from the top post of that operation, he maintains that the shift in his responsibilities doesn't indicate a diminution of his authority. "I'm choosing to oversee certain functions that are newer to our business where I can make a better contribution," he said. 

Information systems in particular will take on new importance, as Farmers implements a new computerized business processing system over the next five years that will allow, among other things, insurance policies to be issued directly from an agent's office. "Service is our business . . . and to render good service you have to have good information- and data-processing," Mr. Denlea said.
He added that the new plan will focus on aggressive marketing and expansion into new markets. 

As part of the emphasis on information technology, H.J. Browning, 56, vice president, field operations/Midwest zone, was named to the new post of senior vice president and chief information officer. 

Other executive changes related to the management restructuring include the appointment of four new regional managers and the addition of various midlevel executives at Farmers's home office. 

