.START 

An attempted coup led by junior Panamanian military officers against Gen. Manuel Noriega fizzled amid signs that the dictator continues to retain the loyalty of most of his nation's armed forces. 

Following an outburst of fighting at Gen. Noriega's headquarters in Panama City early yesterday, a communique read over Panama's Radio Exitosa and signed by three junior officers declared that Gen. Noriega had been toppled and that the entire senior command of the Panamanian Defense Forces had been forced into retirement.
But after a day of conflicting reports, including one that Gen. Noriega had been captured, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said, "It does appear at least that his {Gen.
Noriega's} forces are back in control." 

Gen. Noriega appeared on Panamanian television last night in military uniform to condemn the coup attempt and say there would be an investigation, Reuter reported. 

The U.S. has been trying to drive a wedge between Gen. Noriega and the Panamanian military since mid-1987.
Mr. Fitzwater said yesterday's coup attempt, the second against Gen. Noriega within two years, showed that a "strong faction" of the military felt the strongman should be removed.
The White House spokesman said the Bush administration would continue to press for Gen. Noriega's removal. 

But some Pentagon officials as well as some Panamanians said yesterday's failed coup apparently was led by relatively junior officers concerned about promotions and other internal Panamanian military issues rather than more fundamental opposition to Gen. Noriega. "The base of support for the insurrection seems to have been pretty narrow, even within the armed forces," said one Pentagon analyst. 

Even during the shooting, a high-ranking Panamanian official in Panama said, "The problem is confined to the barracks. . . . If someone came here, he wouldn't be able to tell that anything is going on." 

At the White House, U.S. officials said they had some advance warning of the coup attempt.
But President Bush told reporters, "There were rumors around that this was an American operation, and I can tell you that is not true." 

U.S. officials followed events closely throughout the day, with Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, receiving reports directly from Gen. Maxwell Thurman, the head of U.S. forces in Panama, according to Pentagon officials. 

At one point, Bush administration officials were told through an intermediary that the insurgents had Gen. Noriega in custody and were considering how to hand him over to U.S. authorities, according to one senior administration official.
But within a few hours, pro-Noriega reinforcements stormed the headquarters building.
Mr. Noriega was released before the fighting stopped, according to one military official, after he personally engaged in a round of negotiations with some of the attempted coup's leaders. 

Gen. Noriega was indicted in February 1988 in Florida on drug charges, and President Bush has said the U.S. would like to extradite him to the U.S. to stand trial. 

One of the attempted coup's leaders, Maj. Moises Giraldi, helped thwart the earlier failed coup attempt against Gen. Noriega in March 1988.
According to a senior Panamanian officer, unarmed officers involved in the earlier plot ordered Maj. Giraldi, head of the Urraca battalion in charge of security at Defense Forces headquarters, to open an arsenal containing heavy weapons.
But he refused, arrested the officers and alerted other forces loyal to Gen. Noriega. 

Yesterday's coup attempt, according to the Panamanian official, was prompted mostly by Gen. Noriega's handling of promotions and by the top-heavy structure of the Panamanian military.
Although some of the coup leaders were from elite military units, none of the officers leading the effort were part of the military group created by Gen. Noriega to control the armed forces.
When the insurgent officers announced the coup attempt, they said "This is strictly a military movement.
There is no politics involved." 

Jose de Cordoba in Miami contributed to this article. 

