.START 

Evidence of problems at major New England banks continued to emerge, as Bank of New England Corp. disclosed that regulators in the third quarter took an enforcement action of the same type announced Monday by Bank of Boston Corp. 

Separately, banking sources said the large, highly leveraged transaction cited by Bank of Boston as a factor in its expected third-quarter loss apparently referred to the 1987 acquisition of G. Heileman Brewing Co. by Bond Corp. Holdings of Australia.
Bank of Boston was the lead lender in that $1.26 billion transaction, and sources said the bank's exposure is believed to be $100 million or more. 

Bank of New England's disclosure came in response to inquiries by The Wall Street Journal.
According to the comptroller of the currency's office in Washington, banks aren't required to disclose formal agreements with the regulatory agency if the measures contained in the agreement aren't deemed material.
A Bank of New England spokeswoman said the bank doesn't consider the agreement material.
And she emphasized that, unlike Bank of Boston, Bank of New England doesn't expect to report a third-quarter loss. 

Bank of New England declined to comment on the contents of its agreement with the comptroller's office, but the spokeswoman indicated that the action stemmed from concerns about the bank's exposure to the deteriorating New England real estate market.
She also said the pact came after the bank's July 18 announcement of disappointing second-quarter earnings. 

For the third quarter, Bank of New England expects to report profit of more than the second-quarter's $36.5 million, or 52 cents a share, but less than the 1988 third quarter's $72.3 million, or $1.04 a share, the spokeswoman said.
A formal agreement is one of several regulatory tools that the comptroller's office uses to induce or require banks to improve perceived financial or operational weaknesses.
It is stricter than a commitment letter or memorandum of understanding, but less stringent than a cease-and-desist order. 

Bank of Boston said Monday it will add $370 million to its loan-loss reserve and expects to post a third-quarter loss of about $125 million.
It cited New England real estate loans and one large, highly leveraged transaction as major contributors to its expected increase in nonperforming assets. 

The bank declined to comment on speculation that Bond Corp. 's acquisition of G. Heileman, based in Wisconsin, was the transaction in question.
And G. Heileman officials referred inquiries to the bank.
But sources close to the bank confirmed that Bank of Boston was the lead lender on the deal. 

Bond Corp. Holdings, flagship for the beleaguered brewing, media and resources empire of Australian Alan Bond, has been trying to raise cash and reduce debt by shedding units.
But it said last month that it had delayed for 12 months the planned sale of G. Heileman Brewing Co. Bond declined at the time to elaborate on that announcement, but a source familiar with the situation said Bond expected G. Heileman's performance to improve over the next year, making it easier to sell. 

Bank of Boston in the past has sought to characterize its portfolio of highly leveraged transactions as more conservative than the huge leveraged buy-outs that have stirred controversy in recent months.
The bank says it typically concentrates on "hard assets" and cash flow of the borrower in making lending decisions, rather than on the break-up value of the borrower.
A leveraged buy-out typically is the purchase of a company by a small group of investors, financed largely by debt.
Ultimately, borrowings are repaid with funds generated by the acquired company's operations or the sale of its assets. 

Charles Gifford, president of Bank of Boston, said the transaction cited in this week's announcement, however, was "closer to valuation lending," and in that sense was "more the exception than the rule," among the bank's loans.
Mr. Gifford pointed out that the loan still is technically performing -- meaning that it is less than 90 days past due -- but that the bank decided to classify it as nonperforming as a precautionary measure. 

Bank of Boston said Monday it is still negotiating details of its agreement with federal regulators, and that the agreement is expected to cover internal controls and real estate operations as well as risk review, reserves and other matters. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Bank of Boston shares closed at $24, down $2.625, on heavy volume of 1.4 million shares.
Shares of Bank of New England closed at $20, down 50 cents, on volume of 300,500 shares. 

Separately, Moody's Investors Service Inc. said it lowered its ratings on the senior debt of Bank of Boston to Baa1 from Single-A-2 and the subordinated debt to Baa2 from Single-A-3.
Moody's also lowered Bank of New England Corp. 's senior debt to Baa2 from Single-A-3 and the subordinated debt to Baa3 from Baa1.
In both cases, Moody's cited problems with real-estate loans. 

Bank of Boston, with assets of $37 billion, is New England's largest bank, and Bank of New England is next biggest, with assets of $32 billion. 

