.START 

The House approved a compromise $11.8 billion natural resources bill incorporating major timber and oil provisions and imposing new disclosure requirements to identify payments to consultants hired to pursue federal funds from the executive branch. 

The 381-41 roll call came as House and Senate negotiators reached agreement on a separate $18.4 billion Treasury and Postal Service bill providing significant increases for Internal Revenue Service enforcement and an expanded Customs Service air interdiction program to combat drug smugglers. 

Funds for IRS investigation and tax-collection activities would grow by 13% to $1.62 billion in fiscal 1990, when total appropriations for the agency would reach $5.5 billion. 

Meanwhile, the House Appropriations Committee approved $9 million for the National Endowment for Democracy, as part of a Bush administration request to support the February elections in Nicaragua. 

By a 32-9 vote, the committee brushed aside an effort to severely cut the funding to about $400,000.
Though the administration would be required to report to the committee before obligating any of the funds, the requirement is less restrictive than first proposed by Rep. David Obey (D., Wis.), chairman of the foreign operations subcommittee.
From $85,000 in compensation to an Idaho sheep farmer driven off federal lands by grizzlies to $450 million for clean coal technology, the natural resources bill funds a diverse and unique set of accounts important to Western and energy-producing states.
But more than ever, it became a vehicle this year for legislative provisions affecting not only oil and timber industries but also the arts. 

Oil drilling would be prohibited in Alaska's Bristol Bay and along much of the East and West Coasts.
The measure also seeks to impose some settlement on a bitter dispute between logging and environmental interests over the harvesting of old stands of timber in the Pacific Northwest.
Forest Service sales in the region would be reduced to 7.7 billion board feet over a two-year period.
Also, while logging companies are promised relief from current lawsuits, the measure imposes new requirements to protect the habitat of the northern spotted owl. 

Nationally, Forest Service road-construction funds would be cut to $164 million.
Elsewhere, the bill reflects the growing pressure to add spending for the acquisition of lands by the Park and Fish and Wildlife Services.
Combined acquisition funding for the two services would increase by a fifth, and more than $258 million is provided for new park and wildlife construction projects -- nearly 36% above fiscal 1989, which ended Saturday. 

The lobbying disclosure requirements are in response to the unfolding influence-peddling scandals in the Department of Housing and Urban Development and seek to expose both payments and the identity of people hired to pursue federal funds. 

The measure would apply to all recipients of grants and contracts in excess of $100,000.
Though vulnerable still to evasion, the reporting requirements promise a new base of information to track the movement of lobbyists within federal agencies. 

The initiative is a source of immense pride to its powerful sponsor, Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Byrd.
The West Virginian jealously guards any intrusion by lobbyists in his domain and prefers to cast himself as the true publicly elected advocate and unrelenting champion of federal funds for his own state. 

From Forest Service grants for hardwoods research to Park Service money for the Harpers Ferry police force, the bill is testimony to his persistence.
Mr. Byrd secured more money -- $11.7 million -- for Fish and Wildlife construction in West Virginia than the administration requested for the same accounts for the entire nation. 

Pork-barrel politics was no stranger either at the table of the House-Senate conference on the Treasury and Postal Service bill, which was agreed upon yesterday after weeks of unusual public haggling.
An estimated $16 million for various university projects, including a late bid for a $1.5 million science grant to Smith College, was protected by the House, while senators from the Southwest helped to drive up spending on U.S.-Mexico border facilities to nearly $54.7 million. 

The decision to increase Customs Service air-interdiction funds to $196.7 million is driven by the same regional influence, but runs counter to the priorities set by the administration's drug-policy coordinator, William Bennett. 

The bulk of the increase would go to finance the purchase of a P-3 surveillance aircraft and five Cessna Citation IIs equipped with infrared radar.
Kansas lawmakers, including Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole, were supportive of the funding because of the benefits to a home-state manufacturer. 

Separately, the conference approved an estimated $459.7 million in federal subsidies for the Postal Service after backing away from new restrictions seeking to curb the practice of joint mailings by nonprofit organizations and commercial enterprises.
Credit-card companies and travel agencies, for example, use the mailings to piggyback on the lower, subsidized rate enjoyed by nonprofit organizations, and the Senate has proposed new statutory language to tighten enforcement by the Postal Service. 

The estimated savings were $30 million annually, but rather than adopt new law, the conference directed the Postal Service to provide a report by February on what steps can be taken to stem the loss of funds. 

