.START 

Japan's Fair Trade Commission searched offices of Canon Sales Co. and Apple Computer Japan Co., saying it suspected the companies of "unlawfully impeding" sales by independent importers of Apple personal computers. 

Canon Sales, a unit of Japan's Canon Inc., and Apple Computer Japan, a unit of Apple Computer Co., Cupertino, Calif., denied the antitrust allegations. "Although we think there wasn't such alleged fact, we are reinvestigating the charge with the officials concerned," Canon Sales said. 

According to a spokesman for the trade commission, Canon Sales, which markets Apple's Macintosh personal computers here, allegedly pressured four computer magazines this year to suspend ads from independent importers selling personal computers at a discount. 

Japanese press reports say Canon Sales handles about 80% to 90% of Apple's sales in Japan, but Apple refused to confirm that figure.
Apple has a nominal share of the personal-computer market in Japan, which is dominated by NEC Corp. with more than a 50% share. 

Canon Sales offers discounts of only about 5% on Apple computers, far smaller than discounts offered by many Apple vendors in the U.S., the commission spokesman said.
He said independent importers have been selling Macintosh Plus models at about 200,000 yen ($1,430) per unit, compared with the 368,000 yen ($2,635) base price set by Apple's agents.
A spokesman for Apple Computer Japan cited the Japanese-language capability of the computers marketed here through its authorized dealers.
The computers sold by independent importers don't have this capability. 

In addition, Apple Computer Japan is suspected of having pressured personal-computer shops not to provide service for personal computers handled by independent importers, the commission spokesman said. 

If the commission decides the allegations are true, it will order Canon and Apple to correct the situation.
If the companies comply, they won't be punished or fined.
The commission spokesman said this is an administrative action based on Article 19 of Japan's antitrust law, and stressed that the law doesn't call for penal punishment. 

Price differences between products sold in the U.S. and Japan are a major issue in trade talks the two countries started last month.
Slow sales of some U.S. products in Japan have been blamed largely on higher prices resulting from Japan's complicated, multilayered distribution system.
But in some cases, analysts say, company efforts to keep higher margins contribute to slow sales. 

An analyst at Yamaichi Research Institute of Securities and Economics, an affiliate of Yamaichi Securities Co., said he thinks that is the case with Apple computers sold in Japan.
He said that although Apple computers are becoming more popular among general users, the typical users still are computer fanatics who aren't very sensitive to prices.
As a result, there isn't much pressure on Apple to lower prices, the analyst said. 

Another analyst said the availability and variety of software is the most critical factor for selling personal computers in Japan, so that lower prices don't necessarily mean an immediate increase in sales. 

