.START 

Rising Costs Encourage 

More 'Preventive Law' 

ANNUAL CHECKUPS with your lawyer may become as routine as visits to your dentist. 

At least that's what two law schools and a state bar association hope to see.
They're promoting "preventive law," which is designed to spot possible legal problems in seemingly routine personal and business matters before they erupt into major disputes. 

Case Western Reserve University Law School plans to introduce a preventive law course in 1991, and the State Bar of California has declared 1990 the Year of Preventive Law. 

The University of Denver College of Law has offered a preventive law course for about 10 years.
Students are trained to structure deals and contracts to account for all contingencies.
Some students also work in the school's legal clinic for the elderly, reviewing insurance policies and other documents for possible pitfalls. 

The concept of preventive law isn't brand new, of course, but attorneys say it's becoming more popular because of the high cost of litigation. "Lawyers are portrayed as the hired courtroom gun in television.
But decisions that keep you out of court {also} are made in the lawyer's office," says Louis M. Brown, a Los Angeles lawyer who is considered the dean of preventive law. 

But you don't necessarily have to pay a lawyer to practice preventive law.
Reviewing your own business and tax records regularly can prevent problems, says George Milko, education department director at HALT, a legal reform group in Washington. "There are a lot of things you can do to keep your legal house in order without a lawyer." 

Morbid Mix-Up Leads 

To Key Court Ruling AN APPELLATE court ruling in California may indicate a change in judges' attitudes toward damage claims based on emotional distress. 

The strange case began when the widow and sister of Lupe Quesada told a San Jose, Calif., funeral home that the body in the casket was not their beloved husband and brother.
The funeral home staff insisted they were wrong.
People often look different after embalming, they were told. 

The funeral took place on schedule, though such details as a missing tattoo continued to perplex Mr. Quesada's relatives. 

Then, several days later, a nearby funeral home discovered it had an extra body.
It was Mr. Quesada.
The first funeral home later admitted it had neglected to check the toe tag on the corpse. 

The Quesada family endured another funeral and the widow, sister and a niece sued the funeral home.
The home settled its dispute with the wife for an undisclosed amount, but attorneys for the home claimed the sister and niece had no right to recover damages because they didn't have a legal right to the corpse and hadn't entered into the burial contract.
In 1986 a Santa Clara County judge dismissed the suit on those grounds. 

But a few weeks ago, a state appellate court reversed the lower court and reinstated the case.
To look only at who had the legal right to the corpse was too narrow an approach, the court found.
It said those close enough to the deceased to have suffered because of the incident were entitled to sue for damages. 

"It was a noteworthy departure from recent rulings, expanding the ability of third parties to sue for emotional distress," says James Feliciano, the Quesadas' lawyer. "When you have to argue that this body is not your brother and go to a funeral for the wrong person, believe me, you suffer." 

Lawyers Boost Outlays 

For Local TV Ads 22% 

LAWYERS SPENT more than $39.8 million on local televison advertising in the first six months of 1989, according to the Television Bureau of Advertising.
That's a 22% jump from the year-earlier $32.7 million. 

Injury Helpline, run by R.W. Lynch in San Ramon, Calif., topped the list with $3.3 million, compared with $2.1 million a year earlier.
Injury Helpline provides callers with rudimentary advice and referrals to lawyers. 

Jacoby & Meyers, the New York-based legal clinic, ranked second, at about $1.5 million -- a 6% drop from a year earlier.
Cleveland-based Hyatt Legal Services spent over $2.1 million on TV ads, a 39% increase. 

The legal profession ranks 20th among 25 industries surveyed in terms of money spent on advertising, a spokesman for the TV bureau says.
But lawyers are increasing TV advertising at a rate almost three times that of the other industries surveyed. 

GM Legal Staff Tackles New Kind of Challenge 

GENERAL MOTORS Corp. 's legal department is taking on 150 fifth graders. 

This month the company and the Highland Park, Mich., school system are launching Project MIGHT -- that's Monitoring Involving General Motors and Highland Park Team.
GM lawyers, paralegals and support staff will volunteer their time to teach fifth grade classes in Highland Park, an urban area near Detroit. 

About 60 volunteers will take turns teaching courses on such topics as computers, music careers and short wave radios. 

The program is the brainchild of Harry J. Pearce, General Motors' general counsel, who has tried to recruit minority students for his legal department and found they're underrepresented in top-tier law schools. 

"We thought we'd take a whack in a small way of trying to do something locally," he says. "The whole minority issue gets talked about too much and not enough is done about it." 

