.START 

The folks who got your kids addicted to Super Mario Brothers are out to do it again with a miniaturized Nintendo that intends to be the star of the Christmas season. 

On the tiny screens of the new video-game gizmo, the hand-held Game Boy, Mario will be fighting to rescue Princess Daisy from the clutches of space monster Tatanga.
And toy stores will be fighting to keep the gadgets on their shelves. 

"We think it's the hit idea for Christmas," says Michael Goldstein, chief financial officer of Toys "R" Us Inc. "We'd take their whole production if we could." 

So would other store chains.
In August, Nintendo of America Inc. started shipping the $89.95 Game Boy, a transistor-radio-sized sibling to the explosively popular Nintendo Entertainment System home video games.
But Nintendo calculates that supplies will fall short of holiday-season demand by more than two million units.
The subsidiary of Japan's 100-year-old Nintendo Co. says it will ship 1.1 million of the gadgets this year and another four to five million next year. 

A Game-Boy shortage could spark the kind of "hysteria" that only a few other toys have induced, says Daniel Barry of Kidder, Peabody & Co. Analysts such as Mr. Barry are hot on Toys "R" Us stock, in great part because of the Game Boy. "It could be the biggest phenomenon since the Cabbage Patch Kids," he says. 

It's a hysteria retailers would love.
A Nintendo under the Christmas tree generates months of new software sales as kids keep coming back for new games.
The Game Boy uses $20 game cartridges that don't work in the regular Nintendos, a feature that could spur a whole new surge of game purchases. 

Since late 1986, Americans have bought nearly 20 million of the older Nintendo systems, which plug into televisions and run games such as The Legend of Zelda, Mike Tyson's Punch Out]] and, of course, the Super Mario Brothers adventures. 

Nintendo is eager for a repeat performance with Game Boy because it expects sales of the old machines to fall off as much as 25% next year.
The new toy, whose selling point is portability, features an approximately two-inch-square liquid-crystal screen and headphones for stereo sound effects.
Twenty-two software houses plan to produce Game Boy programs, Nintendo says, to add to the four cartridges now available, including Super Mario Land.
Each Game Boy comes with one game, called Tetris, a puzzle program written by a Soviet computer jockey.
A cable included in the set can connect two Game Boys to allow head-to-head combat for software games such as tennis and baseball. 

Nintendo faces combat of its own against more-powerful machines recently introduced by NEC Corp. and Sega Enterprises Ltd., both of Japan.
Those machines use 16-bit "brain" chips, more sophisticated than Nintendo's eight-bit brains.
But the new challengers will go up against the older, large Nintendo system, and not the Game Boy portable version. 

The Game Boy breaks onto the video-game scene just when some industry pessimists are prophesying the market's demise.
Last month, Tonka Corp. 's chief executive officer, Stephen Shank, told analysts that he expects the video-game business to begin declining soon.
Tonka won't renew its contract to sell video games made by Sega, he said, because the profit margins won't be high enough. 

Toy stores think naysayers are off the mark, and many analysts agree.
The Game Boy, says analyst Margo McGlade at PaineWebber Inc., "is one of the main reasons that the prospects for the whole video game segment for Christmas are outstanding this year." 

It could also be the brightest spot in the entire toy industry this season. "Except for Game Boy . . . there's nothing great, exciting, new, that we're going to have out there" this Christmas, says Duke DeMyer, a vice president at Kay-Bee Toys Inc., a chain of nearly 800 stores. 

Based on past patterns, Game Boy looks like a sure thing.
The little computer is a smash in Japan, where enthusiasts snatched up 200,000 Game Boys during its first two weeks on the market there.
Japanese children have become toy-market bellwethers, presaging the U.S. success of such playthings as transformer robots, radio-controlled cars and, of course, Nintendo systems. 

Stores weren't always believers.
Nintendo's Japanese sales were booming in 1985 when Nintendo of America president Minoru Arakawa trundled a sample around to U.S. retailers.
Vendors mostly cut Mr. Arakawa's presentation short, says Peter Main, marketing vice president of Nintendo's U.S. unit, based in Redmond, Wash. "No one wanted to see him." 

Now everyone wants to see Mr. Arakawa, because Nintendo keeps products in short supply.
Nintendo figures it could sell a million more Entertainment System machines in the U.S. this year than the eight million it expects to ship.
It says it will sell 50 million games to plug into those systems, 10% fewer than Americans want.
Shortages keep interest pumped up in Nintendo products, analysts say, one reason Nintendo expects sales to jump 53% to $2.6 billion this year from $1.7 billion in 1988. 

Nintendo already has begun a $10 million print and TV ad campaign for Game Boy.
It also plans a promotional push with PepsiCo Inc., which Nintendo says will spend $22 million in November and December on ads and Nintendo giveaways. 

And it's not aiming only at kids.
Nintendo says people over 18 use 30% of its regular machines.
The new toy could snare even more grown-ups.
The Game Boy, says one analyst, "is addictive." 

