.START 

Thriving Third World economies are bailing out a squabbling OPEC. 

Craving oil on which to grow, lesser developed countries, rather than the industrial powers, are sopping up more and more of what increasingly undisciplined members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries are pumping into the marketplace.
And in the process -- at least for now -- they're propping up oil prices that otherwise might plummet. 

The appetite for fuel in developing countries is enormous -- growing 60% faster than total world demand this year and at quadruple the pace of U.S. needs, according to some estimates.
At the same time, output from many nations outside of OPEC is waning. 

"The increase in demand will be satisfied by higher OPEC production," says Alfred Munk, foreign affairs manager for Amoco Corp. "There's no other way." 

That thirst for oil is crucial to OPEC right now.
Its output has recently swelled to more than 22 million barrels a day as many members freely "cheat" on a much-maligned quota system.
OPEC's official production ceiling just last week was raised to 20.5 million barrels for the fourth quarter, a feeble gesture that merely legitimizes more of the cartel's output.
The contentious five-day meeting in Geneva that yielded the quota increase only revealed more cracks in the system.
Actual OPEC production could rise further in the months ahead. 

Overall petroleum demand, often cited by OPEC members as justifying current above-target output, is expected to grow by about 2.5% this year to 52.4 million barrels a day in non-communist economies.
More than half of that increase reflects the need for additional energy in developing countries.
These economies, especially ones in the Far East, will demand at least 4% more oil this year.
Traditional guzzlers such as the U.S. will need no more than an additional 1%. 

That doesn't mean oil markets suddenly have become risk-free.
Seasonal ups and downs are still the norm, and the current quarter is a traditional "up" one for demand.
The first quarter, however, is usually weaker, and some industry experts say that oil prices could start to decline by year's end if cartel members don't slow production. 

Typically during the first quarter, Saudi Arabia, the cartel's largest producer, has limited its output to ease the price strain.
But with OPEC now attempting to revamp its quota system, it's unlikely any member will want to reduce output during the struggle for market share. "They better start dealing with the issues, if they want to stave off lower prices," said Lawrence Goldstein, executive director of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation. 

Nonetheless, industrialization will continue to propel Third World demand upward over the long term, barring an unlikely world-wide recession.
Factories and industrial plants are springing up throughout the developing countries, some of which have recently experienced double-digit growth in gross national product.
In the Far East, Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong and Singapore -- dubbed the four tigers -- "are taking the biggest chunks," said George Lumsden, oil market director for the International Energy Agency in Paris.
In South Korea, for instance, gross national product during 1988 jumped by more than 10% and its need for oil skyrocketed by 20%. 

Oil demand in the developing countries between 1988 and 1995 will soar by 25% to 17.4 million barrels a day, Mr. Lumsden says.
During the same period, industrialized economies will demand 38.8 million barrels a day, up only 5.4%. 

The biggest increases have been for transportation, economists say.
People in up-and-coming economies are playing catch-up to the American way of life. "People there are buying cars," says Ed Krapels, president of Energy Security Analysis Inc. 

One big OPEC producer, Kuwait, is specifically focusing its attention on the Far East.
Kuwaiti officials say they have been scouring that region rather than other locales in hopes of either acquiring or building a gasoline refinery and service station network. 

Declining production by non-OPEC producers is strengthening OPEC's hand.
Although output outside of OPEC will actually tick up next year to 32.1 million barrels a day from 31.6 million, that's in part because accidents and maintenance problems in aging oilfields, especially in the North Sea, artificially depressed production during the last 18 months.
And Third World nations that are starting to pump increasing amounts of oil are using much of it themselves rather than exporting it. 

Oilfields in non-OPEC Soviet Union, the world's largest producer, have been pumped quickly to meet quotas imposed by the government, and output actually has fallen. "It's put a real strain on the fields," said William Hermann, chief economist for Chevron Corp., who just returned from a trip to that country. "Squeezing oil out of the reservoirs too quickly has hurt long-term production" capability. 

In the U.S., daily output fell by 500,000 barrels to 7.7 million in just the first eight months of this year.
Industry experts say that production could slip by another 500,000 barrels a day next year. 

Shrinking output from the giant Prudhoe Bay oilfield in Alaska is helping drive U.S. totals down.
Production there will dive by almost 12% a year until the wells are sucked dry.
And many aging, low-volume "stripper wells," the predominant source of oil in the lower 48 states, were sealed when falling prices in the last few years made them unprofitable. 

The chances of finding additional major sources of oil in the U.S. are slim.
The near-term future of exploratory drilling has dimmed because of escalating environmental concern.
When the Exxon Valdez tanker struck an underwater reef and spewed almost 11 million gallons of crude oil into Alaskan waters, it triggered an outpouring of public sentiment against further oil development in frontier areas and along the coastline.
Oil industry executives concede that any near-term exploration in the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge, the most promising possibility, is now ruled out. 

And, experts say, even if oil were discovered there tomorrow, none of it would enter the market until the next century. 

