.START 

While stocks soared to new heights in the third quarter, brokerage firm profits went in the opposite direction, analysts say. 

Most brokerage firms are expected to report lower third-quarter profit compared with the second quarter, partly because of a sudden September slowdown in trading. 

After a robust second quarter in the stock and bond markets that had brokers smiling, the quarter just ended is expected to be a weaker one for almost every firm, including Merrill Lynch & Co., Morgan Stanley Group Inc. and Salomon Inc., parent of Salomon Brothers.
Analysts in recent days have particularly soured on Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc., and even closely held First Boston Corp. has said it expects its third-quarter results to be "mediocre." 

Some brokerage-stock investors are already betting that things will improve in the fourth quarter.
But yesterday's stock and bond market rallies aside, the brokerage business has turned "unexpectedly quiet," said Michael W. Blumstein, First Boston's financial services analyst.
In a recent report, he griped: "Even New England weather is more predictable than the brokerage business these days." 

The third quarter started with a bang in July and August, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average shattered its record.
But trading in September on the New York Stock Exchange averaged a weak 151.8 million shares a day, the slowest monthly Big Board trading volume since December 1988. 

The second-quarter euphoria in the brokerage industry evaporated, as big institutional investors turned cautious and crash-scarred individuals continued to play hard to get.
The retail, or individual-investor, brokerage business is still operating "well below capacity," said John Keefe, financial services analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. 

Also, the sudden drop in prices in the high-yield junk bond market in September hammered even the stock of such firms as Bear Stearns Cos., which doesn't have a big junk exposure.
The junk market's woes cast a temporary pall over stocks and led to at least modest losses from junk bond trading at most firms. 

"September was supposed to be a great month, but it hasn't turned out that way," said Mr. Keefe. "So for the brokerage industry, even though {overall} share prices are very high, it could be viewed as a bear market." 

Last week, for example, Lawrence Eckenfelder, Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. 's brokerage analyst, lowered his third-quarter estimates for Bear Stearns, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley and Shearson Lehman by 10 cents to 20 cents a share apiece. "As of the end of August, my feeling was I'd be going the other way.
It was a big change {in the market}." 

Samuel G. Liss, Salomon's securities industry analyst, on Monday reduced third-quarter earnings expectations because of "weak" brokerage commissions, "exacerbated by a dearth of large mutual fund or closed-end bond fund sales." 

Of course, amid all the negativism, some analysts and investors in recent weeks have started beating the drums for brokerage stocks, calling them undervalued.
Just yesterday, shares of PaineWebber Group Inc., Merrill Lynch, A.G. Edwards Inc. and other brokerage firms rose as the stock market rallied strongly; also helping was word that Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. 's sales force was given a brokerage-stock pep talk by Bernstein's investment strategist David Eisenberg. 

But few analysts are willing to do much cheering for one brokerage stock: Shearson.
The company, 62%-owned by American Express Co., had in the second quarter its first profits after three quarters of losses.
Analysts had been forecasting profits of about 75 cents a share for the third quarter.
But they have been reducing estimates in recent days. 

For example, Michael Goldstein, the brokerage industry analyst at Bernstein, has slashed his Shearson estimate from 90 cents to 55 cents a share -- and 35 cents of that is only because of a gain from the sale of Shearson's Lehman Management Co. unit.
Mr. Goldstein said the slower third quarter wasn't "a total disaster for the securities industry -- except for Shearson.
After a good July and August, {Shearson} had an abysmal September." 

Still, Mr. Goldstein predicts the fourth quarter will be better than the third for Shearson and most other brokerage firms, particularly because of a large number of pending merger and acquisitions deals in which the firms are expecting to get big fees.
He estimates Shearson is involved in about $70 billion in announced merger deals that might close in the next two quarters, giving it the biggest "merger queue" on Wall Street. 

A Shearson spokesman said the firm never makes earnings estimates publicly. 

Per-share earnings estimates for the third quarter, compared with actual results in this year's second quarter and the 1988 third quarter 

