.START 

Negotiations over the future of DWG Corp. collapsed for the second time, despite indications that Victor Posner was considering selling his controlling stake to a group led by New York attorney Andrew N. Heine, people familiar with the talks said. 

After meeting in New York for much of the day, representatives of the two sides failed yesterday to resolve "specific differences in the proposed settlement," said Franklin Chu, a senior vice president of Paribas Corp., which is advising the Heine group in its $22-a-share, or $572 million, bid for DWG. Mr. Chu declined to elaborate.
Paribas is the merchant banking arm of Paris-based Paribas Group. 

One person close to the talks said the breakdown came despite "signs given by Posner that he might consider selling his {46.2%} position." The settlement talks were urged by a federal judge in Cleveland overseeing the courtroom battle between the two sides. 

It wasn't immediately clear why Mr. Posner would agree to sell his stake after spending months -- and a small fortune in legal fees -- fending off Mr. Heine's advances.
One Posner confidante said the Miami Beach financier considers Mr. Heine's bid of $22 a share to be a good price.
But he added that Mr. Posner has been fighting the offer because he doubts the Heine group can finance it. 

Speculation about a possible settlement sent DWG stock on a roller coaster ride in recent days.
At one point this week, the stock rose to almost $15 a share, then plunged yesterday to as low as $13.25 each, before closing at $14.25, down 50 cents. 

Contributing to the speculation was the announcement last week by Metro Mobile CTS Inc., a New York cellular telephone system operator with a large DWG stake, that it was supporting Mr. Heine's bid.
Metro Mobile, whose board members include Texas investors Sid Bass and Richard Rainwater, said it is willing to invest the proceeds it would receive from the redemption of its one million DWG shares into the equity of the new company that would emerge from a Heine takeover. 

Metro Mobile is believed to be eager to acquire DWG's National Propane Corp. unit.
DWG's other major operating units, Arby's Inc. and Royal Crown Cos., have also attracted considerable investor interest. 

The collapse of the talks indicates the two sides are likely to resume their trial in Cleveland federal court.
Mr. Heine's Granada Investments Inc. filed its lawsuit in April accusing the DWG board of shirking its fiduciary duty by rebuffing the bid.
It is asking that the judge appoint a trustee to run DWG as a prelude to putting the offer to a shareholder vote. 

DWG, in a counterclaim against Mr. Heine and certain associates, charged that the bid was a sham to drive up the value of their holdings.
Each side has denied the other's allegations. 

