.START 

European Community ministers approved the "Television Without Frontiers" directive, threatening renewed trade tensions with the U.S. 

The directive, which takes effect in October 1991, is aimed at allowing EC television stations to broadcast without restriction throughout the community.
The directive also sets a single set of rules governing TV advertising and other matters. 

The television directive has drawn criticism from the U.S. because it recommends that television stations devote a majority of their broadcasting time to programs made in the EC.
But in a joint declaration issued in Luxembourg, where the ministers and the EC commission met, they agreed that the quotas represent only a "a political commitment," and not a legally binding requirement for EC broadcasters. 

While most European officials contend that the quota will have little effect on the U.S. television industry, Bush administration officials said they are not happy. "We're concerned with some elements in that directive," said a senior U.S. trade official, who asked not to be identified.
He said that the U.S. considers parts of the EC broadcasting measure "may be contrary to the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade)." 

EC officials scoff at the suggestions of a U.S. complaint to the GATT.
They contend that the TV programs don't fall under any current GATT rules. "Culture is not a commodity.
You can't quantify it in dollars and marks," said EC commissioner Martin Bangemann. 

The recommended programming quotas don't apply to news, sports, games shows, advertising and video text services. 

The U.S. entertainment industry also opposes the move. "The European Community today, in my judgment, took a step backward in time," said Jack Valenti, chairman of the Motion Picture Export Association, in a statement released yesterday after the EC decision was announced. "They said no to competition and viewers' choice, and yes to trade barriers." 

The directive sets allowable advertising time for the stations.
It also bans advertising for tobacco and prescription medicines, and sets standards for alcoholic-beverage advertising.
The directive also gives member nations the right to ban pornography and "excessive violence." 

Mark M. Nelson in Brussels contributed to this article. 

