.START 

The dollar's rise, which began last spring, sparked deep fears among U.S. exporters that their business would go bust. 

So why are exports booming? 

The answer is that this year's relatively modest bounce in the dollar is less important for exporters than the far more dramatic decline that preceded it. 

"Day-to-day swings can have a lot of significance for the financial markets, which worry about the effect on interest rates and Federal Reserve policy," says Norman Robertson, chief economist at Mellon Bank Corp., Pittsburgh. "But manufacturers don't have to get worried about every bounce -- especially when the jump is relatively small, and U.S. products are still price-competitive in the world." 

In fact, this year's 9.1% rise in the dollar is only a minor increase compared with the more than 80% jump between 1980 and 1985. 

And today the dollar is still 38% below its 1985 peak, measured against a basket of foreign currencies.
In many cases, moves a year or two ago by U.S. firms to take advantage of the earlier, big decline are just now being fully felt. 

A decline in the dollar makes U.S. goods more competitive abroad, while a stronger dollar makes them more expensive.
The dollar took a sizable tumble last week as central banks checked its advance, but it remains reasonably strong. 

The U.S. trade balance also is benefiting from rapid economic growth abroad and some slowing domestically.
While U.S. consumers are buying fewer European cars and other luxury imports, strong economies in most European and Pacific rim countries create a ready market for U.S. capital goods and other exports. 

And hundreds of U.S. companies are cashing in on an export momentum that modest changes in currency values won't reverse.
In recent years, they've built relationships with overseas customers, learned the importance of bilingual sales forces and pared costs to the point where they sell products cheaply in spite of currency spikes. 

Consider Minster Machine Co.
The small Minster, Ohio, concern will sell 26% to 28% of its forming presses abroad this year, up from just over 20% last year. "The rising dollar hasn't made any noticeable change" in orders, says Harold J. Winch, president and chairman. 

That's partly because Mr. Winch bolstered Minster's international sales organization.
At the same time, he reached overseas to recruit two multilingual engineers, who speak nine languages between them and can talk with most visiting technical managers in their own language. 

He's also done work at home to make Minster more attractive to overseas customers.
Five years ago, the soaring dollar forced big layoffs at the company.
Intent on avoiding another round of cuts, Mr. Winch made the company's presses faster, more precise and easier to maintain by boosting product development spending to more than 10% of each sales dollar from 2% to 3% five years ago.
He also cut expenses to keep price increases below 2% a year. 

Efforts such as these have helped U.S. merchandise exports, excluding military shipments, soar to a record $90.87 billion in the second quarter, up 16% from a year earlier and a 51% gain from the 1987 second period, the Commerce Department reported.
July exports, though down 1.8% from June, also were up 16% from a year earlier.
Export figures are seasonally adjusted. 

Few economists believe export growth will continue at that steep rate, but climbing orders indicate healthy increases next year, which bodes well for continued economic growth.
During 1988 and the first half of this year, a sharp rise in exports and subsequent narrowing in the merchandise trade deficit were major factors boosting U.S. economic growth.
And exports could be even more critical in 1990, when domestic sales are expected to be sluggish. 

More than twice as many manufacturers had higher foreign orders in August than had lower bookings, according to a survey by the National Association of Purchasing Management, making exports "the strongest element of the economy." 

The U.S. merchandise trade deficit narrowed 12% in the second quarter from the year-earlier period, to the lowest level in four years.
Excluding oil product imports and exports to eliminate the effects of higher 1989 oil prices, the trade deficit narrowed 25%. 

Contributing to that decline has been the spurt of foreign-owned plants in the U.S. Japanese and European companies have begun to supply more of the U.S. market from plants they've built here, rather than shipping all their goods from overseas.
The plants still use some imported parts, but even these are being replaced gradually by U.S.-made parts. 

For U.S. manufacturers, there's a growing realization that to fuel growth, they must broaden their customer base overseas and take advantage of booming markets in Europe and the Far East.
Consider USX Corp., the nation's largest steelmaker, which disbanded its export sales unit in the early 1980s after the dollar soared.
Two years ago, USX assembled a new overseas sales team, and this year expects to export one million tons of steel despite the dollar's rise. 

Some U.S. companies have had to reduce their prices in dollars to stay competitive in foreign currencies.
As spot prices for steel on the world market have dropped, for example, U.S. steelmakers have had to match the declines. 

But most U.S. manufacturers have maintained prices by stressing quality and service.
They've also been helped by the fact that the dollar's rise hasn't been catastrophic and the currency isn't expected to soar any time soon. "The dollar is likely to remain near current levels," says Michael K. Evans, a Washington economic consultant. 

Eager to position themselves for the future, companies are making investments now that will build export sales through the end of the century.
Black & Decker Corp., Towson, Md., for example, began shipping nine different power tools to Japan this summer.
The tools are sold through Shin-Daiwa Kogyo Ltd., a Japanese tool manufacturer and marketer with an established sales organization, which many exporters say is essential when selling in Japan. 

Moreover, each of the tools has been tested by Japanese users and adapted to local tastes.
Some handles were changed and cords lengthened, and motors were modified to optimize performance on slightly lower Japanese voltage.
Black & Decker expects to sell 50 different customized tools within a year. 

Mead Corp. is spending $550 million for a coated paperboard mill expansion in Alabama, on the assumption that it will export half the plant's output.
It's also building an $18 million plant in Japan to convert coated paperboard into packaging -- and demonstrate to Japanese customers how well the new mill's board will meet particular packaging requirements. 

The Dayton, Ohio, forest products and electronic publishing concern doubled its sales force in Japan during the past two years to nearly 25 people, opened a small office in Hong Kong and added a 15-person office in Vienna to sell coated paperboard. 

Foreign companies are adding to the U.S. export boom by lining up long-term U.S. supply sources.
Mazda Motor Corp. says it will buy $100 million of North American-made auto parts for use in Japan in the year ending next March 31, up 60% from a year earlier. 

And other foreign companies have become big U.S. exporters themselves.
Honda Motor Co., which began exporting cars and motorcycles to Japan from its Ohio plants last year, says it plans to export 70,000 U.S.-made cars in 1991. 

