.START 

A growing number of would-be rescuers are offering to step in and help out investors in troubled limited partnerships. 

But while some of these "work-out" specialists have met with at least a measure of success, financial advisers urge caution.
Throwing good money after bad may not be a good idea, they say. 

"I have clients who get those letters all the time," says William G. Brennan, a tax partner in the Washington office of accountants Ernst & Young. "They come from lawyers, brokers, sometimes investors trying to put together an investor group.
But they always ask for additional capital." 

Mr. Brennan's usual advice: "Trash the letters." He says he has "never seen a situation where it seems to have worked out better for investors." 

Rescue attempts are spreading as limited partnership investments sour at an alarming rate.
Brokerage industry officials have estimated that perhaps one in five publicly offered partnerships marketed this decade are failing.
As many as 12 million individuals hold interests in partnerships that own everything from shopping centers to cable TV systems, shipping containers and oil wells. 

Some of the work-out specialists are property-management firms; others are syndicators, willing to lend their expertise to another sponsor's troubled partnership -- for a fee, of course. 

The work-out firms themselves say they don't make any promises, especially when they take over several partnerships syndicated by the same sponsor.
Typically, says Tom Ratliff, president of Investor Management Services Corp. in Atlanta, there are "some we can save and some we can't." 

In what he says was a "classic case," two years ago, his company was hired to manage six private real estate partnerships after investors successfully sued the sponsor. "The day we got them, one was going to be sold on the courthouse steps at noon and two more were in dire straits," Mr. Ratliff says.
But the other three survived, he says. 

Most work-out firms focus on real estate in a certain geographic area.
As a result, they may know more about, say, the Chicago apartment market, than a West Coast syndicator who originally put a deal together.
A substitute general partner in the real estate business, rather than the business of selling ever more partnerships, may also have a greater vested interest in resuscitating a sick partnership. 

That vested interest can cut both ways, however. "Investors should be very wary of somebody offering to just come in on a consultant basis" and analyze their partnership's prospects, says Steven Bleier, president of Diligence Inc., a White Plains, N.Y., firm that tracks partnership performance. "If the consultant also wants to be the replacement general partner, his recommendation is likely to be, 'Kick these guys out and let us take over. '" 

When these outside firms do take over as a substitute for the original general partner, investors should expect to pay for their services.
Some work-out firms demand as much as 50% of the profits when the properties are eventually sold. 

Most rescue attempts so far have involved private partnerships, where industry officials say the problems are most widespread.
These are investments designed for small groups of supposedly sophisticated individuals who can invest $25,000 or more. 

But at least $10 billion of public partnerships marketed by brokerage firms are also foundering, industry officials say.
And some of those investors are beginning to get "send us your money" letters. 

New York nursing-home syndicator Evergreen Property Capital Corp. recently sent one to 3,000 investors in 33 similar partnerships sponsored by Southmark/Envicon Capital Corp., a subsidiary of deeply troubled Dallas syndicator Southmark Corp.
The parent company, which guaranteed cash distributions to the Southmark/Envicon investors, is currently operating with protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code. 

Until just over a year ago, the three principals of Evergreen were senior executives of Southmark/Envicon.
Now, they are offering to go to court on behalf of their own former investors -- and themselves, since they also bought heavily.
To cover expenses, everybody is being asked to ante up 1% of their original investment, totaling roughly $500,000. 

Evergreen says it was drafted into action by both investors and financial planners who sold the partnerships. "It's not something we dreamed up as an opportunity," says Eugene Rosen, senior marketing vice president. 

Erik Swenson, a Milwaukee financial planner, says he is advising clients to go along with Evergreen's proposal, even though "I'm not sure it's a solution." At the least, he figures, Evergreen's monitoring "may give them a better source of information than if they were struggling on their own." 

Since Evergreen's organizing effort got under way, several partnerships that Southmark previously said wouldn't make cash distributions for the second quarter have now made them, Mr. Swenson says. 

But a Southmark official says Evergreen can't take the credit. "Evergreen's letter didn't play a role in our decision," says Bruce Schnitz, executive vice president of Southmark. "The single most important factor in making those distribution decisions was the cash available in the partnerships from operations." 

Whatever the chances of success in turning to a work-out specialist, some investors stuck in a partnership turned sour clearly feel it's their best hope.
Milwaukee homemaker Helen Sorge says she'll give Evergreen a try, even though she has doubts about what it can do. "I'm losing money already," she says, "and I don't want to lose more." 

Before hiring any work-out specialist to actually take over a partnership, investors should check on the firm's experience and background, including any past securities-law violations, advises Ernst & Young's Mr. Brennan.
The firm should also have the financial wherewithal to see the partnership through without coming back again and again to investors for more capital. 

Above all, "the profit-sharing arrangement is crucial," he says. "Will the new management accept the same agreement investors had with the original general partner?
Or do they want a new one that's less favorable to the limited partners?
As an investor, you have to be sure you're still going to be in a fair position." 

