.START 

New factory orders shot up in August, more than recouping a steep decline from the month before, the government reported. 

Factory orders jumped 2.9% during the month to $237.21 billion after dropping 2.0% in July, the Commerce Department said. 

Orders were boosted by a surge in automobile bookings as dealers requisitioned 1990 models.
But orders also rose for an array of industrial goods, suggesting the economy's manufacturing sector may be shrugging off some of the weakness it exhibited in recent months. 

Charles Renfro, chief economist at Alphametrics, an economic forecasting firm in Bala Cynwyd, Pa., said: "I think the economy really hasn't stopped.
We've all been talking about a soft landing, but it really hasn't landed." ("Soft landing" is a term analysts have been using to describe a situation in which the economy slows to the point of reducing inflationary pressures but not to the point of recession.) 

Orders for durable goods -- items expected to last at least three years, such as cars, household appliances and industrial equipment -- jumped 3.9% after falling 2.5% in July.
Orders for nonelectrical machinery, a category that includes computers, soared 9.3%. 

Orders for nondurable goods, including textiles, chemicals and foods, were also strong.
They climbed 1.8% after sagging 1.5% the month before. 

Electrical machinery and primary metals showed declines in orders.
And orders for capital goods outside the defense sector plunged 10.1%.
This category, closely watched as a measure of business investment, was hurt by a decline in civilian aircraft bookings.
Excluding aircraft and parts, however, orders for nondefense capital goods climbed 4.9%. 

Another report offered evidence that the housing industry was also looking up after a slump earlier this year.
Sales of newly built houses continued strong in August at a solid 755,000 annual rate, the department said.
Home sales did slip 0.4% from July, but the July level was 16.1% above June's.
The figure was revised upward from the earlier report of a 14.4% July increase. 

The home sales report is often unreliable and subject to large revisions as more information comes in. 

The two reports were released as the Federal Reserve System's policy-making committee convened a two-day meeting to set monetary policy for the next several weeks. 

The Fed's policy of pushing up interest rates from March 1988 to March 1989, in an attempt to reduce inflation, pummeled the housing industry and eroded much of the strength in manufacturing.
These two sectors are closely influenced by interest rates because purchases frequently are financed by borrowing. 

"Both these (reports) indicate that the economy is probably more robust than has been anticipated," said Michael Carliner, an economist at the National Association of Home Builders. "It indicates we're certainly not going to have a recession." 

Here are the Commerce Department's latest figures for manufacturers in billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted. 

