.START 

Frustrated in its bid to buy LIN Broadcasting Corp. 's big-city cellular phone franchises, McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. agreed to buy Metromedia Co. 's New York franchise interests for $1.9 billion. 

McCaw also agreed to sell its Southeastern franchises to a unit of Atlanta-based Contel Corp. for $1.3 billion. 

McCaw is essentially swapping franchises in the less populated states of Alabama, Kentucky and Tennessee for a large interest in the biggest market of all-New York.
But LIN may again frustrate McCaw.
LIN has a right of first refusal to buy Metromedia's interest, and some analysts expect LIN to exercise that right. 

McCaw has aggressively acquired franchises -- and huge amounts of debt -- in efforts to build a national independent cellular network.
However, many of McCaw's franchises are less populated areas such as the Southeast.
Through an unsolicited tender offer, McCaw has been seeking LIN's valuable franchises in urban markets, including Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Dallas, Houston, and New York. 

LIN, after rejecting McCaw's $110-a-share bid as inadequate, sought out a merger with BellSouth Corp., which is based in Atlanta.
Shareholders are expected to vote on the merger within the next two months. 

In the Metromedia purchase, McCaw would acquire a 50% voting interest and a 45.67% equity interest in the New York City non-wireline cellular franchise.
New York-based LIN currently owns a 50% voting interest and a 45% equity interest in the franchise.
If LIN doesn't exercise its option, it would become partners in New York with McCaw. 

Metromedia's stake represents about 6.8 million potential customers, or POPs in the industry jargon.
McCaw's $1.9 billion offer values that stake at $275 a POP.
The franchises being sold to Contel represent about 6.1 million potential customers, making the price about $205 a POP. 

BellSouth, which has the finances to exercise LIN's option on New York franchise, has expressed interest in attaining the remainder of the market for the merged company.
LIN has said in the past that it wants to increase its stake in its current markets, if the price is right. 

Thus, some analysts weren't optimistic about McCaw's ability to acquire Metromedia's New York interests.
Brad Peery, a communications analyst in San Francisco, said he expects LIN would exercise its right to the New York franchise. "I can't think of any reason they wouldn't." He said McCaw's only option is to sweeten its tender offer before shareholders vote on the LIN-BellSouth merger. 

Michael Plouf, LIN's vice president and treasurer, said yesterday that LIN and BellSouth will decide independently what to do.
But he added, "If there's anything in the world we'd be willling to pay $275 {per potential customer} for, it's this.
But we still have to make the economic judgment before we spend the $2 billion." 

Other analysts warned, however, that the combined cellular-phone interests of BellSouth and LIN might be reluctant to pile on more debt by buying New York-based Metromedia's interests, and BellSouth itself might object to the price. 

In an interview, McCaw's chairman Craig McCaw, said he believes it is "a possibility" that LIN will exercise its right, but he wouldn't speculate on LIN's response.
He declined to say whether McCaw will revise its bid for LIN if LIN picks up the New York franchise.
That bid, for the 90% of LIN that McCaw doesn't already own, has been extended to Oct. 

Mr. McCaw said the he doesn't expect his company will sell off any other franchises. "We felt pretty comfortable with Contel," he said. "It's like a parent placing a child with a good spouse." However, "we're pretty dedicated to not selling other properties." 

McCaw, based in Kirkland, Wash., currently has rights to sell to 50 million potential customers in 26 states, making it the biggest cellular-phone operator. 

The price Contel paid for the franchises in the three Southeastern states was considered a strong bid that might significantly dilute its earnings.
The purchase will make Contel the seventh-largest cellular operator in the country, adding 6.1 million POPs to its existing 14.4 million potential customers.
Contel expects the acquisition will be financed through a combination of debt and equity.
The acquisition is expected to dilute earnings about 15% to 20%, according to James Mason McCabe, analyst for Nomura Securities International.
In the long term, he added, Contel will benefit significantly from the booming Southeastern region and cellular industry. 

Don Weber, Contel's president and chief executive officer, said the proposed deal "moves Contel out of the triple-A league into the major leagues.
That makes us a major player." 

"There will be dilution," Mr. Weber conceded, "but how much I'm not willing to say at this time," adding that the company is studying financing alternatives.
However, he expects the dividend to remain the same. "My golden rule is thou shall not fool with the dividend," he said. 

In national over-the-counter trading yesterday, McCaw's stock closed up $1 a share, at $40.50, and LIN's stock closed down $3.125 at $108.50.
McCaw's move sent cellular-telephone stocks surging again. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading, Contel finished at $34.50, down 62.5 cents, and BellSouth closed up $1 at $55.125. 

McCaw's proposition is "a very shrewd move to salvage what has become a bad situation" in regard to its tender offer still outstanding for LIN, said Jack Grubman, a telecommunications analyst with PaineWebber Inc.
He believes McCaw has basically forced LIN to pay $275 or more for the New York City franchise should LIN exercise its option.
BellSouth, he said, may not be willing to pay such a price. "It's a conservative Bell company." Indeed, BellSouth said its merger agreement with LIN was a "great deal" because it didn't have to pay the lofty prices usually associated with cellular franchises. 

If LIN doesn't exercise the option and McCaw does acquire Metromedia's interest, "the ironic thing is that McCaw could end up being LIN's controlling partner" in the New York franchise, Mr. Grubman said. "McCaw may not have been able to buy LIN, but it could end up as its partner.
I think it's a face-saving move for Craig McCaw," he added. 

Contel's purchase of McCaw's Southeastern properties isn't contingent on McCaw's plan to buy into the New York City market. 

Analysts said the transaction may signal a consolidation in the young industry.
Most companies have their cellular properties scattered through the country.
Analysts believe many companies will begin swapping or selling certain cellular properties in order to buy franchises closer to their desired markets. 

The LIN-BellSouth merger proposal is valued at $105 to $150 per LIN share, depending on the value placed on the 45.5 million potential customers the merged cellular company will have.
One financial adviser said the combined company could be valued at $10 billion. 

Janet Guyon contributed to this article. 

