.START 

If Sony Corp. succeeds in getting Peter Guber and Jon Peters to run Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., the Japanese electronics giant will give the two producers an equity stake in the studio and tie their compensation to increases in the value of Columbia over a five-year period. 

Sony made the disclosure in documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with its $3.4 billion offer for Columbia. 

According to the documents, Sony initially tried to buy just the 49% stake in Columbia owned by Coca-Cola Co., but decided to buy the public shares as well after being informed that Coke would sell its shares only in an offer for the entire company. 

Sony said in the filing that fees and expenses related to the purchase of Columbia will bring the total funds required to $3.55 billion.
Sony said it will obtain the funds from loan agreements with five banks in the U.S. and Japan. 

Sony also today is beginning a $200 million, or $17.50-a-share offer for Guber Peters Entertainment Co., a company it is purchasing primarily to obtain the services of its co-chief executive officers as the new management team at Columbia.
But Sony acknowledged in the filing that it might not be able to hire the two executives or buy their company in a timely manner. 

The Guber Peters executives have spent the past few days trying to negotiate their way out of a five-year exclusive contract to produce movies for Warner Communications Inc., which is in the process of being acquired by Time Warner Inc. Warner executives were angered at the decision by the two executives, who produced the hit "Batman" for the studio; the Warner executives contend the two have a binding contract with Warner. 

According to the documents, Sony has the right to terminate its offer for Guber Peters if a waiver of the agreement cannot be obtained from Warner by Oct. 25.
Officials of Warner and a spokesman for Guber Peters said an agreement hasn't been reached yet. 

If the Warner waiver is obtained and the Guber Peters company is acquired, Sony will pay Messrs.
Guber and Peters each an annual salary of $2.7 million initially , rising to $2.9 million over five years.
In addition, Sony said Messrs.
Guber and Peters and as many as three more executives will be entitled to receive an "equity participation" of as much as 8.08% of the increase in a "formula-based market value" of the company in a five-year period. 

Although Sony officials couldn't be reached to elaborate on the compensation package, giving executives equity in companies and tying their compensation to an increase in value has become more common in Hollywood recently.
The Guber Peters equity plan isn't nearly as generous as some others, such as that granted to 20th Century Fox Inc. Chairman Barry Diller when he was recruited by parent company News Corp.
But Sony also is buying the Guber Peters company, in which the two producers combined have a 28% stake that would bring them more than $50 million if and when Sony's purchase is completed. 

The Sony documents also show that Michael P. Schulof, Sony Corp. of America vice chairman and a director of the parent Sony, first approached Victor Kaufman, Columbia's chief executive officer, in November 1988 about acquiring Coke's 49% stake in Columbia. 

Subsequently, at a meeting in early 1989, Coke director and investment banker Herbert A. Allen told Mr. Schulof that Coke would consider selling its shares only in connection with an offer for all of Columbia's shares.
Mr. Kaufman said he would leave the company to pursue other opportunities in the event of a sale. 

Meanwhile, according to the documents, Mr. Schulof discussed the need for new management at Columbia with Walter Yetnikoff, chairman of the CBS Records unit that Sony had acquired from CBS Inc.
While top officials at Sony in Japan weighed the acquisition of Columbia, Mr. Schulof, Mr. Yetnikoff and his advisers at the Blackstone Group in New York, met with a number of entertainment-industry executives to find a new management team. 

Although Sony didn't disclose to whom it spoke, industry executives said the company first approached Michael Ovitz, head of the powerful Creative Artists Agency in Hollywood, but the two sides couldn't come to terms on such issues as compensation and operating authority.
Mr. Ovitz wasn't available to comment. 

The entertainment-industry officials said Mr. Yetnikoff subsequently brought Mr. Guber to meet Mr. Schulof after Mr. Guber made it known that he was interested in the post. 

