.START 

The dollar climbed steadily on early reports that Panamanian strongman Manuel Antonio Noriega had been ousted in a coup.
Late in the day, following the conclusion of New York trading, the White House announced that the coup apparently had failed. 

Foreign exchange traders said the U.S. unit was also buoyed by pronounced weakness in both the Japanese and British currencies. 

Dealers noted that the dollar had begun to push higher in Asian trading despite several waves of dollar selling by the Bank of Japan in the Tokyo and Sydney markets.
Some market participants estimated that the Bank of Japan poured $1 billion into the market to blunt the U.S. currency's climb, with seemingly little impact. 

As events in Panama grew increasingly tense, some investors were driven to the dollar as a "safe haven" currency.
The market also continued to focus on tomorrow's meeting of the Bundesbank central bank council, dealers said. 

Late in the New York trading day, the dollar was quoted at 1.8873 marks, up from 1.8793 marks late Monday in New York.
The U.S. currency was changing hands at 141.25 yen, well above 139.68 yen in New York late Monday.
Sterling was trading at $1.6045, down from $1.6135 late Monday. 

In Tokyo Wednesday, the U.S. dollar opened for trading at 141.05 yen, up from Tuesday's Tokyo close of 140.65 yen. 

Late Tuesday morning, a Panamanian armed forces communique said that General Noriega had been toppled in a military coup.
But White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the situation in Panama City was confused and he couldn't confirm reports that Mr. Noriega had been overthrown.
Later in the day, the White House reported the apparent failure of the coup. 

Prior to the late White House announcement, one New York trader said that reports of Mr. Noriega's ouster came on a day when the dollar had begun to gain. "It added fuel to the fire," he said. 

Although the Bank of Japan appeared in the Tokyo market, the dollar surged in the final half-hour of trading, breaking through an important resistance level at 140 yen. 

A round of intervention by nine European central banks temporarily pushed the dollar lower, but the U.S. currency climbed back.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York intervened late in the New York day, selling dollars for sterling. 

But the Fed's move, which one New York dealer speculated may have been on behalf of the Bank of England, did little to bolster the beleaguered British unit. 

"Panama was a catalyst to make people buy dollars, but not before (the dollar) had gained on sterling's tremendous weakness," said Graham Beale, manager of foreign exchange for Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corp. in New York. 

Traders noted that the Japanese unit has been hit by cross-trading against the mark in anticipation of an interest rate increase in Germany.
The mark gained against its Japanese counterpart yesterday, climbing to 74.82 yen in late New York trading from 74.32 late Monday. 

The policy-making central bank council of the Bundesbank is expected to raise Germany's discount rate by at least one-half of a percentage point from its current level of 5%.
Most traders say that the market has factored in a half-point increase by the Bundesbank; some venture that a full-point hike has been discounted. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $366.90 an ounce, down 70 cents.
Estimated volume was a light 2.3 million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Wednesday, gold was quoted at $365.75 an ounce. 

