.START 

Unisys Corp. said it plans to cut its work force by 7,000 to 8,000 people, roughly 1,000 more than it expected in August when it announced a restructuring designed to restore the company to health. 

The maker of computers and defense-electronics products said it is laying off 6,300 people, with the rest of the reduction coming through attrition and a previously reported early-retirement program.
That will reduce employment by 8% to 9%, to the low 80,000s, by the end of next year. 

Unisys said the moves will cut costs by $400 million to $500 million a year; in August, it had put the amount at $400 million.
The company said the reorganization will cut its break-even point by $1.5 billion -- meaning that if it were to break even on the roughly $10 billion of sales it expects to post for this year, it would be able to break even on $8.5 billion of sales in 1990. 

The Blue Bell, Pa., company said it will take a substantial charge in the third quarter to cover the program but won't disclose the amount until it reports third-quarter results in midmonth. 

Securities analysts, who had expressed doubts in August that the cutbacks Unisys had talked about then went far enough, were encouraged by yesterday's announcement. (The stock, which has dropped from $39 a bit more than a year ago, inched up 25 cents a share in advance of the announcement to close at $19.625 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.) 

Still, Unisys has dug itself a deep hole and will have to work hard merely to regain its position of a year ago.
Despite pent-up demand for a new line of mainframes, it has generally been losing ground in the mainframe and minicomputer markets.
Its big defense business has lagged, partly because of the slowing growth in the U.S. defense budget but also because of a three-month suspension tied to the company's involvement in the Pentagon procurement scandal. 

Other parts of the business -- notably systems based on the Unix operating system -- have grown fast, but not fast enough to offset the weak performers; the company had a net loss of $25.1 million in the first half on revenue of $4.78 billion and is expected to do little better than break even for the year.
And, with debt high and the stock price low, Unisys has limited room to maneuver. 

Unisys said most of the job reductions will come from corporate staffs, where it is trying to reduce duplication of effort.
It said 3,200 jobs will be cut at 250 locations in the U.S. starting this week.
Outside the U.S., 1,200 jobs will be cut by the first quarter of 1990. 

The company will also consolidate manufacturing by closing two operations and continuing to wind down a third.
That will eliminate 1,900 jobs starting later this year. 

Unisys said it will close the mainframe-manufacturing operation in Tredyffrin, Pa., and move the work to a facility in Clear Lake, Iowa.
Engineering will remain in Tredyffrin.
The computer-power-supply manufacturing and engineering operations in St. Laurent, Canada, will be closed in the first quarter.
Engineering support will be moved to Rancho Bernardo, Calif.
Computer-peripherals operations in Santa Clara, Calif., will continue to be moved out through the end of the year.
Manufacturing of disk drives and certain disk materials will stay there. 

In addition to the cutbacks in manufacturing and staffs, Unisys said it will cut out management layers and centralize support for its marketing staff.
That means, for example, that someone trained to sell to health-care organizations and someone selling to financial-services concerns would draw on the same pool of internal experts on Unisys hardware and software rather than each having a dedicated group. 

Unisys also said it is continuing to look at its defense-electronics operations, whose fortunes tend to rise and fall independent of the pressures facing the company's computer operations.
Unisys said it has cut the division's work force by 1,900 so far this year -- to 21,700 -- including 200 who were part of the layoffs announced yesterday. 

