.START 

When Industrias Resistol S.A., a big Mexican chemical company, saw sales of some products jump during the first half of this year, top executives were stunned. 

"The government is fighting inflation, cleaning up public spending, tightening the supply of money," says Benito Bucay, Resistol's director-general. "Economics 100 says we should be having a recession, and demand should be weak." Mr. Bucay decided to find out just who his customers were.
He was amazed to discover a leading buyer in a shabby, but bustling, off-the-books factory that bought tons of plastic to make toys. 

Executives at Cementos Mexicanos, the country's largest cement producer, were also taken aback by an unexpected moderate growth in sales. "It's mostly coming from underground construction," says Lorenzo Zambrano, director-general of Monterrey-based Cementos. 

Cementos had traditionally used government statistics on construction starts to gauge demand for its product.
But so much building is done off the books these days, there is no longer a direct correlation. 

Executives in a variety of industries say robust underground enterprises drove Mexico's unexpected 2.4% first-half growth in 1989, even though the government had programmed a recession to root out inflation.
And Mexican policy-makers, who have maintained controls on wages, prices and the exchange rate for 21 months, are enjoying the best of both worlds.
Mexico has kept a tight grip on inflation, which fell to 1% in August, the smallest increase in a decade. 

"Nobody, nobody, expected we'd have both low inflation and this kind of growth," says a government economic official. 

But while businessmen generally welcome this year's unexpected economic surge, they recognize that the underground economy is a double-edged sword. 

Executives of the food unit of giant Grupo Alfa are elated about this year's 100% sales increase in the company's most inexpensive line of cold meats, whose biggest buyers are underground mom-and-pop stores.
The downside for Alfa is what competition from underground employers is doing to the wage structure. 

"People have an image of Mexico as a country with a terrible problem of unemployment," says Guillermo Barba, president of Alfa's food group. "But just try hiring a janitor or a warehouse worker these days.
They won't even think of coming to work for less than double the mimimum wage.
They gain more underground." 

Mexico has always had a vibrant underground economy.
But as factories and farms went belly up because of the debt crisis, it has become larger and more sophisticated. 

The underground economy "has clearly become an increasingly important factor since the crisis started," said one top government economic official. "It's difficult to quantify how big it is today, but it has certainly provided many thousands of people with work, which has eased social pressures." 

Mexico's leading business association estimated the underground economy had doubled in size to 38% of gross domestic product, the total value of all goods and services produced, during the first three years of the crisis.
There's no telling how big it is now. 

Underground supply networks, usually an array of extended family contacts, are remarkably efficient.
A teen-age salesmen working near a downtown Mexico City subway station was selling Batman T-shirts weeks before Batman paraphernalia arrived in most Mexican department stores. 

"Some real entrepreneurs are emerging," says Mr. Zambrano. "And I don't think it's necessarily a bad thing that the government is losing some control over economic management.
It's a way of democratizing the economy." 

Of course, even with the economy's surprisingly strong performance, and the recent renegotiation of Mexico's $97 billion debt, Mexico's long-term outlook is still uncertain.
It's unclear that the debt accord will spark badly needed new investment.
And the government's anti-inflation strategy still has its doubters, who maintain this year's strong demand is an artificial product of price controls.
They point to recent anti-inflation programs in Argentina and Brazil, where price controls heated up demand, provoked product shortages and, ultimately, unleashed a new wave of inflation. 

"In our business, much of this year's sales boom is attributable to price distortions," says Cesar Flores Esquivel, a leader of the Mexican Association of the Auto Industry. 

But other business executives think Mexico's program is essentially sound. "There are distortions, but compared to what happened in South America, they are minor," says Ernesto Vega Velasco, finance director of Grupo Desc, one of Mexico's biggest conglomerates. "Unlike those cases, the fiscal management of the Mexican government has been very responsible." Public finances are shaping up strongly.
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari is unloading costly public enterprises such as Mexico's largest airline and the state telephone monopoly. 

And perhaps the biggest difference of all between Mexico's anti-inflation program and those of Argentina and Brazil is that Mexico has a market mechanism to keep prices low: an almost complete opening of the economy to imports. "The reduction in tariffs is a very strong price control," says Gilberto Borja, president of Grupo ICA, a huge construction concern.
Indeed, Resistol's Mr. Bucay says that even if controls were lifted, he could only make limited price increases before his products were no longer competitive with imports. 

Some businessmen in the formal sector are just as pressured by what they consider unfair competition by the underground businesses.
A relatively small group of major companies pays the great majority of taxes in Mexico.
And when the government has faced cash crunches, it has combed their books for whatever money it can claim. 

"It's not enough that I'm paying higher wages because of the informal economy, but I also have to pay their share of taxes," says one frustrated executive at a big manufacturing company. 

Businessmen say that if the government wants to stop inequities to the formal sector and regain control of economic management, it must bring the underground economy into the mainstream.
Indeed, President Salinas says Mexico will soon simplify its unwieldy tax system to induce more off-the-books businesses to enter the formal sector. 

