.START 

The downfall of another banking institution was the latest blow to New Zealand's beleaguered financial system. 

The nation's central bank appointed statutory managers for DFC New Zealand Ltd., a high-profile investment bank, because of what DFC called "serious" financial difficulties.
The investment bank is owned 20% by Salomon Brothers Inc. and 80% by National Provident Fund, New Zealand's largest pension fund. 

This is "the most serious collapse we've had since the deregulation" of New Zealand's financial markets in 1984, said Paul Collins, chairman of National Provident Fund. 

Disclosure of DFC's problems was the latest in a string of setbacks in the financial sector, where mounting potential loan losses have left New Zealand institutions struggling to stay afloat.
In June, the government arranged a 600 million New Zealand-dollar (US$352.5 million) bailout package for state-controlled Bank of New Zealand because of its hefty provisions for doubtful debts.
And NZI Corp., a banking and insurance company that is reeling from shaky loans, has asked its controlling shareholder, British-based General Accident Fire & Life Assurance Corp., to boost its stake to 100% from an initial 51% acquired in June 1988. 

The sagging fortunes of New Zealand financial institutions stem mainly from a series of corporate failures that followed the October 1987 global equities crash.
Many of New Zealand's high-flying companies were hit particularly hard in the crash.
Moreover, unlike Australia and the U.S., New Zealand's government tightened credit after the crash.
That led to a recession and plunged many companies, especially those with interests in a declining property market, into financial problems. 

While central bank officials said it is too early to predict what DFC's final fate might be, National Provident Fund's Mr. Collins said he expects the investment bank "will be wound down over a period of time," probably over many years.
He said it is "quite apparent and quite clear to me that DFC in its present form is incapable of being resuscitated." 

About 50% of DFC's loan portfolio involves property, tourism and agriculture-related borrowers, according to Mr. Collins.
Most of DFC's creditors are banks in Singapore, Hong Kong and Tokyo. 

The central bank appointed Don Francis and Tom Davies of the accounting firm Deloitte Haskins & Sells as statutory managers.
Mr. Francis told a news conference that DFC has shareholders' funds of about NZ$180 million and that the bank's provisions for bad and doubtful debts total about the same amount. 

Mr. Collins said DFC would have needed a capital injection of "hundreds of millions of dollars" to continue operating.
He said National Provident Fund, as the majority shareholder, refused to provide those funds. 

John Perham, DFC's chairman, said Salomon Brothers also wasn't prepared to bail out his bank.
Salomon Brothers officials in Sydney weren't immediately available for comment. 

DFC was set up by the New Zealand government in 1964 as Development Finance Corp. to be a lender of last resort for new industries or development projects.
By 1976, the government ceased funding the bank, and it evolved into an investment bank.
In June 1988, the government sold DFC to Salomon Brothers and National Provident Fund for NZ$111.3 million, and the two new owners subsequently made a capital injection of NZ$45 million.
National Provident since has said it believes it paid too much for its DFC stake. 

