.START 

The combined foreign-currency holdings of the Federal Reserve and Treasury totaled $34 billion at the end of July 1989, the latest reporting date.
That figure had increased by $23.2 billion in the 13 months since June 1988, mainly by purchases of yen and marks.
This activity's costs appear to outweigh by far the benefits. 

The legal basis for the Federal Reserve's intervention in foreign-exchange markets is questionable.
The Federal Reserve Act provides no general and positive authorization to operate in foreign currencies.
However, in early 1962, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC, comprising the Fed board and presidents of the Fed regional banks) approved such operations with the concurrence of top U.S. officials. 

Congress, in the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, gave the Treasury a limited authority for operations to stabilize the dollar's exchange value.
In March 1961, with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as its agent, the Treasury for the first time since the late 1930s entered into foreign-exchange transactions for monetary purposes.
The Treasury and the Fed effectively have been coordinating these efforts ever since, except during the the first Reagan administration, when no intervention occurred.
Only since the start of 1977, however, has the FOMC approved an overall open position in all foreign currencies. 

Why do the authorities engage in substantial foreign-currency purchases?
Has doing so achieved its objective?
What costs are imposed on the economy? 

The authorities buy foreign currencies when they want to prevent the dollar from appreciating, and sell them when they want to prevent the dollar from depreciating.
Ten years ago, foreign-currency reserves were $3.8 billion.
The current figure is almost tenfold as large, a far greater increase than in the total assets of the Federal Reserve System, which less than doubled ($160 billion in 1979; less than $300 billion at the end of June 1989). 

The foreign-currency purchasing binge over the past 13 months has not prevented a sizable appreciation of the dollar.
One dollar bought 1.758 marks and 127.5 yen in June 1988, and 1.89 marks and 140.4 yen in July 1989.
Intervention has been ineffective because the Fed sterilized the monetary effects of purchases and sales -- that is, it contracted or expanded the domestic money supply to counteract the effects at home of its moves in the foreign-exchange markets. 

A major source of fluctuations in exchange rates is the change in relative rates of money growth.
Differences in money growth rates tend to produce differences in inflation rates.
Differences in inflation rates in turn produce either exchange-rate depreciation or appreciation. 

Since early 1987, with the exception of the months just after the 1987 stock market crash, the Federal Reserve has been restricting monetary growth; Japan and West Germany on the whole have been expansionary.
Monetary policy was expansionary in those countries in 1987 and 1988 because they engaged in exchange-rate intervention in the attempt to prevent dollar depreciation and did not fully sterilize their purchases of dollars.
As a result, monetary growth has accelerated in Japan and West Germany. 

A delayed result of these differences in monetary growth rates is that inflation is now trending down in the U.S. and rising in the other countries, with the expected consequences for exchange rates.
Central-bank intervention in exchange markets has been a pointless activity that has imposed costs on the countries engaging in such intervention. 

One cost is an increase in exchange-rate volatility produced by the erratic intervention.
A second is that the taxpayer bears a double pecuniary loss. 

The first arises from the Fed's sterilization activity.
It offsets open-market purchases of foreign currency with open-market sales of Treasury and federal agency obligations.
Although the monetary base grew by $10 billion from June 1988 to May 1989, domestic interest-bearing securities held by the Fed over the period declined on net by $7 billion.
Net income of the Federal Reserve Banks, which is normally rebated to the Treasury, has accordingly been reduced.
That is one part of the loss sustained by taxpayers, offset to an extent that is not reported by the interest earned on foreign-exchange holdings. 

The second loss relates back to exchange-rate volatility and the risk to which the taxpayer is exposed as foreign-currency assets held by the Fed and the Treasury balloon.
By acquiring $34 billion of foreign currency, the monetary authorities have taken a speculative position that yen, D-marks and other currencies will appreciate in relation to the dollar.
The Fed and the administration assert that the elimination of inflation is a major goal of policy.
Yet in their foreign-exchange operations, the U.S. authorities are gambling that their own anti-inflationary policies will fail. 

The Fed publishes a quarterly report on its foreign-exchange operations three months after their conclusion.
The report details the dates of purchases and sales, but not the prices at which it executed the transactions. 

In 1988, the latest year for which information is available, the realized and unrealized loss on foreign-exchange-rate transactions by the Fed was $511 million.
The Treasury's losses, approximately equal, are not reported. 

No benefits offset the losses.
Sterilized intervention has only temporary effects on exchange rates.
The public has a right to insist on a full accounting of the realized and unrealized losses on official intervention in foreign-exchange markets.
Is any congressional committee paying attention to these losses?
Is there any other mechanism in existence for making the Treasury and the Fed accountable for their speculation in foreign exchange? 

Ms. Schwartz, co-author with Milton Friedman of "A Monetary History of the United States," is affiliated with the National Bureau of Economic Research. 

