.START 

Daniel P. Kearney, a Boston real estate adviser, was named president and chief executive officer of the Oversight Board of the Resolution Trust Corp., the new government agency that oversees sales of hundreds of billions of dollars of thrifts and their assets. 

The Oversight Board, with a staff of about 40, sets policy for the RTC, and will review its regulations and performance as it solicits bids and sells thrifts and their assets.
Its primary job will be to prevent fraud in the RTC and its private industry contractors. 

Mr. Kearney, a principal at Aldrich, Eastman & Waltch Inc., specializes in mortgage financing.
The firm manages more than $8 billion of real estate equity and debt for tax-exempt pension funds.
Previously, Mr. Kearney was a managing director at Salomon Brothers Inc. in charge of the real estate financing department. 

Mr. Kearney brings Washington experience to the post, having served as associate director of the White House Office of Management and Budget in the Carter administration, and as president of the Government National Mortgage Association from 1974 to 1976.
He was also a deputy assistant secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development from 1973 to 1974. 

As president of the Oversight Board, Mr. Kearney will be faced with soothing less than easy relations between the board and the RTC.
The RTC has clashed with its board, for example, over the types of transactions that it may use to sell sick S&Ls, with the board favoring simpler deals that are considered less lucrative for thrift buyers. 

The relationship between the RTC and the Oversight Board is certain to come up today in hearings by banking committees of both the Senate and House, where the three current Oversight Board members are to testify.
Those board members are Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and HUD Secretary Jack Kemp.
Two members from the private sector have yet to be appointed. 

Mr. Brady, who announced the appointment, said in a statement that Mr. Kearney's selection by the three board members was unanimous. "He brings to his new position experience in finance, real estate and government which will be critical in carrying out the mandate set by Congress." 

"Dan Kearney has every credential you could ask for," said John Oros, a partner at Goldman, Sachs & Co. who advises thrifts. "He's level-headed, with an easygoing style." 

Mr. Kearney wasn't available for comment yesterday. 

