.START 

Digital Equipment Corp. said that John J. Shields, a senior vice president who had often been considered a potential future chief executive, resigned. 

Mr. Shields, 51 years old, had run half the company, supervising sales, services, marketing and international operations for almost a decade.
In fiscal 1989 ended June 30, his $532,231 salary was second only to that of 63-year-old Kenneth H. Olsen, president and founder of the 32-year old computer company. 

The resignation, which had been rumored and denied since May, raises anew questions about who will succeed Mr. Olsen when he steps aside as head of the nation's second biggest computer maker.
Glenn Rifkin, co-author of "The Ultimate Entrepreneur," a biography of Mr. Olsen, and an editor of ComputerWorld, said: "I think Olsen has no intention of stepping down.
If he has somebody in mind, it will be a big surprise." 

In New York Stock Exchange trading, stock of Digital, based in Maynard, Mass., fell $2.25 to $88.75. 

Neither Mr. Shields nor Mr. Olsen could be reached for comment.
A Digital spokesman said that the resignation was voluntary.
In a prepared statement, the company said Mr. Shields had made "a personal decision to leave the company to pursue other interests." 

Mr. Olsen has always avoided anointing any successor, noting that he is healthy and plans to continue running the company for the foreseeable future.
But analysts and consultants have long pressed him to announce a plan, fearing that chaos will result if a strong successor isn't groomed. 

Some Digital watchers think Mr. Shields' departure leaves an open field for John F. Smith, a 54-year old senior vice president who is in charge of engineering and manufacturing.
A dark horse would be the company's other senior vice president, Winston B. Hindle, who heads administrative functions and was once known internally as "Olsen's Richelieu" after the historic French cardinal and statesman who was chief minister of Louis XIII.
But Mr. Hindle's age, 59, would make him more of a caretaker. 

John Logan, an analyst with Aberdeen Group in Boston, said, "Olsen believes he's good for at least another 10 years of running the company.
When Olsen goes for succession planning he'll skip a generation (of managers) and go down 20 years from his age." Mr. Logan said the ultimate successor may be a vice president now in his early 40s or someone who hasn't emerged yet. 

A successor to Mr. Shields wasn't named. 

The resignation reemphasizes the seriousness of Digital's sales problems.
Last year Digital's net income fell 18% to $1.07 billion, or $8.45 a share, and sales growth slowed for the second straight year, rising 11% to $12.74 billion. 

Analysts said that Mr. Shields was blamed for last year's optimistic forecast of 18% growth.
One Digital insider said he also was blamed for an unpopular increase in warranty costs that most customers viewed as a back-door price increase. 

Worse, after several years of improving customer relations, customer satisfaction declined last year.
Steven Wendler, a consultant with Gartner Group -- a market researcher -- and a former Digital employee, said that last winter half the 500 customers at a Gartner program on Digital said they were dissatisfied with Digital's sales and service. "Mr.
Olsen stood up and said, 'I'm going to fix that problem, '" he said. 

Digital insiders said Mr. Olsen has been paying increasing attention to the sales force this year.
Digital spent millions of dollars renting facilities at Brown University, Providence, R.I., for the summer and bringing in sales people to make sure they understood their products. 

Analysts and former employees contend that Mr. Shields has been out of favor with Mr. Olsen since last fall. "He was on the skids, and finally he just resigned," said Jay P. Stevens, a Dean Witter analyst. 

Last spring, rumors that he was leaving flooded the company because Mr. Shields's name was left off organization charts and he didn't appear at some executive meetings.
Electronic bulletin boards at Digital carried jokes: "Q.
What's the difference between Elvis and Jack Shields?
A. Elvis has been spotted recently." 

It has been a characteristic of Mr. Olsen in the past to leave unwanted executives in untenable positions and wait for them to quit.
Terry Shannon, who follows Digital for market researcher International Data Corp., Framingham, Mass., said that Mr. Shields lost some of his authority and was "left to contemplate the handwriting on the wall." 

However, the company repeatedly denied that Mr. Shields was about to leave.
Last June Mr. Shields arranged for the company's public relations director to bring a reporter to his office for an interview in which he promised he didn't plan to leave.
Yesterday through a spokesman, Mr. Shields emphasized that he had made the decision to leave only six weeks ago. 

