.START 

NORIEGA'S FORCES FOILED an attempt to topple his regime in Panama. 

Troops loyal to the military chief put down a coup attempt by junior officers in Panama City after a day of heavy fighting, a spokesman for the country's defense forces said.
Some of the officers who had seized Noriega's headquarters surrendered, and the government said the situation was "under control." Noriega, who has been indicted by the U.S. on drug charges, later appeared on government television to end speculation that he might have been injured in the aborted coup, the second such attempt in two years. 

Bush denied that the U.S. had engineered the insurrection, but made clear that the administration would welcome the downfall of Noriega's government. 

EAST GERMANY SUSPENDED free travel after letting more refugees flee. 

The government in East Berlin agreed to allow about 10,000 of its citizens at the West German Embassy in Prague to emigrate but banned unrestricted travel to Czechoslovakia, which has emerged as the main gateway to the West.
The clampdown on travel came after hundreds of East Germans stormed through police lines to get inside West Germany's embassy compound in an attempt to follow nearly 40,000 others who have fled. 

East German leader Honecker accused Bonn of attempting to "destabilize" the Communist state.
Prague also protested an "undesirable situation." 

The Soviet legislature rejected Gorbachev's call for a 15-month emergency ban on workers' newly won right to strike.
It was the Kremlin leader's first major policy defeat in the four-month-old Supreme Soviet.
But Gorbachev said he was satisfied with a compromise that imposes a selective prohibition on strikes in critical industries. 

Lebanese lawmakers agreed in principle to share seats in Parliament equally between Moslems and Christians.
The accord is the first since the legislators opened talks Saturday in Saudi Arabia aimed at ending Lebanon's 14-year-old civil war.
The Moslems have cited the Christian-dominated government as a cause of the conflict. 

The U.S. and Mexico signed agreements on trade, investment, the environment, and tourism.
The accords came during a state visit by Mexican President Salinas.
At a signing ceremony at the White House, Bush said relations between the two countries have "never been stronger." 

Bush conferred in Washington with Soviet Defense Minister Yazov about prospects for reducing superpower nuclear and conventional arms.
Yazov, who met Monday with Defense Secretary Cheney, is the first Soviet defense chief to visit the U.S. 

Colombia's high court upheld the constitutionality of President Barco's decree allowing extradition of suspected narcotics traffickers to the U.S.
But the court ruled against a decree allowing security forces to confiscate traffickers' property. 

An Israeli activist was sentenced to six months in jail for meeting with PLO leader Arafat.
Abie Nathan, the first person imprisoned for violating a 1986 anti-terrorism law, vowed to persist in meeting "the enemy" as a route to peace.
The sentencing came as the government debated whether to open talks with Arabs approved by the PLO. 

The House approved a compromise $11.8 billion natural resources bill incorporating major timber and oil provisions.
Meanwhile, the House Appropriations Committee approved $9 million as part of a Bush administration request to support the February elections in Nicaragua. 

HUD Secretary Kemp unveiled revisions aimed at preventing a recurrence of scandals at the housing agency.
The package announced by Kemp, who said he was "clearing the decks," is designed to redirect programs toward the poor and away from those who reaped big fees from projects meant to assist the needy. 

South Carolina banned shellfish harvesting and warned against swimming in the ocean and rivers, saying Hurricane Hugo had left waters choked with sewage.
Authorities also ordered the construction of an eight-mile-long sand dune to protect beaches from North Myrtle Beach to Pawleys Island from high tides later this month. 

Poland's Communist leadership held a one-day meeting in Warsaw to discuss ways to overhaul the party's image after losing control of the East bloc government to a Solidarity-led opposition.
An internal poll found that 72% of the party's members favor changing its official name and policies at a party congress scheduled for January. 

The African National Congress expressed concern that the U.S. may be rushing to support South Africa's new white-minority government without any firm evidence that President de Klerk's regime is committed to easing apartheid.
The black nationalists made their comments after meeting in Washington with State Department aides. 

