.START 

Machinists union members at Boeing Co., facing an early-morning deadline today, rejected a three-year contract offer from the Seattle-based aerospace concern and notified the company that they intended to strike. 

Although it wasn't clear whether there would be any last-minute efforts to restart negotiations last night -- and how much of the talk on both sides was typical 11th-hour swagger -- Boeing began preparing late yesterday for a walkout at 12:01 a.m., when contracts with 55,000 union members are set to expire. 

The company, its order book for commercial jetliners brimming, said it would continue delivering aircraft using supervisory and other non-striking personnel.
A Boeing spokesman added that if there are shipment delays because of a work stoppage, the airlines wouldn't be able to collect compensation as they normally do. 

"Boeing is not about to step in and cave," predicted David Smith, an aerospace analyst with Raymond James & Associates, a St. Petersburg, Fla., brokerage firm. 

The offer that was rejected yesterday by "a substantial majority," in the words of one union representative, called for a 4% wage increase and an additional 8% lump-sum bonus in the first year.
In the second year, workers would receive a 3% wage increase and 3% bonus, with a 3% wage gain and no bonus in the third year.
It also reduced the amount of overtime Boeing could require, and, according to the company, improved the cost-of-living formula for workers and provided significant increases in medical coverage and other benefits. 

"We're extremely disappointed," the Boeing spokesman said. "This is one of the best packages we've put on the table in years." 

Nonetheless, Machinists District 751, with 40,000 members, approved a strike resolution by a reported 85% of the vote.
At the district's meeting held in Seattle's Kingdome stadium, Machinists leaders recommended a rejection of the pact.
They maintained the company's wage and benefit offers were insufficient.
Their primary goal has been to replace the bonuses with a straight wage increase. 

Three years ago, Boeing Machinists approved an accord calling for bonuses of 12% in the first year and 5% in each of the next two years, without an increase in base wage rates.
Boeing pioneered the lump-sum bonus approach as a means of holding down spiraling costs, and others in the industry, including Lockheed Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp., have adopted the strategy. 

The union's 1986 approval, however, came only after the membership first rejected the company's offer, then agreed to stay on the job under a series of one-day contract extensions until better terms could be obtained.
The last strike, which lasted for 45 days, was in 1977. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Boeing shares rose $3.125 to finish at $59.75 a share, in a broadly rising market. 

The contract vote tally came after the Big Board had closed, although clearly, most major brokerages weren't expecting trouble.
Yesterday morning, in fact, three houses issued positive reports about Boeing's outlook. 

"The Street has been assuming the new contract would go through without a hiccup," said Phillip Brannon of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets. 

The precise impact of a strike on Boeing's delivery schedule -- already upset this year by production delays stemming from its record backlog -- would, of course, depend on how long a strike lasts.
The company noted that its airline customers "have been notified of a strike and our intention to support deliveries to the best of our ability." 

Separately, a spokesman for Machinists negotiating with Lockheed said 20,000 of Lockheed rank and file were continuing to work past the Sunday expiration date of their contracts as they await the outcome of the Boeing situation.
The spokesman said a Lockheed strike vote now is scheduled for Oct. 22. 

