.START 

Coffee futures prices plunged to a 14-year low as Brazil dashed hopes of a new International Coffee Agreement anytime soon. 

At least one analyst said further sharp declines are likely. 

The December contract ended yesterday with a loss of 4.03 cents a pound at 76.50 cents, after falling to a new life-of-contract low of 75.05 cents.
All contracts established new lows for as long as they've been available for trading. 

The prices were the lowest since 1975.
That year a devastating frost in Brazil subsequently pushed prices to a record of $3.40 a pound on April 14, 1977, on what was then the Coffee and Sugar Exchange, said a spokeswoman for the Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange Inc. 

There wasn't much chance to begin with that a new international coffee agreement would be reached at the current talks of the International Coffee Organization, now in their second week in London. 

Export quotas of green coffee, which, along with prices, comprise the critical economic components of the coffee agreement, were suspended in July.
Since then, there has been a free market in coffee, in which prices have fallen by more than 50% as producing nations aggressively competed to sell coffee.
The May futures contract traded as high as $1.47 a pound in May of this year. 

What little chance there was of reaching a new accord, which blossomed simply because the 74 member nations were discussing the possibility, completely disappeared following the strong tone of a Brazilian representative's comments. 

Jorio Dauster, president of the Brazilian Coffee Institute (IBC), the government agency that supervises the industry in that country, stated that he saw no chance of a revival in coffee export quotas in the near future.
The reason, he said, is that pact members' positions hadn't changed since July when the quotas collapsed, according to a report (Reuters Holdings PLC) from London. 

Another report (Knight-Ridder Inc.) said Mr. Dauster saw no chance of a new agreement before March 1990, when a new Brazilian government takes office. 

"Some people are changing their tune, but the lyrics are the same. . . . We should not rush into negotiations unless we see that the elements which led to {the} deadlock have been removed," Mr. Dauster said, according to the first report. 

When asked what he meant by near term, Mr. Dauster said he thought it would be impossible to restore quotas for at least six months, the Reuter report said. 

The IBC president touched on many of the arguments that have been made for changes in the agreement.
The U.S., in particular, has been adamant in asking for the elimination of sales of coffee at cheaper prices to countries that aren't members of the agreement.
The U.S. also wants more flexible export quotas that would allow greater shipments of the more flavorful mild coffees, such as those from Central America. 

While not mentioning the U.S. by name, he said that the question of selectivity of coffee qualities was overplayed, according to Knight-Ridder.
He said selectivity shouldn't result in cutting Brazil's export quota because Brazilian coffee isn't inferior to any other country's coffee, the report said. 

With respect to non-ICO sales, he said the question should be resolved. "This is a time to attract non-members to the agreement by bringing them in now," he said, according to Knight-Ridder. 

Now that the possibility of quotas has disappeared, traders will focus on the oversupply of coffee in the market, according to Bernard Savaiko, analyst for PaineWebber Inc., New York. 

"The situation is about as negative as that of cocoa, unless they can withhold coffee from the market," Mr. Savaiko said. "Roasters are about to buy coffee for winter needs, but traditionally, they're reluctant to buy in a free-falling market and don't come in until prices show a sign of stabilizing," he said. "Under those circumstances, the price could drop to as low as 50 cents." 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

ENERGY: Crude oil futures were higher, helped in part by events in Panama.
The benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude for November delivery rose 12 cents a barrel to settle at $20.13.
Petroleum products were mixed on the New York Mercantile Exchange with gasoline flat to slightly higher.
American Petroleum Institute statistics on U.S. oil inventories, released after trading's close, showed a rise of 4.5 million barrels in gasoline stocks last week.
That was more than had been expected and could be a bearish factor in trading today.
Reports of a military coup in Panama contributed to crude's strength yesterday.
Although traders generally played down the effects of the Panamanian news, there was some concern about oil supplies shipped across Panama, through the Canal and the pipeline.
With a capacity of 800,000 barrels a day, the trans-Panama pipeline transports Alaskan North Slope crude from the Pacific across the Isthmus for delivery to the U.S. Gulf Coast.
But the pipeline's operator said there didn't appear to be a problem.
Meanwhile, several traders and analysts said seasonal factors were helping to firm prices in the crude oil market. "We're looking for continued strength through October," said Peter Beutel of Elders Futures Inc.
But he added that if crude prices follow the usual pattern they will peak in early November and decline until March. 

GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: The prices of corn futures contracts slipped slightly from the big Monday rally as traders looked for more evidence to substantiate rumors that the Soviet Union was on the verge of buying as many as four million metric tons of U.S. corn, said Robert Lekberg, an analyst for Farmers Grain & Livestock Corp., Chicago.
The prices of some corn futures contracts had jumped their daily permissible limit during part of the trading session Monday because any Soviet purchase would end a recent scare that it doesn't have the hard currency to afford its annual autumn buying binge of U.S. crops.
After trading ended, the Agriculture Department announced that the Soviets had bought two million metric tons of corn.
Corn futures prices slipped slightly yesterday, in part because the Monday price rally triggered selling of corn by farmers to grain elevators and processors.
The prices of most soybean futures contracts fell, while the prices of wheat futures contracts rose slightly. 

PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices eased in quiet trading.
December delivery gold ended with a loss of 70 cents an ounce at $371.40.
December silver was off 0.30 cent an ounce at $5.30.
January platinum declined $1.90 to $498.60.
The listless reaction of precious metals to reports of an attempt to overthrow Gen. Noriega in Panama is just another indication that precious metals at the moment show no sensitivity to political developments, one analyst said.
He also noted that the rise in crude oil prices, normally regarded as an inflationary factor, didn't make any impression on precious metals traders either and that the dollar, which was strong, continued to be the principal influence. 

