.START 

A bold move by McCaw Cellular Communications in its battle for LIN Broadcasting sent cellular-telephone stocks surging again as the Nasdaq Composite Index jumped 2.09 to 477.28 -- its third record high in as many sessions. 

Strength in the cellular sector has helped boost the over-the-counter market during the past two sessions. 

McCaw offered to buy the New York cellular properties of Metromedia for $1.9 billion, properties on which LIN holds a right of first refusal. 

LIN has long been known to want the properties.
But if LIN were to exercise its option, it would be forced to take on hefty debt to finance the acquisition.
Such a move could scare away LIN's proposed merger partner, analysts speculate. 

LIN has agreed to merge with BellSouth in a stock swap.
As part of a restructuring prior to the merger, LIN would spin off its television stations to shareholders and pay a $20-a-share special dividend.
The BellSouth merger has been seen as an attempt to thwart McCaw's $110-a-share acquisition offer for LIN. 

While LIN fell 3 1/8 to 108 1/2 on the news, other cellular issues gained.
McCaw, which analysts say stands to gain no matter what LIN does, added 1 to 40 1/2. 

McCaw also agreed to sell certain southeastern cellular properties to Contel for $205 a "pop", or potential subscriber, a total of $1.3 billion.
That's a record for medium-sized cellular properties, analysts say.
That move forced an upward valuation of other cellular companies in the industry. 

"Everyone on Wall Street has to raise their valuations {on other cellular companies} to bring them into line" with the price Contel is paying for McCaw's properties, said Frederick A. Moran of Moran & Associates in Stamford, Conn. 

The activity in the OTC cellular stocks drove up the Nasdaq Utility Index 1%, or 7.65 points, to 772.54, also a high for that index. 

Overall Nasdaq volume was 151,197,400 shares. 

Among those cellular stocks benefiting from McCaw Cellular's sale of cellular properties to Contel Corp. were Associated Communications.
Its Class A shares added 1 1/4 to 37 3/4; U S West NewVector, which rose 1/4 to 41 1/4, and Contel Cellular, up 1/8 to 26. 

One loser in the group was Vanguard Cellular, which dropped 3/4 to 38.
Analysts said speculation that Contel would make a bid for Vanguard had driven the stock higher in recent sessions. 

Northeast bank stocks were weak again this session, as they have been recently.
The Nasdaq Bank Index eased 0.40 to 

Shearson Lehman Hutton trader George Jennison, who trades bank stocks, said continuing concerns over real-estate lending problems are pressuring the issues.
Mr. Jennison said that a move by Bank of Boston yesterday to increase its third-quarter loan-loss reserves and review its real-estate lending practices has heightened concerns in the region. 

Connecticut banks were among the weakest yesterday, Mr. Jennison said.
Among those, Centerbank lost 3/4 to 8 3/4; Burritt Interfinancial Bancorp lost 1 to 14, and Norwich Financial slipped 1/4 to 9 1/4. 

Surgical Care Affiliates rose 2 to 20 1/2.
The company gave a presentation yesterday at a health-care conference for institutional investors and analysts.
Other companies attending the conference included St. Jude Medical, which added 1/2 to 44 1/ 2, and Biomet, which was up 1/4 to 27 1/2. 

At the top of the OTC most-active list, Great American Communications dipped 1/8 to 12 3/8 on volume of more than 2.6 million shares.
Late yesterday, the company said it agreed in principle to buy two radio stations from Sandusky Radio.
The stations, in Tampa, Fla., and Denver, boost Great American's holdings to 12 stations, the maximum permitted by the Federal Communications Commission. 

Second on the list, Jaguar PLC's American Depository Receipts added 15/32 to 9 23/32.
This week's issue of Barron's added to the speculation over General Motors and Ford's interest in the European luxury-car maker.
Barron's quoted a European auto analyst who said that Jaguar would be a good fit for either of the American auto giants.
Both companies have expressed an interest in buying a significant stake in Jaguar. 

