.START 

Housing Secretary Jack Kemp, in an attempt to prevent a recurrence of the scandals at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, announced changes aimed at redirecting programs toward the poor and away from the affluent and powerful consultants who reaped big fees from projects meant to assist the needy. 

Saying that he is "clearing the decks," Mr. Kemp unveiled revisions involving ethics, management and the Federal Housing Administration. 

At a news conference at HUD's headquarters, the secretary said "the answer is demonstratively yes" when asked if the scandals have hindered the progress he sought for the agency during his tenure. "I must admit it has set us back a couple of months." He insisted, however, "that I will not allow HUD's mission to be paralyzed." 

Starting with an inspector general's report in April, HUD has been regularly hit with allegations of mismanagement, fraud and influence-peddling.
Mr. Kemp said that after taking office, he "soon learned that a number of programs intended to help poor people and low-income communities were riddled with systemic flaws that allowed them to be corrupted by greedy individuals who used their political influence to gain unfair access to HUD resources." 

The secretary focused his proposals, some of which require regulatory or legislative action, on three areas: 

-- Ethics: All funding decisions would be announced publicly.
Certain discretionary monies would be folded into programs that require disbursements according to a formula or on a competitive basis.
Consultants and lobbyists doing HUD-related business would have to register with the department, and their fees would be disclosed.
Failure to register could result in a $10,000 fine.
The agency's inspector general would be given subpoena power and additional staff. 

-- Management and Finance: Resources for monitoring and evaluating HUD programs, which were slashed along with the rest of HUD's budget during the Reagan administration, would rise to $100 million from $25 million.
Communities would be required to spend at least 75% of their Community Development Block Grants on projects that benefit low and moderate-income people.
A chief financial officer would report directly to the secretary, and a comptroller for the Federal Housing Administration would be appointed. 

-- FHA Audits: Annual audits would be required for the FHA, which didn't have one from 1974 until this year because its books were in such bad shape.
Loans for private investments in single-family units and FHA-backed loans originated by dealers of home-improvement services would be eliminated.
Mr. Kemp also wants to stop developers from securing big profits by layering HUD subsidies on top of each other. 

Mr. Kemp's plan targets the programs that have been hardest hit by allegations of scandal, mismanagement and misplaced priorities.
His announced "reforms," however, generally wouldn't produce a totally revamped agency, with new, audacious and visionary programs as some among his advisers had urged. 

Strong praise for Mr. Kemp's proposals was quickly volunteered by members of Congress and others concerned with federal housing programs.
Rep. Marge Roukema (R., N.J.), sponsor of legislation that would make the inspector general's position even stronger than recommended by Mr. Kemp, said his suggestions are "going to go a long way toward the housecleaning HUD needs." 

Rep. Tom Lantos (D., Calif.), chairman of the House subcommittee investigating the HUD scandals, called the secretary's effort "vigorous and prompt and impressive action along a whole spectrum of issues." Noting that Mr. Kemp had once referred to the department's problems as a "swamp," Mr. Lantos added: "This is good medicine for swamp fever." 

Some local officials, however, weren't pleased with Mr. Kemp's plan to target 75% of Community Development Block Grants specifically to projects that benefit low and moderate-income people.
A statement from the National Association of Counties said the proposal would "sharply restrict" public works and infrastructure improvements, in favor of projects such as low-income housing rehabilitation, even if that allocation conflicted with local priorities. 

