.START 

MGM Grand Inc. expanded plans for a movie studio theme park and hotel on the Las Vegas Strip just a month after it announced the project. 

The company also said it has been approached by several companies interested in being partners in the $700 million project, and hinted that one of them might be entertainment giant MCA Inc., which owns the Universal Studios Hollywood theme park near Los Angeles and is building a similar attraction in Orlando, Fla.
An MCA official declined to comment on any possible contacts the company has had with MGM Grand. 

Fred Benninger, chairman of MGM Grand, wouldn't identify the interested parties but acknowleged that one operates its own studio tour/theme park. "You figure out which one it is," Mr. Benninger said, smiling.
Walt Disney Co., the only other company with a studio/theme park, said yesterday that it isn't interested in joining forces with MGM Grand in Las Vegas. 

Although plans for the MGM Grand project are still sketchy, the attraction, which could open as early as the fall of 1992, has already grown from its initial conception. 

The company said yesterday that it has agreed to purchase a 115-acre parcel along the Las Vegas Strip that includes the 700-room Marina Hotel and Casino and the Tropicana Country Club and Golf Course.
The project as first announced was to have been built a few miles away on land adjacent to the MGM Desert Inn Hotel & Casino, and Mr. Benninger noted that the new site will allow for a 75-acre theme park and working movie studio, double the size originally planned.
The planned hotel has also grown, to 5,000 rooms from 4,000 rooms, with the new facility to be built around the existing Marina hotel.
The hotel and theme park are expected to employ more than 7,000 year-round. 

Mr. Benninger said the project may be funded with "mortgage financing," depending on whether MGM Grand selects a venture partner. 

The location of the park and hotel -- kitty-cornered from the 4,032-room Excalibur castle-themed resort being built by Circus Circus Enterprises Inc. and across the street from Ramada Inc. 's Tropicana Hotel & Casino -- is designed to create a new hub of walk-in traffic along the Strip that will be geared toward family entertainment as well as gambling.
The intersection of the Strip and Flamingo Road a few blocks north currently attracts the most traffic, with Caesars Palace, the Dunes, Bally's and the Flamingo catering to a mostly adult crowd. 

"We believe the quality and scale of our entertainment complex will encourage Las Vegas convention delegates, as well as vacationing couples, to bring along their families," Mr. Benninger said, pointing out that the attraction should appeal to "ages 10 to 75." Average room rates at the hotel will be around $40. 

Although Mr. Benninger maintained that "the items you see today at MCA and Disney parks are not going to be the same items" as at the Las Vegas project, conceptual drawings of the new attraction bear a striking similarity to other parks. 

The facility will feature several themed areas -- one with a Taj Mahal-flavor, a second with a Japanese look, another with a jungle atmosphere -- much like the "lands" at Disneyland.
The multi-spired 5,000-room hotel at the park's entrance looks like a hybrid of Cinderella's Castle at Walt Disney World and the Emerald City in the MGM movie "The Wizard of Oz," a film that MGM Grand's 97%-owner, Kirk Kerkorian, sold to Ted Turner along with the rest of the classic Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer library a few years back. 

In a nod to Mr. Kerkorian, who started his career shuttling gamblers to Las Vegas in a surplus bomber after World War II, the park may also feature an area that looks like a 1940s airport.
The reclusive Mr. Kerkorian didn't attend yesterday's news conference, despite invitations that implied he would be there. 

Mr. Kerkorian is near closing a $1.5 billion sale of his movie studio, MGM/UA Communications Co., to Qintex Group of Australia.
After the sale of the studio, Mr. Kerkorian will have no film library of his own from which to draw inspiration for the attractions at the park. (Both the Disney and MCA parks primarily feature attractions based on films made by their respective movie companies.) Mr. Benninger said MGM Grand will have to use public domain films or buy the rights to other movies for its attractions. 

MGM Grand filed suit against Disney last month seeking to use the "MGM Grand" name for its theme park, and Mr. Benninger said it will take about three months to resolve the suit.
Disney uses the "MGM" name for its new Disney/MGM Studio Tour in Orlando under a 1985 licensing agreement with MGM/UA Communication's predecessor, MGM/UA Entertainment Co. 

Mr. Kerkorian split MGM Grand off from the movie company in 1980.
In addition to its interests in Las Vegas real estate, MGM Grand owns and operates a luxury airline. 

