.START 

REAL-ESTATE INVESTORS face a blow from the House capital-gains provisions. 

A little-noted rule would limit the benefit of a lower tax on gains when property is sold, by letting Uncle Sam "recapture" all taxes lost from past depreciation.
The law now taxes as ordinary income only gains derived from accelerated write-offs; gains from straight-line write-offs -- equal sums annually -- are capital.
That makes little difference now, for ordinary and gains tax rates are the same.
But the House bill would lower gains taxes while recapturing and taxing all depreciation as ordinary income. 

An industry official says recapture was a trade-off in a "monumental" fight to get depreciable real estate into the gains package -- and that there are other more pressing battles ahead.
Still, says CPA Joseph Green of Mann Judd-Boston, the rule would hit nearly every sale after last Sept. 14 and be an unpleasant surprise for owners large and small that have based tax planning on the current treatment of depreciation. 

If a gains cut survives, lobbyists hope to get recapture relief for property held before 1986's tax revisions. 

DON'T RUSH IN where we fear to tread, the IRS cautions banks on levies. 

The taxpayer bill of rights, enacted in 1988, has required since last July 1 that banks wait 21 days after getting a levy notice from the IRS before seizing funds in a delinquent taxpayer's account.
This holding period was established to give taxpayers time to try to resolve problems with the IRS; but now the IRS is concerned, because many banks are sending payments to it well before the holding period expires. 

Last week, the IRS said that banks are remitting up to 50% of the proceeds from its levy notices before the holding period has ended, in violation of the new law.
It urged banks with questions about the new levy rules to contact local IRS offices for information.
And it reminded taxpayers that it has two booklets on "The Collection Process" that explain their rights -- Publication 586A on income taxes and Publication 594 on employment taxes. 

TAX PROSPECTORS from five Eastern states strike it rich in Silicon Valley. 

In April, New York, Connecticut, New Jersey, New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania joined to send 20 auditors to California's high-tech area.
In two weeks, team members called on 1,200 computer hardware and software firms to ask about ties and customers back East that might create income- or sales-tax liabilities.
Responses were stunning.
Before getting any bills, some firms volunteered checks totaling $100,000 to Connecticut and $294,000 to New York. 

New York correlated data gathered by the team and recently sent a total of 353 leads to its four partners; the states will send formal tax notices to firms.
New York found 50 companies that it says must collect its sales tax and 170 that probably should; it thinks at least 108 should pay its corporate tax.
It sent three auditors back to Silicon Valley to follow up.
The partners plan forays to other regions, with the Washington Beltway and Los Angeles next. 

Down the road: Boston's Route 128, Dallas and Fort Worth, and North Carolina's Research Triangle. 

DELAYED TO 1990 are the first IRS lists of taxpayers subject to 20% withholding for supplying faulty Social Security or employer numbers to payers of interest and dividends.
Banks and other payers were to get the lists this fall and to withhold tax from customers that didn't report correct numbers within 30 days after a notice. 

DAMAGES RECEIVED for personal injury are exempt; some courts have extended the exemption to payments for wrongful discharge or injury to a professional reputation.
But the House bill would bar broad interpretations and limit exemption to cases involving physical injury or sickness. 

"GIMMEE AN R, . . .": The 1988 tax act ended an old row by allowing 80% charitable deductions back to 1984 for gifts that entitle you to buy preferred college-sports tickets.
IRS Announcement 89-122 tells how to claim refunds based on past gifts. 

CHARITABLE HOSPITALS vying for patients and doctors attract IRS concern. 

The issue is whether such entities use exempt funds only to serve the public or risk losing exemption by turning away indigents and over-rewarding doctors who refer paying patients.
Assistant Chief Counsel McGovern says the IRS has begun looking for hospitals that may breach exempt boundaries and will make them a big part of a new study of all exempt entities. 

Among its concerns: offers of unreasonable pay and perks to entice and keep doctors, service partnerships that promote doctors' private interests with exempt funds, exempt holding companies with for-profit units, and reports of restrictions on emergency-room admittances.
The Health and Human Services Department is concerned about Medicare and Medicaid abuse by any hospital, McGovern notes, and the IRS is talking to HHS about getting information. 

Hospitals welcome any IRS-HHS liaison that produces firm guidance on these issues, says Michael Anthony of the American Hospital Association. 

BRIEFS: The Supreme Court refused to hear the appeal of shelter promoter Charles Agee Atkins from his 1987 conviction for conspiracy and aiding the filing of false returns. . . . A 1986 law's retroactive increase to 25% from 10% in the civil penalty for substantial understatement of tax wasn't unconstitutional, the Tax Court told Jay N. and Elizabeth J. Karpa. 

