.START 

Slim are the profits reaped by the small investor who is lured to a big-name stock by a little bullish news. 

This old Wall Street truism may prove painfully accurate in the case of Harley-Davidson, a number of takeover speculators and securities analysts say. 

It wasn't the well-heeled "smart money" crowd that sent Harley-Davidson shares soaring 3 5/8 yesterday to a new 12-month high of 42 3/4. 

"No big buyers are in there," remarked one takeover speculator who yesterday called a broker on the New York Stock Exchange floor. "It's only retail {small investors} buying." 

What sent the motorcycle maker's stock racing ahead was the disclosure that private investor Malcolm I. Glazer and certain family members had bought 6.24% of the stock and might seek control of the Milwaukee company.
Their regulatory filing came to light after the market closed Monday.
Even before yesterday, the stock had jumped nearly 25% on takeover rumors since mid-September, when it traded at 32. 

Some analysts think Harley's stock price has risen too fast on a bubble of takeover speculation to make it worth buying at current levels, even if it inches higher for a few days. "It's hard to argue against taking partial profits" on Harley-Davidson, said William Tichy, a securities analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds in San Francisco. 

Several professional takeover speculators said they won't be buying Harley shares until they see evidence that the Glazer group could, or would, mount a successful takeover of Harley after making failed attempts to acquire other companies in 1984 and 1988. 

Richard Teerlink, Harley-Davidson's chief executive officer, said in a brief interview yesterday afternoon that company officials hadn't had any contact with Mr. Glazer, "and we don't intend to sell the company." 

Some analysts speculated yesterday that Wisconsin's tough anti-takeover law might repel any hostile bidder for the motorcycle concern.
But a Harley-Davidson official said the company is incorporated in Delaware and so the Wisconsin law doesn't apply. 

Mr. Glazer, 61 years old, is chairman of First Allied Investors Corp., a closely held Rochester, N.Y., investment company with $200 million in assets including real estate and network-affiliated television stations.
Mr. Glazer says he spends most of his time at his Palm Beach, Fla., home "but I'm on the phone with Rochester every day." 

Mr. Glazer failed in an attempt to take over Consolidated Rail Corp. in 1984.
He didn't win Formica Corp. last year, either; that company was bought by another bidder.
But he bristles at one speculator's skepticism about his intentions, saying, "We made a bid for Formica; that means we're for real." 

Harley-Davidson is "tremendously undervalued," Mr. Glazer says.
It has "over a 50% market share" in large motorcycles, and "there's still tremendous upside {growth potential} in the export field." 

Analysts say the company's unique position makes it difficult to value.
But some say the shares are worth at least 48 based on eight-times cash flow (net income plus depreciation) of about $6 a share, or three-times the company's $16-a-share book value (assets minus liabilities).
The mystique of the Harley-Davidson name could push the per-share value above 50, analysts added. 

Harley-Davidson management, which owns about 10% of the company, took it private in 1981 in a buy-out from its then-owner, AMF Inc., which had acquired the company in 1969.
Harley-Davidson went public again in 1986. 

Institutional investors hold nearly three-fourths of Harley-Davidson's shares.
Some of the largest institutional holders say they approve of Harley-Davidson's management. 

An officer of Harris Associates in Chicago, which bought more than 12% of the shares in the past six months, said, "Management is a key ingredient to their success." John Nelson, an investment officer with the Wisconsin Investment Board, which manages retirement funds for state employees and holds 7.8% of Harley-Davidson, said, "We're very pleased with the company's long-term performance." 

Both institutions said they need more data to evaluate Mr. Glazer's intentions. 

Harley-Davidson 

(NYSE; Symbol: HDI) 

Business: Motorcycles 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Sales: $757.4 million 

Net Income: $23.9 million; $3 a share 

Second quarter, June 25, 1989: Per-share earnings: $1.14 vs. $1.08 

Average daily trading volume: 43,511 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 8.6 million 

