.START 

What is a fair price for a miracle drug? $8,000 a year? $6,000? $100?
Should it be given away for nothing?
Questions such as these arrive from the recent controversy over the pricing of the AIDS drug AZT, which is sold by Burroughs-Wellcome Co. Protesting the drug's annual cost of about $8,000, AIDS demonstrators recently chained themselves to the visitors gallery at the New York Stock Exchange. 

Wellcome has since cut AZT's price to $6,000, though this may have more to do with the likelihood that the FDA will formally expand the drug's use to a larger population, namely individuals who don't have AIDS but carry the virus that usually develops into the disease.
This approval would greatly expand the potential size of AZT's market. 

Over the years some people have argued that market economics aren't appropriate to the pricing of pharmaceuticals, that it is in some sense wrong for the drug companies to "profit" from people who are ill.
The AZT pricing protests raise all these questions anew.
Senator David Pryor, for instance, examined the drug-pricing issue in hearings last July.
The industry's position has been that finding new combinations of chemicals that work is extremely expensive and that a successful new drug's revenues have to support both the cost of pursuing dead ends and research into the next generation of discoveries.
In a study for the industry, Texas A&M's Steven Wiggins estimated that the average outlay now to develop a new drug, in 1986 dollars, is $65 million.
The Wellcome company says it is spending about $300 million a year on research and employs 2,400 research scientists. 

Congressman Henry Waxman, a longtime critic of the drug industry's prices, criticized Wellcome over AZT, adding, "Congress has the responsibility to ensure that this life-saving drug is available to everyone . . . and through a reasonable price to all." While Congress is now considering an extension of its program of federal payments to individuals using AIDS drugs, Mr. Waxman's remarks raise another familiar threat -- price controls on pharmaceuticals.
Liberals have been dancing around this issue for years, but there isn't much chance that they'd ever succeed in enacting such controls.
Without a significant flow of capital back into research (total industry outlays for research in 1986 were about $4.6 billion), the discovery of new drugs would slow significantly.
Nor is it likely that making drug development a "nonprofit" federal function would duplicate the private sector's record of discovery.
The bureaucratic delays that have engulfed the federal AIDS effort are reason enough to leave drug development primarily to private companies. 

However, if we can agree that a drug's development costs contribute to its final price, one way to cut the price deserves consideration: Reduce the number and scale of clinical trials required to support proof of the drug's efficacy prior to putting it on the market.
An analysis by Arthur D. Little estimated that the largest clinical trials normally required by the FDA, so-called Phase-3 tests, typically account for about 30% of a drug's total development cost. 

With AZT, Wellcome gained FDA approval at the end of the smaller Phase-2 tests, some of which were conducted with the National Cancer Institute (the company's critics cite NCI's contribution to the drug's discovery as evidence that the company shouldn't hold exclusive patent rights to the drug).
Wellcome's trials of the drug have continued; all told the company has been involved in 92 trials of AZT involving 10,000 patients worldwide.
Some of this work produces new knowledge, but is all of this expensive data gathering necessary before letting doctors expand AZT's use beyond its initial indication? 

For instance, it has been reported recently that many children with AIDS -- typically hemophiliacs or the children of drug abusers -- can't gain access to AZT because many doctors won't prescribe it without the FDA's formal approval.
And insurance companies won't reimburse for an unapproved use.
The FDA says it is waiting for Wellcome to submit its data to support using AZT in children.
Under the circumstances -- certain death -- why not skip this umpteenth submission of "data"? 

The FDA and many researchers would resist giving up any degree of the statistical comfort (and work) provided by these huge, costly, labor-intensive trials.
And many of the people who complain about the high price of prescription drugs are the same ones who most vociferously defend the FDA's current, expensive system of approval.
But they can't have their cake and eat it too on this.
Either defend the status quo and stop complaining about the resulting costs, or rethink the status quo.
If indeed getting drugs to the seriously ill at a reasonable price is a legitimate issue, this country ought to think about revising its gold-plated system of large-scale clinical trials. 

