.START 

RJR Nabisco Inc. 's sale of its Del Monte canned foods business to Citicorp Venture Capital is being revamped to comply with federal limits on banks' ownership of non-financial companies, according to people familiar with the transaction. 

The change is being made as a result of concerns expressed by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board, which applies the provisions of federal banking laws to proposed individual transactions, the same people said. 

The Citicorp unit was expected to purchase the Del Monte business for about $1.48 billion in a leveraged buy-out as part of RJR's sale of Del Monte's fresh-fruit and processed-foods divisions.
If it occurs, the sale will pare down RJR's debt after its record $25 billion LBO earlier this year by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. 

Instead, Citicorp's equity interest in the purchase is being reduced, and another financial buyer, possibly another leveraged buy-out fund, is likely to step in to help make the purchase, according to one person familiar with the sale.
One participant said Citicorp's equity percentage may be reduced to around 25% from a higher level that hasn't been disclosed. 

The identity of the additional equity investors couldn't be learned.
Citicorp is being advised by Merrill Lynch & Co., which could supply funds to assist in completing the transaction. 

Although some people involved in the transaction were hopeful that RJR would receive the same price tag for the business, at least one said the price might have to be reduced as a result of the change.
There also remained a chance that RJR might yank the property off the auction block and postpone any sale. 

Some people involved said the Fed staff vetoed the proposed sale as part of an informal procedure in which transactions are submitted, informally and unofficially, for inspection by the Fed staff.
These people said the veto may signal a tougher attitude by the Fed staff members toward bank equity investments in leveraged buy-outs. 

"I think they finally just took a different stance," said one person familiar with the sale talks. "I think they let the banks do a lot for a long time and finally said no." 

Banks, which usually supply more than half of the debt for most LBOs, haven't generally been big equity investors in them.
Federal bank law bars commercial banks regulated by the Federal Reserve from owning more than 5% of a non-financial company.
Banks can own nearly 25% in non-voting stock.
And they can own nearly 50% of a small business.
One person said the Fed may be tightening the rules for small-business exemptions. 

A spokesman for the Fed wouldn't confirm its intervention in the transaction, and said there has been "no change" in the Fed's orientation to banks' participation as equity investors in LBOs. 

Nevertheless, tougher interpretation of existing bank laws wouldn't be implausible in light of the current turmoil in the junk-bond market.
Prices of such high-interest, high-risk bonds, which help finance LBOs, have tumbled in the past week as a result of financial woes at Campeau Corp., a Canadian retailer choking on debt. 

A spokesman for RJR said: "We've had a few complications, but that's normal for a complex transaction.
As each complication comes up, we work it out.
The deal is still under discussion and we think it's going to get done." A Citicorp spokeswoman said she could confirm the RJR statement but couldn't elaborate. 

Depending on how it is worked out, the snag in the transaction could tarnish the outcome of asset sales that RJR is making to try to pay down some of the debt incurred in the buy-out.
RJR received a higher-than-expected price for five European food businesses this summer; but the Del Monte sale is coming in under earlier optimistic hopes for proceeds of $3 billion or more. 

During a lengthy auction, bidders for the Del Monte business were first asked for bids for the entire company, and then later were asked for bids for the two major pieces.
Two weeks ago, RJR announced the sale of Del Monte's fresh-fruit business for $875 million to Polly Peck International PLC. 

The proposed canned-foods price tag would mean RJR would obtain $2.35 billion for the Del Monte businesses.
Anything less in the canned-foods sale would increase the amount by which the sale fell short of earlier hopes.
However, the canned-foods sale won't include the Canadian and Latin American businesses, leaving open the chance that RJR might yet come closer to its target with further asset sales. 

