.START 

Until now, many troubled junk-bond issuers have been able to restructure bad debt -- rather than default on it.
But with the junk market in turmoil, analysts say they expect more defaults. 

M.D.C. Holdings could be one of the first companies to test that thesis. 

The Denver-based developer has been on the ropes because of depressed housing markets in Denver, Texas and Arizona.
Its 11 1/4% senior subordinated notes, underwritten by Drexel Burnham Lambert have fallen to about 35 cents on the dollar.
Its stock has plummeted to 2 5/8 from a 1988 high of 6 7/8. 

But Brian E. Bogart, an analyst for McCarthy, Crisanti & Maffei, says the company's bonds, and probably its stock, are trading too high. 

In a strongly worded report, Mr. Bogart says the probability that M.D.C. will default or exchange its bonds, of which $256 million are outstanding, "has risen to the highest level.
The company has experienced difficulty in renewing some of its revolving {bank} credit, and we expect the situation to worsen." 

In an interview, Mr. Bogart asserts that with M.D.C.'s bonds trading at such distressed levels, the bondholders would be unlikely to swap them for new paper if such a restructuring were to be proposed. "My feeling is: They will most likely end up in bankruptcy" proceedings, he says. 

Spencer Browne, M.D.C.'s executive vice president and general counsel, disagrees. "We've never missed a payment.
We closed seven divisions and we're still building homes," he says, adding that M.D.C. is "the only major survivor" among Denver's home builders.
Although banks have reduced M.D.C.'s credit lines, he argues that the now-smaller company doesn't need as much capital. 

However, the company concedes that it has been selling homes and mortgages in its inventory, as well as other assets, to meet its expenses.
Mr. Bogart estimates that operating cash flow will cover only 81% of this year's interest bill. 

Whether it lives or dies, M.D.C.'s plight speaks volumes about how junk issuers got in trouble.
Not only did its own business sour, but it took a $49.7 million write-down on investments last year -- largely from selling junk bonds issued by others. 

What was M.D.C. doing with other people's junk? 

In 1986 Drexel -- then in its heyday as a junk-bond marketer -- raised $506 million in M.D.C. senior subordinated notes.
Jeff Sussman, chief investment officer at Far West Savings & Loan, says, "their strategy was 'give me half a billion dollars and I'll go find places for it. ' It was a big blind pool." When various acquisition attempts failed, M.D.C. found itself overfunded and paying high interest.
Looking to earn as high a yield as it was paying, it invested $200 million in third-party junk.
Ray Garea, of Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, says "that was the name of the Drexel game of a few years ago." Overfunding, he says, helped insure that buyers would be there for Drexel's next deal. 

A Drexel spokesman says "M.D.C. raised funds so they could expand in home building, and they did.
They were also looking to expand into financial services.
When they could'nt find a suitable company they put money into high-yield bonds." Mr. Browne says M.D.C. bought bonds from other underwriters as well as Drexel. 

Curiously, M.D.C. has been helped by the fact that its own bonds fell faster than those it invested in.
Although it sold third-party junk bonds at a loss, it used the proceeds to buy back its own bonds at deeper discounts and booked a $55.3 million gain last year.
That move also reduced the company's interest charges.
But now, M.D.C.'s bank covenants prevent it from buying back more of its bonds. 

Mr. Browne says "in retrospect, we should have {borrowed less}.
The company expanded very fast and used a lot of leverage." About 42% of M.D.C's raw land and land under development is in Colorado, perhaps the worst U.S. real estate market.
It also has real estate in strong markets, such as California and Virginia.
Mr. Browne says M.D.C. is hoping to sell some of its California assets. "That would worsen the long-term earnings outlook," Mr. Bogart says. 

But M.D.C. may not have the luxury of thinking long-term.
James Spirrison, a trader at Rodman & Renshaw, says "it's a horse race whether they can turn the business around before they run out of cash." 

Many of M.D.C.'s bank lines mature next year, but Mr. Browne predicts they will be renewed.
And MDC recently settled charges against it by the Securities and Exchange Commission relating to its accounting; the company didn't admit or deny any wrongdoing.
Mr. Browne boasts that the SEC "didn't take action against any official." Now, he says, "We're trying to get our house in order." But, he adds, the fact that the McCarthy report may be read by the company's creditors "doesn't help." 

M.D.C. Holdings 

(NYSE; Symbol: MDC) 

Business: Home builder 

Year ended Dec. 31, 1988: 

Revenue: $840.6 million 

Net loss: $5.3 million vs. loss $16.8 million 

Second quarter, June 30, 1989: 

Net loss: $5.3 million vs. loss $16.8 million 

Average daily trading volume: 

6,651 shares 

Common shares outstanding: 15.9 million 

