.START 

Dreyfus Corp. agreed to sell the credit-card operation of its Dreyfus Consumer Bank to a Bank of New York Co. subsidiary for $168 million. 

The move comes seven months after Dreyfus put the East Orange, N.J., branch of the bank on the block because of asset-growth limits on so-called non-bank banks, such as Dreyfus Consumer.
Dreyfus said then that the move was designed to take the bank out of demand deposits -- the so-called retail side -- and to let it concentrate on credit cards, mortgages and certificates of deposits. 

The price breaks out to $120 million plus $8 million of payments annually for six years in return for which Dreyfus won't compete with Bank of New York in the credit-card business.
The sale of the credit accounts, which the companies expect to close around the end of November, is subject to regulatory clearance and approval by Dreyfus's board. 

"It became clear that the direction of the credit-card business is that a large number of cards are needed to keep costs low," a spokesman for Dreyfus said.
Issuers must do a large volume to gain economies of scale, he said, and Dreyfus faced the decision either to acquire other credit-card businesses or to sell its own. 

John Keefe, analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., called the deal "a little bit of a surprise . . . but I'm sure they've done this with the long term in mind." The analyst, who calls himself an "incorrigible bull" on Dreyfus and has a buy recommendation out on its stock, notes that selling the credit accounts will fatten Dreyfus's about $600 million cash hoard.
The company has declined to say what it plans to do with those funds. 

Bank of New York called Dreyfus's portfolio the fourth-largest MasterCard Gold portfolio in the U.S., encompassing more than 320,000 accounts with $790 million in credit outstanding.
The credit-card business accounted for the lion's share -- $20.7 million -- of the bank's $22.9 million of 1988 revenue.
Earnings for the credit-card operation were unavailable, but it is known to be highly profitable. 

Bank of New York (Delaware), the buyer, has more than two million cards issued, accounting for some $2.8 billion of credit outstanding at June 30. "We plan to continue to expand this business, both through internal growth and by solicitation and acquisition of credit-card portfolios," Bank of New York said. 

Under an existing agreement, the receivables from the MasterCard accounts at Dreyfus Consumer Bank are reflected in the financial statements of Bank of New York (Delaware), and the two companies share the revenue. 

In 1982, Dreyfus bought Lincoln State Bank for $2.8 million and then sold the bank's commercial-loan portfolio.
Dreyfus renamed it Dreyfus Consumer Bank and, said Drexel's Mr. Keefe, realized a strong return on the investment.
Recently, Dreyfus agreed to sell the East Orange branch of Dreyfus Consumer to a unit of Broad National Bancorp., Newark, N.J.
That sale is awaiting regulatory approval. 

Under federal law, banks can take consumer deposits and make commercial loans.
The so-called non-bank banks make consumer loans but not commercial loans; this allows commercial concerns like Dreyfus, which primarily manages mutual funds, to own them. 

