.START 

The last of three settlements in one of the nation's largest tax-shelter scams is expected to be approved by a federal court in Brooklyn early next week. 

The total of the settlements -- $16.9 million -- will be the biggest civil settlement of a tax-shelter case, tax lawyers said.
At least 5,000 investors will recoup a portion of more than $45 million in losses from three fraudulent shelters sold in 1982 and 1983. 

The wide-ranging scam, which involved promoters, lawyers, engineers, and accountants in a dozen states, was based on investments in the "Energy Control System," an electronic switch which could monitor and conserve electricity for businesses. 

In several civil suits, consolidated in the Eastern District of New York, investors claimed that OEC Leasing Corp. and First Energy Leasing Corp. both of Long Island, N.Y., the two principal promoters, and 34 other defendants violated federal securities and racketeering laws in a series of sham sales of the device.
The promoters marketed the investment as a tax-shelter security. 

The investors alleged that OEC and First Energy inflated the value of several models of the electronic switch by asserting they were worth between $65,000 and $280,000.
Plaintiffs' lawyers put the value in the range of $500 to $3,000.
The promoters allegedly exaggerated the available investment tax credits and depreciation deductions. 

In addition to tax benefits, the investors alleged they were led to believe they would reap huge profits through a revenue-sharing arrangement with the users of the switch. 

Edward Labaton, a lawyer for the investors, said that although many of the devices were manufactured, very few, if any, were installed. 

Mr. Labaton, of the New York law firm Goodkind, Wechsler, Labaton & Rudoff, said one reason the promoters were successful was that "energy had sex appeal" in the early 1980s. 

"The opinions of experts were the real key to the sales," said Mr. Labaton.
The experts, including lawyers, engineers, and accountants, "simply did a reckless job.
They didn't look far enough," he said. 

One of the experts, Touche, Ross & Co. settled for $2 million, said Mr. Labaton.
The accounting firm has since merged with Deloitte, Haskins & Sells.
Another accounting firm, Stuart Becker & Co., settled for $2.3 million; the engineering firm of Day & Zimmerman, of Philadelphia, for $3.8 million; and two law firms, Spierer Woodward & Holguin and Bernstein, Bernstein, Stein & Rush settled for $4.9 million and $1.7 million respectively. 

A Philadelphia grand jury indicted 12 individuals connected with the scam in April 1988.
Seven pleaded guilty.
Of the five who went to trial in last November, two were acquitted.
The three others, including the former general manager of OEC, Salvatore Giuffrida, were sentenced to prison terms earlier this year. 

Five law firms have been working together on the civil cases for nearly five years.
Mr. Labaton's co-lead counsel is Fay Clayton of the Chicago law firm, Kahn, Robinson, Curley & Clayton. 

PRESIDENT OF COMPANY that violated OSHA standards will serve time. 

In the 18 years that the U.S. Department of Justice has been prosecuting employers for risking the lives of their employees, no company official has ever been sentenced to serve time -- until last week. 

The 35-year-old president of a plumbing and heating company in Avon, S.D., was sentenced to six-months imprisonment because of a construction accident that killed two men.
All but 45 days of the sentence was suspended.
Howard Elliot, president of Elliot Plumbing & Heating, earlier pleaded guilty to deliberately failing to comply with Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards for digging trenches.
His attorney, Dennis Duncan of Parker, S.D., said Mr. Elliot will serve the time either in jail or a halfway house. 

Two of Mr. Elliot's employees died and a third was injured in May 1988 when the trench they were working in collapsed for the second time in four days. 

OSHA and the Justice Department have been criticized for being lax in pursuing criminal penalties against reckless employers.
Since its inception in 1971, OSHA has referred 54 workplace accident cases for criminal prosecution. 

The Justice Department has prosecuted 17 and has won civil and criminal sanctions in 13. 

DALLAS LAWYER will run for governor of Texas. 

Thomas Luce III, longtime counsel to billionaire H. Ross Perot, will kick off his campaign for governor.
Mr. Luce, a founding partner of the 150-lawyer Dallas firm of Hughes & Luce, will join three other candidates for the Republican nomination. 

Mr. Luce spent most of the past year lobbying to secure funding for the supercolliding superconductor research facility to be built south of Dallas.
Last year, he was embroiled in litigation between Mr. Perot and General Motors Corp. over the terms of GM's 1986 buy-out of Electronic Data Systems Corp., the data-processing firm founded by Mr. Perot. 

Mr. Perot says he doesn't have a role in his lawyer's gubernatorial campaign. "When Mr. Luce becomes governor, I will certainly miss him as an able attorney," he says. 

TWO FORMER OFFICIALS OF FIRST MARYLAND SAVINGS & LOAN INC. were sentenced to prison Friday in connection with the thrift's failure in 1985.
Former President Julian M. Seidel, 53, was sentenced to 12 years behind bars and former Senior Vice President James R. Porter, 41, was sentenced to seven years.
Both were convicted in federal court in Baltimore in June of multiple counts of conspiracy and mail- and wire-fraud related to insider loans, false reports to regulators and false statements to the public.
First Maryland collapsed in August 1985 owing about 2,700 depositors more than $118 million. 

GERMAN LAW FIRM ENTERS N.Y. MARKET: One of the largest law firms in West Germany, Mueller Weitzel Weisner, plans to open an office in New York next year.
Two other German firms have New York offices.
Mueller Weitzel is one of Germany's fastest-growing firms.
In January, it will merge with Hengeler Kurth Wirtz of Dusseldorf in what will be one of the first major law firm mergers in Germany.
The combined firm will have about 50 lawyers.
Next month Mueller Weitzel, known for its international corporate work, will open a branch in Brussels. 

MYERSON & KUHN RECRUITS REAL-ESTATE PARTNER: Robert W. Claeson, 49, a partner at the New York law firm of Shea & Gould, will join Myerson & Kuhn, also of New York.
Mr. Claeson, who has been at Shea & Gould since 1972, will head Myerson & Kuhn's real-estate practice.
A group of 20 real-estate lawyers led by David Stadtmauer and Michael Bailkin left Myerson & Kuhn earlier this year. 

