.START 

Spicer & Oppenheim, the 14th-biggest U.S. accounting firm, which recently has been under financial pressure, said it lost its biggest public-audit client, Bear Stearns Cos. 

William Montgoris, senior vice president, finance, of Bear Stearns, the holding company for Bear, Stearns & Co., a large securities concern, said next year's annual audit would be done by Deloitte & Touche, the fifth-biggest accounting firm. 

Deloitte & Touche was formed recently by the merger of Deloitte, Haskins & Sells and Touche Ross & Co. 

"This was a very difficult decision because of our long association with Spicer," Mr. Montgoris said. "But because of our development of many new products, including real-estate-asset securitization in London, we need a larger auditor to handle our global requirements." Spicer had been Bear Stearns's auditor since 1944. 

Steven D. Oppenheim, chief executive partner of Spicer, said he isn't happy about losing Bear Stearns but believes his firm is getting a lot of new business in bankruptcy and litigation-support work to make up for the loss. "Also, we're going to continue to do a substantial amount of other consulting and special projects for Bear Stearns," he said. 

While neither Spicer nor Bear Stearns would disclose the annual fee for the Bear Stearns audit, other auditors estimate it at about $500,000. 

Mr. Oppenheim said that with mega-mergers of major accounting firms increasing, "there is going to be vicious competition from the big, new firms to take away the larger audit clients of smaller CPA firms such as us, while we may gain some middle-market work from the merged firms." 

He estimated that Spicer's revenue for the fiscal six months ending this month will rise more than 10% from a year earlier.
In fiscal 1989, ended March 31, Spicer's revenue rose only 7%, to more than $70 million, from fiscal 1988, when revenue rose 11%. 

Spicer recently cut 10% of its 1,000-member staff at nine U.S. offices.
Mr. Oppenheim said the firm is now seeking to boost its professional staff by 5% to handle new business. 

As to a report that Spicer is in preliminary merger talks with Laventhol & Horwath, the seventh-biggest accounting firm, Mr. Oppenheim said "a great number of {accounting} firms want to talk to us" about merger.
He declined to comment further. 

