.START 

First Bank System Inc. said it is weighing a possible restructuring that could result in as much as $40 million in charges by year end, as well as the cutback of its work force by one-fifth and a reduction of about $2 billion in assets. 

The Minneapolis-based regional bank-holding company, which has been successfully rebounding from a $310 million loss last year, said it undertook the "strategic review of its major business segments" in a bid to improve the company's operating performance and "to continue to lower its risk profiles." 

First Bank disclosed the review at an early stage, it said, to put an end to what it termed rumors circulating about its intentions.
But the company steadfastly refused to elaborate on what options it is considering. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, First Bank System shares slipped $1.25 to close at $22.875. 

Additionally, the company said it expects its provision for nonperforming loans to substantially increase in the current quarter, because of some troubled leveraged buy-out investments with which it is involved. 

In a prepared release, D.H. Ankeny, Jr., the company's chairman, president and chief executive officer, said First Bank "must seriously consider eliminating or downsizing some of our businesses that have risk characteristics that exceed their reward potential or that no longer provide the return our shareholders expect." The move may involve reducing total assets by about $2 billion from the current $22.4 billion, he said. 

Piper Jaffray & Hopwood analyst Steven R. Schroll said, "My guess is they're trying to get rid of the more unpredictable banking businesses," such as volatile merchant bank operations, or the highly competitive mortgage banking and corporate-lending fields.
The company's comments also suggest that they will re-emphasize consumer and small-business loans, which Mr. Schroll said "makes a lot of sense." 

While the company said it is "premature" to try to fix the potential restructuring charge at this point, it said it may be "in the range of" $25 million to $40 million during the third or fourth quarter.
The company's current work force of about 10,500 employees may be cut by about 15% to 20% as part of the changes under consideration. 

First Bank said it expects domestic nonperforming loans and associated charge-offs to increase in the third quarter, "primarily as a result of recent events involving a few loans in the company's portfolio of highly leveraged transactions." In banking jargon, "highly leveraged transactions" means LBO lending; a spokeswoman declined to identify the leveraged deals First Bank has backed that are in trouble. 

Third-quarter domestic nonperforming assets will be about $330 million, compared with $294 million a year ago and $247 million at the end of the second quarter of 1989, the company said.
The company will boost its reserve for such potential losses by about $35 million, up from $20.5 million in the second quarter. 

In the first six months of this year, the company had net income of $103.3 million, or $1.54 a share.
Analysts said the company appears to have largely put behind it the effects of an extremely expensive bond-market misreading, under which the company last year finally sold off its huge government-bond position for a $506 million loss. 

