.START 

"After death human thought lives on by momentum," wrote Vladimir Nabokov in an early novel.
He certainly was correct about his own: A dozen years after his death at 78, new paperback editions of his works proliferate, and we are offered his 10th posthumous volume, "Vladimir Nabokov: Selected Letters, 1940-1977" (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich/Bruccoli Clark Layman, 582 pages, $29.95), edited by Dmitri Nabokov and Matthew J. Bruccoli. 

In Nabokov's career the numbers count.
This new volume supplies more than 400 letters to put beside the eight novels written in English; the 10 in Russian; the four volumes of stories; the four books of translations of Russian literature; the two volumes of plays; the one of poems and chess problems; the autobiography; the "strong opinions" (a collection of "public prose": interviews, letters to editors and articles); the correspondence with Edmund Wilson; and the five critical books on works of English, French, German, Spanish and Russian literature.
The author of "Lolita," "Pale Fire" and "Speak, Memory" seems well positioned for a classic run. 

Not that the man who so ostentatiously exulted in his literary prestidigitation and who so gleefully declared his hatred of Freud ("the Viennese Quack"), Henry James ("that pale porpoise") -- as well as Dostoevski, Faulkner, Eliot and Thomas Mann (the last two simply were "big fakes") -- will ever congeal into a safe classic.
He was much too eager to create "something very weird and dynamic," "catastrophic and jolly" like "this great and coily thing" "Lolita." 

But in Nabokov's work nothing is simply as it seems.
Beauty and pity, the grotesque and the heartbreaking, freedom and tyranny, the aesthetic and the moral, time lost and time regained -- these themes run throughout his books despite disclaimers that he cared not a whit for the social, political or moral aspects of literature.
His notorious high Mandarin disdain was his protective coloration against political or moralistic predators. 

Nabokov knew more than most about the bite of history, politics and moralism, about noble causes and the sense of loss.
By the time he arrived in New York in 1940 with his wife, his six-year-old son and the manuscript of his first English novel, he already had been thrice exiled -- in 1922 from the Russia of his childhood and adolescence; in 1937 from the Berlin where he had become a distinguished Russian novelist; and in May 1940 from the Paris where he had hoped to continue his literary career safe from the Nazis.
His father -- a liberal democrat jailed by the czar and booted by the Bolsheviks -- had been assassinated by Russian monarchists in Berlin in 1922, and a brother died in a German concentration camp some 20 years later. 

No wonder Nabokov thought of art -- perfected memory -- as the one sure defense against time.
But at his best he avoided aesthetic megalomania.
In his masterpiece, "Lolita," he portrayed the evolution of lust into love and condemned the cruel perversion that -- trying to stop time in its tracks -- created pornography and death.
Despite his later evasions, Nabokov was "Conradically conservative" (to steal his pun) and did believe in the moral importance of art: "I never meant to deny the moral impact of art which is certainly inherent in every genuine work of art," he wrote a correspondent in 1945. "What I do deny and am prepared to fight to the last drop of my ink is the deliberate moralizing which to me kills every vestige of art in a work however skillfully written. . . . In my opinion, the fact that {Tolstoy's} 'The Kreutzer Sonata' and 'The Power of Darkness' were written with a deliberate moral purpose largely defeats their purpose, killing the inherent morality of uninhibited art." 

These letters bring us a master's voice notably more human and humane than Nabokov's late public manner might suggest.
In them we see a little more of the man than the mask -- not that he ever permits himself to appear in verbal or social deshabille.
But in these letters his gift for friendship and his love for his family are as notable as his noble, if aristocratic dedication to the vocation of literature. 

While scrambling for a teaching job and trying to gain a foothold in the American literary world, Nabokov worked as a part-time research fellow in lepidoptery in New York and at Harvard.
Within five years of his arrival he was teaching at Wellesley and had published three books, as well as stories, poems and reviews in the New Republic, the New Yorker and the Atlantic, to all of which the admirable, admiring and competitive Edmund Wilson had most generously provided access.
In 1948 he became a professor of Russian and European literature at Cornell for $5,500 a year.
By 1959, the once-scandalous, unpublishable "Lolita" had triumphed on "the golden trapeze of the best-seller list" and freed its author from all extra-literary drudgery.
He moved to Switzerland, supervised translations of his Russian works, produced an annotated English version of Pushkin's "Eugene Onegin," and continued to create new works in English until his death in 

In all, these letters provide a laudable and attractive self-portrait that enlarges and -- in every sense -- domesticates our understanding of this great Russo-American writer who once so characteristically declared, "the difference between the comic side of things and their cosmic side depends upon one sibilant." 

Mr. Locke teaches English and comparative literature at Columbia University. 

