.START 

The top 10 fuel-efficient cars in the 1990 lineup are foreign-made, according to an Environmental Protection Agency report.
But foreigners are also turning out the biggest gas guzzlers. 

The 1990 Geo Metro XFI, a subcompact made in Japan by Suzuki for General Motors Corp. 's imported vehicle division, topped the high-mileage list by getting 53 miles per gallon in the city and 58 mpg on the highway.
It is the fourth year the GM import rated first place. 

Eight other Japanese-made models and one from West Germany filled out the list of top gas savers. 

The worst gas guzzler in the EPA's annual rating isn't for sale in the U.S. -- Chrysler Italian Imports' two-seat Italian-made Lamborghini Countach.
A 1990 model of the $155,000 sports car was tested by the EPA and got 6 mpg in city driving and 10 mpg on the highway, but the manufacturer says a replacement line will be introduced in the U.S. this year. 

That means the worst gas guzzler on the road will be the 1990 British-built Rolls-Royce Bentley Continental, a $200,000 handmade convertible that gets 10 mpg in the city and 13 mpg on the highway. 

The annual EPA report for the first time touted that fuel-efficient cars will save the global environment as well as gasoline. 

The EPA, which has been collecting fuel-efficiency data on pre-production vehicles since 1974 as it tests air-pollution equipment, estimated that each Lamborghini annually would emit 15 tons of carbon dioxide, one of the so-called greenhouse gases that contribute to global warming.
The fuel-efficient Geo Metro would emit only about 2.2 tons a year. 

Auto makers for the 1990 model year are required to produce fleets with an average fuel efficiency of 27.5 mpg, stricter than that required over the past four years. 

Other high-mileage cars listed by the EPA were two additional models of the Geo Metro, two models of the Honda Civic CRX HF, three models of the Suzuki Swift, the Daihatsu Motor Co. Charade and a Volkswagen Jetta.
The range of mileage was from 37 to 49 mpg in the city, and 39 to 52 mpg on the highway. 

