.START 

Burroughs-Wellcome Co., bowing to pressure from patients and their advocates, announced a 20% price cut in its antiviral drug AZT for acquired immune deficiency syndrome. 

AIDS activists, who have been lobbying for a price cut for months, gave the move muted praise.
It is "a small step in the right direction," said one. 

The price cut, which follows an earlier price reduction of 20% in Dec. 1987, effectively reduces AZT's retail price to $6,400 from $8,000 a year per patient.
But recent studies suggest that the drug may be effective at 40% or 50% of the original dose, which could further reduce the cost to patients to about $3,000. 

In the end, it wasn't consumer pressure alone but anticipated growth in its market that brought the change.
AZT's market is expected to mushroom due to findings that the drug slows the onset of AIDS in people infected with the AIDS virus but not yet showing any symptoms of disease.
That suggests the drug will be useful to hundreds of thousands of infected people, in addition to the tens of thousands of patients with AIDS symptoms. 

The company's stock surged 32% in mid-August when those findings were announced, and analysts have projected that a broadened market for the drug could boost AZT sales to $1 billion by 1992.
The company, based in Research Triangle Park, N.C., is a unit of Wellcome PLC of London. 

"We're pleased to see the price lowered," said Mervyn Silverman, president of the American Foundation for AIDS Research. "But to be fair and to put AZT within reach of most people with AIDS {and its related infection}, the price needs to be reduced much further." 

Burroughs-Wellcome long resisted pressure and pleas for a price cut, citing the burden of ongoing research and doubts about AZT's useful product life.
But T.E. Haigler, Jr., president and chief executive officer, said yesterday, "The expected growth in patient population, coupled with recent production economies, will reduce somewhat our financial risk and will remove some of the uncertainties which existed when this drug was first introduced." 

Mr. Haigler added that the company, in its calculations, also had to consider the health of the corporation and the value of the stock to shareholders. 

Reactions to the price cut, while favorable, were heavily qualified, and hinted at continued public scrutiny of Wellcome. 

"We know their market is expanding exponentially, so we feel a further reduction is warranted.
Their stock is rising, so we know their profit margins aren't in jeopardy.
But what is in jeopardy is the life and health of many people," said Timothy Sweeney, acting executive director of Gay Men's Health Crisis, a support group in New York. 

"The company can do better," agreed Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.), who held hearings on AZT's price when it was introduced in 1987. "Wellcome's cost of production is clearly lower, and its market is clearly larger.
The Congress has the responsibility to ensure that this life-saving drug is available to everyone -- through federal insurance to the poor, and through a reasonable price to all." 

So far, the U.S. government has loomed large as AZT's biggest single purchaser, with $320 million in subsidies to patients through its Medicaid program and federal grants for the purchase of AZT.
That cost is expected to increase as earlier treatment of the infected population begins, a program that could run as high as $5 billion to $10 billion in public and private outlays, according to an article in the current issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association. 

Mr. Waxman, meeting with Wellcome executives yesterday in Washington, again pressed the company to disclose details of its development costs and threatened to reopen hearings into AZT's price -- notwithstanding yesterday's cut -- if he believes the company is reaping too high a rate of return. 

Activists said they will continue to pursue their inquiries into Wellcome. "It's a good start.
But we'll continue to look at a possible challenge of the company's patent," said David Barr, an attorney with the Lambda Legal Defense Fund, a New York public interest firm specializing in gay rights issues. 

AZT, originally created in 1964 by Jerome Horwitz of the Michigan Cancer Foundation with federal grant funding, was developed in close collaboration with the National Cancer Institute, a unit of the National Institutes of Health.
Wellcome financed clinical trials and conducted tests of AZT's toxicology and pharmacology; that the company stood on so many shoulders in making the product further heated up the pricing debate. 

The compound itself has been in the public domain for more than two decades, but Wellcome holds a so-called "use patent" for treating AIDS.
In addition, the company has claimed broad title to AZT's use in infections by other "retroviruses," a class of viruses encompassing AIDS which are linked by their habit of transmitting genetic information in a backwards flow from RNA to DNA.
But AZT's potential use in retroviruses was first published by West German researchers in 1974, a quirk of AZT's history likely to be exploited in any assault on Wellcome's patent. 

The controversy over AZT's price prompted government lawyers to consider a range of potential remedies, from price controls to government manufacture of AZT, and sparked re-examination of an old statute enabling the U.S. to invite patent infringement when federal procurement of a strategic product was threatened by activities of a single supplier. 

The uproar also inspired a "reasonable price" clause that now is inserted into all technology licensing agreements between the government and companies. 

Ultimately, many experts believe moderation of AIDS-drug prices will be brought about by competition between many drugs and pharmaceutical companies.
Real market competition is still months away, however. 

One of the earliest sources of such competition may be DDI, a related compound patented by the cancer institute and licensed to Bristol-Myers Co. DDI has passed safety tests and now is entering tests of effectiveness needed for market approval.
But the company already has pledged to distribute DDI to patients in critical need even as such tests proceed.
The Food and Drug Administration is expected to approve such a giveaway shortly, by designating DDI a "treatment I.N.D.," or investigational new drug, some time this week. 

"I really think the answer from everybody's point of view is going to be having lots of effective agents in the hands of lots of competing companies," said Samuel Broder, director of the National Cancer Institute. "Until then, we never will have a solution satisfactory to everybody.
You run a better race when you have a competitor." 

