.START 

Whenever Ann Callahan makes hotel reservations for her boss, Gil Rogin, she must settle several pressing pieces of business before getting around to such trivia as the length of stay and size of room. 

First, there's the very basic issue of the swimming pool to resolve. 

Does the hotel in question have one?
What shape is it? (Rectangular is best for push-offs and flip turns.) How long is it? (The longer the better.) How deep is it? (Apparently not a major issue, since Mr. Rogin, the corporate editor at Time Warner Inc., once swam in a pool while it was being drained, and completed his requisite mile swim with his knees scraping the concrete at the shallow end.) How crowded is it? (Serious swimmers don't like to share.) Is it indoors or outdoors?
How early does it open? (An important consideration for the business person whose day could well begin with 7:30 breakfast appointments.) 

Mr. Rogin, who can't remember when he last missed a day in the water, and who belongs to four swimming clubs in the New York area, has, over the years, mastered the art of compromise and quick thinking.
On the scene during the 1980 Winter Olympics, Mr. Rogin, then managing editor of Sports Illustrated, grudgingly recognized that he couldn't swim in the very frozen Lake Placid. "So I went into town and snuck into various motels, changed in the men's rooms and went swimming," he says. "That was a desperate situation." According to the National Sporting Goods Association, there are 71.1 million recreational swimmers in the U.S.; few take the activity more seriously than Mr. Rogin. 

When in Miami, he stays at a particular hotel that has a small pool but is located next to a hotel with a large pool -- and a friendly manager who grants Mr. Rogin entree. "My biggest fear," he says, "is that for some reason a pool will be drained.
I've had bad dreams about it." Mr. Rogin, who networks energetically to hear about good pools, would be the very first to admit that swimming is an enormously boring activity, but the feeling of well-being that is left behind with the chlorine residue is more than adequate payoff. 

"It's an obsession," says John Jessey, travel manager at Conde Nast Traveler, who carries a pair of swimming trunks in his pocket at all times, and asks even more aquatic questions than Mr. Rogin's ever-vigilant secretary. "Is the pool in service at this time?" Mr. Jessey wants to know, a very important question for the swimming Northerner headed South to do business. 

"You can't assume that just because the weather is warm the pool is open," he says with the tone of a man who has learned a bitter lesson the hard way. "In the South they may see May and June as cold months still.
In Texas in October they're ready to close the pool regardless of the warm temperature." 

It is not enough for Mr. Jessey to know that the pool is open year-round and at all hours: He wants a room overlooking the pool to check in advance how crowded it is.
If the front desk can't oblige that request, Mr. Jessey at least would like a room very close to the pool to cut down on travel time.
Mr. Jessey makes no exceptions to his policy of staying only in pool-equipped hotels and makes no apologies for his passion. "With all the demands of business travel, swimming helps me recover from the hassles and stress," he says.
The high concentration of non-swimmers who work as reservations clerks has tended to turn even the most trusting freestylers into skeptics. "Do you have a pool?" is Michael Stott's first question when booking a room.
His second question: "Do you REALLY have a pool?" "A reservation clerk's definition of a pool is not usually my definition of a pool," says Mr. Stott, until recently the marketing director of the Richmond, Va.-based Office America, purveyor of office supplies. "They always say 'It's Olympic size. ' Well, Olympic size is 50 meters {165 feet}, so I ask if it's 50 meters.
Then they say 'It's a BIG one. '" Generally, at this turn in the conversation, Mr. Stott asks, very politely, to be connected to the lifeguard, whom he'll frequently persuade to pace off the pool, describe its contours and reveal whether it has lights for late-night laps.
Not that a small pool would keep Mr. Stott on dry land; he once did his daily mile in a pool that was 27 feet long and 2 1/2 feet deep. 

Size and shape and hours of operation certainly are important, says Wendy Finerman, a producer at Columbia Pictures, "but I always ask the temperature of the pool too," she says. "My basic requirement is it be heated and at least 40 feet long." 

Serious swimmers on business trips learn to live with the indignity of kidney-shaped pools ("You know there's a set of stairs at one end so you can't do a flip turn without breaking your heel," says Mr. Stott); they learn to live with the specter of children frolicking at the shallow end ("You've got to get up at ungodly hours to beat the kids into the pool," mourns Mr. Rogin).
They learn to deal with the stares of front-desk clerks, who, according to Ms. Finerman, "look at you real funny when you start asking them a lot of questions about pools." 

They even learn to deal with Europe, a continent that presents particular challenges to swimming fanatics.
Ms. Finerman has learned that while most hotels don't have pools, the management can arrange pool time at private clubs. "There are pools in all the European cities," says Mr. Rogin. "It's just a matter of finding someone to direct you to one and getting permission to swim there. "But," he sighs, "there are vast areas of rural Europe {Mr.
Rogin is thinking particularly of Scotland} that you can't go to because the sea is too cold or there aren't any pools.
I simply don't go to those places." 

Favorites pools of the fanatics, in no particular order: 

-- The Regent (Hong Kong): Outdoor pool, diamond-shaped, 66 feet long, 86 degrees.
Open year-round, 6:30 a.m.-8 p.m. No lanes set aside for lap swimming.
Early-morning swimmers get complementary fresh orange juice. 

-- The Chicago Hilton: Indoor pool, rectangular, 66 feet, 83 degrees. 6 a.m.-10 p.m.
Two lanes for lap swimming. 

-- The Beverly Hills Hotel: Outdoor pool, rectangular, 66 feet, heated.
Hours vary depending on the season.
No lanes set aside for laps.
Pool used to be eight feet longer, but former owner Ivan Boesky lopped off a portion to expand the deck area and add a cafe. 

-- The Four Seasons Inn on the Park (Houston): Two outdoor pools, heated depending on the season.
Rectangular one is 80 feet; L-shaped one is 92 feet.
Both open 24 hours.
No lanes set aside for laps. 

-- The Tepid Baths (Auckland, New Zealand): Indoor pool, rectangular, 83 feet, 84 degrees.
Monday-Friday, 6 a.m.-10 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday, 8 a.m.-7 p.m. Lanes for lap swimming.
Admission: NZ$3.50 (about $2). 

-- The Four Seasons (Philadelphia): Indoor pool, rectangular, 45 feet, between 79 and 83 degrees. 6 a.m.-10 p.m.
Three lanes for lap swimming. 

-- The Grosvenor House (London): Indoor pool, rectangular, 66 feet, 82 degrees.
Monday-Friday, 6:30 a.m.-10 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday, 7 a.m.-10 p.m. Lanes for lap swimming on request. 

-- The Fairmont (New Orleans): Outdoor pool, rectangular, 60 feet, between 76 and 78 degrees.
Year-round, 6:30 a.m.-10 p.m. No lanes set aside for laps. 

-- The Registry (Scottsdale, Ariz.): Outdoor pool, R-shaped, 55 feet, 84 degrees.
Year-round.
Lifeguard hours, 8 a.m.-6 p.m; swim other times at your own risk.
No lanes for laps. 

Ms. Kaufman swims and writes in New York City. 

