.START 

Earlier this year, when Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir unveiled his proposal for Palestinian elections in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, some Israelis likened the event to an elephant sticking its trunk through the eye of a needle.
Mr. Shamir had taken the first step toward peace, but to get him all the way from his proposal to the negotiating table still would take a lot of pulling. 

Now, Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak has grabbed the trunk and given it a powerful tug.
In an unusually bold move for the cautious Egyptian leader, Mr. Mubarak has stepped forward as a would-be go-between for the Palestinians and Israelis by offering a 10-point elaboration of Mr. Shamir's election proposal that attempts to make it acceptable to Palestinians without altering its basic thrust. 

Mr. Mubarak's move signals the unease of moderate Arabs over the lack of progress toward peace since Yasser Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, renounced terrorism and recognized Israel last December.
Mr. Arafat's lack of political gain in return for his concessions has left him exposed to criticism from Palestinian radicals, with the risk that his position will be undermined or that he will, to save his job, revert to a hardline stance. 

Signs that PLO moderates are losing control also are apparent in the occupied territories, where the violence of the 21-month uprising has turned inward.
In recent months, Palestinians have murdered alleged collaborators and, in apparent actions by Islamic fundamentalists, those Palestinians thought to be engaged in immoral activities. 

Mr. Mubarak's 10 points aren't at odds with Mr. Shamir's plan as it was approved by the Israeli Knesset, or parliament, in March.
But since then the Labor Party and Mr. Shamir's Likud Party have come to interpret the plan quite differently. 

While there is a gulf between the Egyptian position and that of Likud on several key issues, Mr. Mubarak's points are in line with the interpretation of the Labor Party, which holds 39 seats to Likud's 40 seats in the 120-member Knesset, and governs with Likud in a coalition. 

The Israeli defense minister, Labor's Yitzhak Rabin, flew to Cairo yesterday for a meeting with Mr. Mubarak to discuss the 10 points.
After the session, Mr. Rabin said he strongly supported Egypt's role. 

The 10 points are: an open campaign; immunity for those elected; withdrawal of Israeli troops from polling stations on election day; presence of foreign observers; a one-day ban on Israelis entering the territories; Israeli commitment to accept the election's results; setting a date for the beginning of negotiations on the final status of the occupied lands; participation of voters in Arab East Jerusalem, and a freeze on Jewish settlements.
The 10th point calls on Israel to "accept the four principles of the American policy in the Middle East {including} . . . trading land for peace." 

The wording of the final point almost compels U.S. support and puts the Bush administration in a ticklish spot.
The Likud, especially its right wing, finds many of the points unacceptable, particularly any talk of land for peace. 

The Bush administration has been unwilling to push the Israeli government.
With Labor leader Shimon Peres and Mr. Shamir more than ever at odds, the risk of the government crumbling is ever-present. 

Yet for the U.S. to be less than wholehearted in its support for Mr. Mubarak, who is soon due in Washington, would be inconsistent with its own proclaimed Middle East policies. 

Mr. Mubarak wants to host a Cairo meeting of Israelis and Palestinians to discuss election arrangements.
On the face of it, this is what Mr. Shamir has long wanted: direct negotiations with the Palestinians without pressure from an array of hostile parties such as the Soviet Union and China, who would have been present at any international peace conference. 

The Egyptians have proposed that the Palestinian delegation be made up of residents of the occupied territories plus Palestinians deported from Israel.
This gets around the PLO's insistence that the fate of the territories concerns the 2.5 million Palestinians who don't now live there, as well as the 1.5 million who do.
Yet it spares Mr. Shamir from talking directly with PLO officials, which he has sworn never to do. 

While Mr. Shamir is unlikely to give as much ground as the Egyptians want, he can't afford to dismiss the initiative out of hand because he would risk fracturing the fragile coalition government and probably sparking further U.S. disapprobation.
Mr. Shamir probably will search for some maneuvering room in the proposal and use the frenetic shuttle diplomacy it engenders to buy himself time. 

