.START 

TAKING COVER: More companies fund executive benefits.
But risks persist. 

Fully 53% of companies with more than $5 billion of sales have made special funding or security arrangements to assure top managers they'll ultimately collect the deferred pay, pensions and other benefits they've been promised, says Robert Salwen of consultant Mercer Meidinger Hansen.
That's up from 44% last year and a negligible number a decade ago.
The risk of takeovers prods companies to back their pledges, he says. 

By Mercer's count, however, two-thirds of the security plans include a form of trust that offers no protection if the company goes bust.
And a third are funded by company-owned life insurance in which the executive has no interest; again, it's a promise to pay.
Fred Rumack of Buck Consultants suggests that worried executives might take benefits in a lump sum when they retire -- while they still have some voice in the company -- rather than in installments payable long after they've left. 

Executives, too, could negotiate for more cash or stock now instead of promises of pensions later. 

NEW OUTSIDE DIRECTORS: Are they adequately briefed for the job? 

Exxon Corp. says it doesn't have any formal orientation for new directors; they meet with officers, visit operations when able and get an armful of budget and business plans each fall.
At Borden Inc., which believes a "formal program would be overkill for some people and not enough for others," new directors get information "based on their needs." Dow Chemical Co. 's distribution includes a code of conduct and a warning against insider trading. 

Airborne Freight Corp. says its outside directors know the company through personal or professional contacts and don't need any orientation.
Similarly, Utah Medical Products looks for directors familiar with the health industry.
Heidrick Partners, a search firm, says, the majority of major industrial companies "fail to offer a structured orientation program." Chief executives, it says, devote on average only 4.4 hours a year in one-on-one meetings with newcomers to their boards. 

EMPLOYEE SURVEYS tap worker attitudes.
But how they're used stirs debate. 

Equifax Inc. surveys workers regularly to ask, among other things, what they'd do if they were president.
One result: a change in vacation policy.
Motorola Inc. learns workers crave recognition.
Ashland Oil Co. discovers the best source of information for workers is the company grapevine. 

Some companies, however, see limits.
NCNB Corp. questions workers only when it contemplates some action. "The survey helps us decide what action to take," an official explains.
Corning Inc., which has been running surveys since 1985, sees such studies as "big traps" if used "to provide all the answers." In Corning's view, "you use surveys to see patterns; they point you in the right direction for conversation." 

Consultant A. Foster Higgins & Co. says many companies find it difficult to interpret or implement survey results. 

JOB HUNTING gets tougher for displaced executives.
The search took an average 5.9 months last year, up from 5.1 months in 1988, says Drake Beam Morin, an outplacement firm.
But they're getting 3% more severance pay and a 9% bigger salary when hired than last year's crop. 

BUSINESS TRIPS get shorter.
The Hotel and Travel Index, a travel directory, says the number of business trips jumped to 155.6 million last year from 103.6 million in 1983.
Only 67% involved hotel stays, off from 72% five years before. 

INCREASING NUMBERS of female employees will quit jobs at major corporations, half the women surveyed by Future Focus say. "Women are leaving because they do not have the support in the workplace or at home," the research firm contends. 

HARD HATS for news people.
Virginia's Department of Labor and Industry says newspapers and broadcasters have the same responsibility as any employer to provide protective equipment for reporters and photographers covering hazardous events. 

PUBLIC SERVICE gets a college push.
But the schools want federal help. 

Some 200 colleges have banded together in the Campus Compact to draw more students into such community service as tutoring youngsters and helping the homeless. "We're setting the stage for participatory democracy," says Ellen Futter, president of Barnard College.
But volunteerism, she notes, often has been a luxury of the well-to-do.
Students on financial aid find little time to spare from course work and jobs; after graduation, they need private-sector jobs to pay off loans. 

Incentives being considered range from credits to loan help.
Joseph Duffey, chancellor of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, suggests part of the loans might be forgiven for students who take a year off for community work.
Such encouragement, though, could cost billions.
So the colleges are looking to the federal government for leadership and financial support. 

President Bush has proposed a volunteer program without pay.
A Senate bill would test cash incentives. 

THE CHECKOFF: Middle managers, unite] Power & Systems Inc., which runs seminars, sponsors a workshop on Mastering Middleness . . . . Looking for a job out of town? "Wrangle an address and phone number there," advises Joy Reed Belt, a career consultant.
A target company might think you're a local and give you an edge. 

