.START 

As students of television lip reading no doubt will recall, Mike Ditka, coach of football's Chicago Bears, over the years has had numerous differences of opinion with Mike Tomczak, his quarterback.
Such is the nature of their relationship that the disputes continued even after a victorious Sunday here at the expense of the Minnesota Vikings. 

Their latest debate, conducted in separate post-game interviews, was over statistics and the sort of people who value them. 

"Statistics are for idiots," declared Ditka. 

"Statistics are for critics," said Tomczak. 

But, hmmm, maybe it wasn't an argument after all.
Maybe those guys were talking about the same folks.
Or maybe it's that both are able to see things that the, uh, critics can't. "Our win today wasn't pretty, but we knew it wouldn't look pretty," summed up Ditka without rebuttal. "We feel we're a little better than we look." 

As it was, the Bears looked pretty good on Sunday or, at least, for one quarter of a gloriously sunny afternoon that made even decrepit Soldier Field look good.
That was the fourth quarter, in which they outscored the Vikings, 28-0, en route to a 38-7 win, their second in as many appearances in this still-new National Football League season.
Come to think of it, they must have played OK for the first three quarters, too, or they wouldn't have been ahead. 

So what if baby-faced quarterback Tomczak had a 10-for-26 passing day on top of 10-for-24 stats the week before in a 17-14 victory over the Cincinnati Bengals?
So what if the losers outgained the winners, 320 yards to 306?
So what if the Bears, whose carnivorous pass rush turned opposing quarterbacks' hair white with terror in their 1985 championship season and for a couple of years thereafter, went sackless? 

"We showed patience and discipline," said Ditka, whose newfound gravity was underscored by sideline attire that included both belt and suspenders. "I'm proud of that." 

You probably get the idea by now that the 1989 Bears are different from their recent, beastly predecessors and, from appearances, they are.
For starters, QB Tomczak does not go about off-field sporting spiked hair and wrap-around sunglasses like Jim McMahon, the man he replaced by virtue of the latter's late exile/trade for draft choices unknown to San Diego.
For reserves (and a few starters, too), 26 of the 47 men currently wearing bruinish black (very dark blue, actually) are in their fourth season or less, meaning that they saw the team's Super Bowl triumph on TV, if at all. 

But if the look is new, the ways are familiar to the gang that won the past five NFC Central Division titles and was the league's winningest unit in that span. "Oh, yeah, we've got a lot of new faces -- just look around you," said Mike Singletary, Chicago veteran middle linebacker and defensive leader, gesturing at the smiling countenances atop the unclothed bods in the Bears locker room post-fray. "But I think most of them have got the idea pretty well." 

If the Bears hadn't they wouldn't be 2-0 after games with a couple teams some thought would knock them off.
The Bengals, their week-one foe, were a narrow Super Bowl loser to the San Francisco 49ers in January, and the Vikings were picked by many to appear in that august struggle this time around.
Indeed, the Minnesotans were slight point-spread favorites Sunday, no small honor in a league in which the humblest home team usually gets a betting bow. 

The Vikes' cast included nine last-season Pro Bowlers, and I ain't talkin' ten pins.
Their premier passing combo of Wade Wilson to squirmy Anthony Carter may be the game's best if you don't count San Fran's Joe Montana to Jerry Rice.
They beat the Bears three times last year, if you do count a pre-season tilt in Sweden.
They spindled the formidable-appearing Houston Oilers, 38-7, in their opener last week. 

Throughout a Sunday first half made tedious in part by a couple of long delays for those awful TV reviews of field-officials' decisions, the Vikings gave about as good as they got.
The Bears scored first on a 51-yard, first-period drive capped when Neal Anderson, Walter Payton's worthy successor at running back, caught a 24-yard pass and crawled into the end zone before a Viking could pin him down.
The Vikes got even in quarter two on a Wilson-to-Jim Gustafson pass, and although a field goal gave Chicago a 10-7 halftime edge the visitors led in every important yardage category. 

In the second half, though, a couple of bad things happened to Minny.
The first was a missed field goal by Teddy Garcia from 33 yards early in quarter three that would have meant a tie.
The other came on a 22-yard pass play from Tomczak to Matt Suhey, a stumpy, graying fullback in his 10th season, that set up the fourth-period TD that finally gave the Bears some leeway.
Tomczak was rushed hard and threw the ball up for grabs.
Suhey looked back before Scott Studwell, the linebacker who was covering him, and grabbed it at the Minnesota two yard-line.
Anderson scored from there to make it 17-7. 

"I hung it up for Matt because he's an older guy and needs more time to run his route," Tomczak quipped.
The joke worked only because the pass did. 

From there, the Vikes simply collapsed.
On the second play after the next kickoff, Bear linebacker Ron Rivera intercepted a Wilson pass to set up a touchdown drive.
Cornerback Lemuel Stinson intercepted on the first Viking play after that and ran it in from 29 yards.
Rookie halfback Mark Green scored from 37 yards on his first carry as a Bear in his team's last possession. 

"It was embarrassing.
We played atrocious," fumed Keith Millard, a Minnesota defensive lineman.
The information that Ditka had commented that the Vikes might not lose again until Dec. 3, the next time the two teams meet, didn't soothe. "Ditka's a sarcastic person.
I don't take him serious," Millard said.
He didn't say anything about statistics. 

