.START 

Pension funds are racing to invest billions more of their dollars in real estate -- even though their returns on properties so far have barely outpaced risk-free Treasury bills. 

By 1991, real estate investments by pension and endowment funds will swell to $122 billion from about $72 billion today, predicts Greenwich Associates, a Connecticut pension consultant.
As much as $100 billion in new pension money could land on the real estate market in the next five years, others say. 

Yet the average return on real estate was a less-than-dazzling 9.27% annually for the six years through 1988, according to the Frank Russell Co. Property Index.
After subtracting 1.2 percentage points, the typical management fee charged by real estate investment advisers, properties' 8.07% return was little better than the 7.63% average for Treasury bills, says David G. Shulman, director of real estate research at Salomon Brothers Inc. 

"You have a tremendous capacity in real estate for self-delusion," Mr. Shulman says, "because you don't have a tickertape" to use in judging property values.
His prediction: "The next couple of years are going to be difficult" for some real estate investors. 

Pension funds expanded their real estate investing in the mid-1980s, after office buildings, shopping malls and other properties had posted strong gains from 1978 to 1982.
But many pension funds arrived just in time for the collapse of real estate prices in the oil-patch states and general overbuilding spurred on by eager lenders, including many now-troubled savings and loan associations. 

The very presence of so many deep-pocket funds also helped drive up property prices, reducing returns. "All these {pension fund} supertankers with asset-allocation targets set a few years ago are pouring money into an environment that we think is fundamentally unattractive," says Scott Sperling, head of real estate investing for the Harvard University endowment, which has been trimming its real estate portfolio. 

The average pension fund has about 4% of its assets invested in real estate.
Many are shooting to boost that figure to between 10% and 15%, says John S. Lillard, president of JMB Institutional Realty Corp., a Chicago money manager. 

Even in bad times, real estate holds many attractions for pension funds.
First, there is so much of it, with the total value of U.S. commercial real estate amounting to almost as much as U.S. common stocks and more than domestic and foreign corporate bonds.
Properties can provide a valuable outlet for funds' excess cash. 

American Telephone & Telegraph Co., for example, sharply increased its property buying in 1980 when "$200 million a month was coming in to invest.
We had no place to put the money," according to Ronald R. Roessler, AT&T's head of real estate investing.
Real estate proved the answer, and AT&T has boosted its real estate holdings from 2.3% of its pension fund in 1980 to 13%, or nearly $4 billion, today. 

Returns have long since dimmed -- far outstripped by gains in stock and bond prices.
But pension managers say that's no reason to abandon real estate. "If you're seeking quality assets and a well-diversified {real estate} portfolio, you have to be willing to take the soft markets," says Roger Franz, manager of real estate investments for the $56 billion California Public Employees Retirement System. "If you don't get in, you don't get to play the ball game." 

Calpers, the nation's largest public employee pension system, has been stepping up to the plate in a big way.
The fund has $4.2 billion invested in real estate, after plunking down more than $1 billion so far this year.
Even so, Calpers is still short of its goal of having 10% of its assets, or $5.6 billion at current levels, invested in real estate. 

"By the turn of the century," JMB's Mr. Lillard told a recent meeting of real estate investors, 20% of pension fund assets going toward real estate "will be the conventional wisdom." George Russell of the Tacoma, Wash., consulting firm Frank Russell Co., calls the typical pension fund "seriously underweighted" in real estate. 

Sellers of real estate are doing their best to attract money from the funds. "Pension funds are where the action is," says Paul Saylor, president of Atlanta-based Institutional Property Consultants. "They are the group of investors one thinks of first -- and that's going to be more and more the case in the future." 

Inevitably, some funds have begun battling each other for properties.
Japanese and other foreign buyers have attracted the spotlight for their purchases of high-profile U.S. properties.
Yet "the highest price is not necessarily being paid by the Japanese anymore," says Philip J. Ward, senior vice president for insurer Cigna Corp. 

Faced with a dearth of bargains, many pension funds are keeping their real estate allocation targets unchanged but giving themselves more time to reach them. "Demand is off for our {real estate} products in the last six to nine months," says Mr. Ward.
Mr. Saylor, the Atlanta consultant, says, "Our clients have $19.5 billion allocated to real estate, but they have spent only $8.5 billion.
And the gap grows even as we speak." 

For crash-wary pension managers, real estate is enticing because "it will never decline 22% in value one day," says Salomon's Mr. Shulman. "And if it did, you would never know it anyway." 

What pension funds are seeking, says Roger E. Hilkert of consultants Eager & Associates in Louisville, Ky., "is the ability to diversify into an asset that acts differently than stocks and bonds, has much more stability and isn't subject to an Oct. 19 debacle." 

Many pension funds, especially longtime investors in real estate, say they are getting their money's worth even if the returns haven't been bell-ringers. "Real estate has delivered what it promised," says AT&T's Mr. Roessler. "It has been able to outperform stocks three times in 10 years." and interest, if any -- on selected investments, in percent 

