.START 

Ollie Coleman lives in fear of the ultimate disgrace: "Dying in the pen." It may be an ignominious end, but it is a common one for the likes of Mr. Coleman, a 74-year-old inmate in the State Park Correctional Center here.
Old convicts don't just fade away, it seems, they just move to State Park. 

The pink, green and mauve buildings of this former tuberculosis hospital have been transformed into what may be the wave of the future in American corrections -- specially-designated prisons for the elderly.
As the nation's prison population ages, other facilities are expected to go the way of this one, providing ramps, rails and 24-hour medical surveillance in place of bars and razor-edged wire. 

Security is evidently not a big problem in such institutions, although there was one attempted escape -- by-wheelchair at State Park.
The staff can easily outrun most of the inmates.
Moreover, there are more people on waiting lists trying to get in than there are prisoners trying to get out.
In fact, a 66-year-old inmate once escaped by running off with a worker in her 30s, only to change his mind.
After a few days, he knocked on the warden's door asking to be reincarcerated, explaining that he missed the prison's medical attention. 

With the so-called graying of America, more elderly than ever are behind bars.
A recent study by the American Correctional Association showed a 50% increase during the past four years in the number of inmates over the age of 55 (the usual minimum age at State Park is 55 except for convicts with special medical needs). 

At the same time, prisons are starting to feel the impact of longer sentences.
More ominously, a geriatric crime wave appears to be sweeping the nation.
Criminologists attribute the apparent crime spree to the frustrations of old age in this country, among them poverty and feelings of uselessness.
Murder, sex offenses and arson are the crimes most often committed by the elderly, says Braden L. Walter, a prison consultant. "A grandfather living with his daughter will murder his son-in-law or a long-simmering dispute over a property line will erupt into a neighbor being murdered," he says. 

Drug dealing is also growing, especially among grandmothers who must raise their grandchildren because their daughters have problems with crime or drugs. 

Here at State Park, a hundred or so such male offenders, and 15 such females, are living out their days. 

While hardly idyllic, as prisons go this is a relatively cheery place.
The grounds are meticulously tended, largely by the inmates.
The rose gardens are the particular province of a 70-year-old convicted murderer who sculpts rows of cedar hedges into geometric shapes. 

The work programs are much less taxing than those in a general prison.
Jobs for those under 65 include making fishing tackle and maintaining the facility's greenhouse.
At 65, inmates are allowed to retire from prison labor.
In most ordinary prisons, this means the elderly have nothing to do.
But Warden Judith Anderson believes activity is important. "We want their lives to have some meaning.
Our most enthusiastic workers are over 65," she says. 

Mr. Coleman is one.
Despite his high blood pressure and a recent heart attack, he delivers mail two or three times a day throughout the sprawling complex. 

The younger inmates typically have a more structured day.
Each morning "Miss Sara," a 61-year-old woman serving a 30-year sentence for manslaughter, reports to the greenhouse for work, and three days a week she joins several others for a supervised morning walk around the grounds.
After lunch, she and three others make fishing tackle for a local company.
In the hour or so before dinner, she has group therapy, which she calls "my harness-emotions meeting," since this is where she has been told she must learn self-control. 

On two Friday nights each month, the height of the social calendar, there's bingo.
But some six months ago at State Park, this was eclipsed as the favorite activity by a new pastime -- singing in the church choir under the conductorship of 56-year-old celebrity inmate James Brown, the self-proclaimed "Godfather of Soul." Mr. Brown is in prison for assault and other offenses. 

Generally, there isn't much in the way of physical violence here, but the officers are often called upon to break up abusive verbal battles.
These usually take place on the front porch, where male inmates swap tales in competition for toughest-guy-in-the-old-days status. 

But the main bone of contention, say officers, is the temperature level of the air-conditioners, installed in each dorm room and usually shared by four residents.
Also, say officers, it isn't uncommon for one or two residents to steal each other's tomato plants. 

As at most prisons, drugs are a problem.
One elderly man complains that his three roommates "do the stuff {marijuana mostly} at night." He worries that he will be implicated when they get caught. "If the stuff is shoved across the room and lands under your bunk, it's yours even if you don't know it," he says.
Still, it's possible at times to forget that State Park is a prison.
Warden Anderson, an upbeat 46-year-old who has been working in prisons for 21 years, insists that the inmates be called residents "for the sake of human dignity." And there are no guards, she insists. "They are correctional officers." 

Periodically, of course, there are reminders that the inmates don't run their own lives.
Loudspeakers, mounted on tall poles every several feet, blurt out the names of officers and inmates, requesting their presence at headquarters.
Officers go about their business in uniform.
And prisoners' doors are locked at night. 

Yet State Park inmates are far luckier than most convicts their age.
With the exception of a few states such as South Carolina, North Carolina and Florida, most of the nation's elderly prisoners, often called "old Joes," live among the general prison population. 

There, the elderly become easy targets for abusive or violent younger inmates.
Some need special diets that most prisons aren't equipped to prepare.
Those who aren't sick enough to be hospitalized often need daily access to medical personnel. 

Also, at most prisons, counseling is geared to rehabilitating younger inmates, not to coping with issues such as chronic illness and death. 

Amidst all the other pressing problems facing prisons, "elderly inmates seem to fall through the institutional cracks," says Richard Franklin, a program specialist at the National Institue of Corrections in Washington, D.C. 

But back in 1970, South Carolina's prison officials began providing special facilities for the elderly -- long before most states pondered the issue.
The state, which usually ranks first or second nationally in the number of inmates per capita, is renowned for its harsh sentencing practices.
Consequently, it has always had its share of long-termers growing old behind bars.
Needing more space, the state's prison for the elderly moved into this former tuberculosis hospital in 1983. 

The medical set-up comes in handy.
The litany of medical problems facing the prison population mirrors that of any group of the elderly.
Severe high blood pressure and arthritis top the list. 

Those on dialysis and chemotherapy are bused daily by State Park staff to a nearby hospital.
At the prison itself, a full-time doctor writes an average of 925 prescriptions a month.
Thirteen nurses are on duty around the clock.
Such care is costly. 

In most prisons, the high cost of medical care makes elderly inmates up to three times as expensive to warehouse as younger ones.
For state prisons the burden is especially onerous because inmates are not eligible for Medicare, veterans' benefits or Social Security.
Consequently, the states end up paying bills the federal government would normally pay. 

Here at State Park, on a hot September day, Mr. Coleman sits in the shade of an old cherry tree and reflects on all this.
Except for three escapes from a chain gang, he's spent most of 40 years in prison, for a murder in 1948 and another, 20 years later.
In some ways, he believes he has lived longer because he has been behind bars. 

"On the outside, women and whiskey are gonna shorten your days.
For one thing, you eat here on a regular basis." Waving his long thin arm across a courtyard where two other old cons fan themselves with folded magazines, he acknowledges, "It's a strange thing, but I'm still living by being here." 

Just the same, says Mr. Coleman, who is up for parole next year and hopes to die a free man, "I'd rather be out there taking my chances." 

