.START 

A powerful corn farmers group and an agricultural science organization are moving to call for stronger surveillance of the nation's food supply for cancer-causing aflatoxin. 

The actions by the National Corn Growers Association and the Council for Agricultural Science and Technology signal a shift in the farm industry's position on aflatoxin, and it is significant that they come from groups representing the agriculture industry instead of consumer activists.
This development is expected to put pressure on Congress and Farm Belt states to adopt measures to keep the fungus-produced poison, which contaminated much of the Midwest corn crop last year, out of food for humans and livestock. 

The moves also reflect a growing feeling in the scientific community that aflatoxin might cause more health problems in the U.S. than previously thought. 

Aflatoxin, a potent carcinogen in laboratory animals, is excreted by a fungus that thrives in hot and dry climates.
Although it often plagues the corn and peanut industry in the Southeast, and has been linked to several deaths there, it didn't become a political issue until the 1988 drought sparked an outbreak in the two biggest corn-producing states, Iowa and Illinois, from which flow much of the crop consumed here and abroad. 

Several nations complained of finding aflatoxin in U.S. corn and corn byproducts.
The amount of aflatoxin that seeped into the U.S. food chain isn't clear, but spot-checking by state and federal officials found unsafe levels in milled corn and milk, and smaller amounts in popcorn, cereal and chips. 

Although the Food and Drug Administration prohibits the interstate transport of corn with more than a tiny amount of aflatoxin, federal and state regulators were ill-prepared for the outbreak. 

The National Corn Growers Association is widely expected to adopt recommendations by its influential Iowa chapter that the U.S. Agriculture Department look for aflatoxin during its monthly surveys of crop conditions and that Midwest states routinely screen food and milk for residues of the poison. 

Last year, Iowa authorities were hamstrung in part because they didn't gauge the severity of the outbreak until October, when the corn harvest was nearly complete and some of the crop had already been sold to processors. 

The corn group's recommendations are modest.
It doesn't, for example, call for the mandatory inspection of corn before processing -- something that is required of the peanut industry. 

Yet even these measures are a significant change in the farm industry.
Earlier, farm and government officials had reasoned that outbreaks of aflatoxin in the Midwest Corn Belt were too rare to justify tight regulation.
But the 1988 outbreak was the third in twelve years. 

"We have to realize that there is a potential for a problem in the Midwest," said Ron Swanson, a Galt, Iowa, farmer who headed the task force. 

The authors of the report also blame unreliable test results for the "cynical attitude" of some farmers and grain handlers about the seriousness of the poison.
Because aflatoxin is difficult to detect even under the best of laboratory conditions, some farmers whose corn had been rejected at one elevator were able to have it accepted at another.
Among other things, the report suggests the government could compensate farmers for their contaminated corn so they don't try to evade detection. 

Many farm-state lawmakers wouldn't support tougher regulation without the direction of the National Corn Growers Association.
Because it represents farmers of the nation's biggest crop, the association plays a major role in shaping U.S. agricultural policy. 

As a result, some farm lobbyists are speculating that an aflatoxin measure will be tacked onto 1990 farm legislation, which will probably dictate farm policy for the next five years.
Hearings are expected in the next several months on a bill in the House that would, among other things, require federal grain inspectors to screen export-bound corn for aflatoxin. 

Meanwhile, a report slated for release next month by the Council for Agricultural Science and Technology, an umbrella organization of industry and academic groups, could ignite a debate over whether aflatoxin is a hidden cause of many illnesses in the U.S. 

In addition to a request for more research money, the authors of the report, which is subject to approval by the council, proposes a survey of people in the U.S. for residues of aflatoxin. 

Much of the scientific community has long reasoned that aflatoxin isn't a major health problem in the U.S. because the country's rate of liver cancer isn't high.
Aflatoxin is a potent liver carcinogen in laboratory rats and has been linked in surveys to human liver cancer in Asia and Africa. 

But for more than a decade, doctors have detected aflatoxin in Southerners.
In 1979, aflatoxin was found in the blood of a 31-year-old black woman from rural Georgia who died of liver cancer.
In 1971, aflatoxin was found in the urine of children from an Albany, Ga., family, one of whom had been hospitalized for bone marrow and liver disease.
At about the same time, a group of researchers found aflatoxin-producing fungus in a south Georgia house frequented by four people who had developed leukemia. 

The most puzzling case occurred in Jackson, Miss., where doctors at the University of Mississippi Medical Center detected aflatoxin in the blood or liver of seven children who died of Reye's syndrome from 1975 through 1978.
Although the incidence of this brain and liver disorder has fallen since it was linked to aspirin, researchers are still mystified by its presence. 

"I'm frustrated that no one pays attention to it," said Dr. Betty B. Wray, vice chairwoman of the pediatrics department at the Medical College of Georgia, who has worked on aflatoxin-related cases. 

Some scientists are dubious about the reports from the South.
Because of recent advances in the laboratory, however, a U.S. survey might indicate whether aflatoxin is a health hazard. 

