.START 

Lawrence Walsh & Co., Washington's permanent-looking Independent Counsel, is still racking up taxpayers' dollars, but the final tally is in on another of these prosecutorial pyramids.
For three years, taxpayers paid to have Independent Counsel Alexia Morrison harass former Reagan Justice Department official Theodore Olson.
Final tab: Morrison $1,494,120-Olson $861,589, for a total outlay of $2,355,709. 

But we note some discrepancies.
Mr. Olson's reimbursement is just two-thirds of what his lawyers spent and about half what Ms. Morrison spent.
Ms. Morrison, however, got paid in full.
The story of how the defendant gets shorted and the prosecutor rewarded is instructive. 

The special panel of judges that oversees Independent Counsel cases decides how much a defendant such as Mr. Olson will be allowed to pay his lawyers.
Before reaching Mr. Olson's bottom line, the panel offered a neat synopsis of the case, which was another criminalization of policy differences by Congress: "Theodore B. Olson, as Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, was caught up in a separation of powers contest between the Congress and the Executive Branch and subjected, by an Independent Counsel . . . to a protracted investigation into the truthfulness of his congressional testimony." 

Readers of these columns will recall how Rep. John Dingell agitated a Democratic House "report" in 1985, which charged Mr. Olson with a crime for his testimony defending President Reagan's executive privilege in a 1983 battle over the Environmental Protection Agency.
Mr. Olson, now a Washington constitutional lawyer, lived for years under the shadow cast by Ms. Morrison until in August 1988 she announced he'd done no wrong. 

Now, after all this, the compensation judges have refused Mr. Olson's lawyers at the firm of Jenner & Block their full fees and expenses.
The lawyers had sent Mr. Olson a bill for $1,259,072 -- well below what Ms. Morrison and her staff spent.
Under the Ethics in Government Act, an unindicted target such as Mr. Olson is supposed to get all reasonable bills paid, on the assumption that a private citizen's financial resources are limited.
But the judges decided to knock out several categories of charges, including late-payment fees of $200,000, which sounds like a reasonable amount for interest. 

The inherent unfairness of the process is especially apparent to us after seeing a copy of the $1.4 million in detailed billings Ms. Morrison submitted, not to the judges, but to the Justice Department, which promptly paid -- no questions asked. 

The judges decided not to reimburse Mr. Olson for "librarians, clerical personnel and other support staff," but the records show that Justice paid Ms. Morrison in the tens of thousands of dollars for entries including "administrative services" and "other contractual services not classified." 

While the judges forbade reimbursement for the Olson lawyers' "secretarial overtime" or "overtime dinner expense," Justice's bureaucrats reimbursed Ms. Morrison for "overtime pay," "overtime utilities" and "subsistence and per diem allowance." Despite the supposed temporary nature of Independent Counsel work, Ms. Morrison was even paid for "contributions to Federal Employees' Life and Health Insurance Funds." 

The lesson here is clear: Lawyers may well refuse to defend any executive-branch official under Independent Counsel investigation, since they're on notice that they'll lose 20% of their fees off the top, yet face a prosecutor with a virtually blank checkbook. 

