.START 

Goldman, Sachs & Co. is known for throwing its weight around in the financial markets, but one of its traders apparently went overboard on the New York Stock Exchange a few months ago. 

In one of the most unusual disciplinary actions it has ever meted out, the Big Board yesterday said a Goldman Sachs floor broker was censured and fined $2,500 for allegedly disrupting -- through verbal outbursts and "physically reckless" actions -- the gala opening ceremony on Feb. 14 for a newly listed stock.
Exchange traders identified the stock as Fiat S.p.
A.
The broker, 45-year-old Thomas P. Breen, settled the disciplinary proceeding without admitting or denying wrongdoing. 

The case was one of 11 announced by the Big Board yesterday, including one against a Swiss Bank Corp. subsidiary, SBCI Swiss Bank Corp. Investment Banking, for alleged capital-reserve violations.
SBCI settled the case, without admitting or denying wrongdoing, by paying a $150,000 fine. 

The Goldman Sachs case has been talked about for months on the Big Board trading floor.
Mr. Breen, a floor broker with 21 years experience on Wall Street, is described in the exchange's disciplinary decision No. 89-57 as having "barged" through the opening ceremonies for Fiat so he could place a Goldman Sachs order for Fiat shares. 

The Big Board routinely has such opening ceremonies for the 150 or so stocks newly listed on the exchange each year. 

The Big Board's chairman, John J. Phelan Jr., and Giovanni Agnelli, chairman of Fiat, the giant Italian auto maker, were smiling for cameras during the morning of Feb. 14, when Mr. Breen took the actions, according to traders who were there. 

As the Big Board disciplinary decision describes it, Mr. Breen "felt he was unable to get an order executed due to the group that was assembled for the ceremonies." A floor supervisor cleared a path for Mr. Breen around the group, "yet Breen failed to use the path" and instead "engaged in inappropriate verbal outbursts, and acting in a physically reckless manner, barged through the participants assembled for the ceremonies," according to the Big Board. 

These alleged actions violated Exchange Rule 401 governing good business practices, the exchange said. 

Mr. Breen couldn't be reached to comment.
A Big Board trader sympathetic to him called the case "slightly unusual," and said Mr. Breen just got caught up in a crowded, "kind of get-out-of-my-way situation there." 

Goldman Sachs and Fiat officials had no comment. 

Most Big Board disciplinary cases are for conventional trading or accounting violations.
Yet every so often there is an unusual enforcement action; in July, for example, the exchange censured and handed out a $1,000 fine to a broker who allegedly failed to stay with two guests on the Big Board trading floor, causing them to engage in "disruptive behavior." 

In the case concerning SBCI Swiss Bank Corp. Investment Banking, the exchange said that, among other things, the firm erred in computing its reserve requirements and thus failed to maintain minimum net capital. 

The exchange also took disciplinary action against nine other individuals for what it called violations of its rules and of federal securities laws.
The decisions the exchange reached "may be subject to further review by the Securities and Exchange Commission," the Big Board said. 

SBCI settled the exchange's charges without admitting or denying them.
The case arose from a review of the firm's books conducted by exchange examiners in 1986 and 1987.
The firm formerly was known as Swiss Bank Corp. International Securities. 

The 1986 report says the firm didn't comply with minimum-capital requirements "on three dates on which underwriting commitments became effective," according to the exchange. 

During March to May 1986, the firm's weekly computation of its reserve requirement for a bank account used for the exclusive benefit of customers "was not prepared as required," the exchange said. 

Also, when the exchange conducted its 1986 review, "the firm did not have adequate procedures to supervise and control certain areas of the firm's sales practice activities," the Big Board said. 

The exchange said SBCI called the errors "inadvertent and unintentional," and said the firm has taken corrective action, including replacing certain personnel, adopting a more-sophisticated data-processing system, and implementing additional security measures and accounting controls. 

A spokesman for SBCI reiterated that the events took place three years ago and that the company corrected its procedures.
He declined further comment. 

The exchange also permanently barred four individuals from working for an exchange member because of what it called improper conduct or misappropriation of customer securities.
They are Stephen H. Gorman of Troy, Mich.; Monty Lee Jackson of Mount Morris, Mich.; Daniel Villalobos of Foster City, Calif.; and Thomas Jungho Yu of Houston.
Messrs.
Gorman and Jackson also were censured.
Mr. Yu neither admitted nor denied the exchange's allegations. 

Karen Ann Koopman of Phoenix, Ariz., was barred until she complies with an exchange request for data.
Steven Mitchell Podufaly of Waban, Mass., received a censure and a three-year bar for violations including failing to comply with an exchange request for testimony. 

Edward Nicholas Zurek of Deerfield, Ill., consented to a censure, a 4 1/4-year bar, and a permanent bar from any supervisory post.
Without admitting or denying wrongdoing, he consented to findings that he, among other things, exercised discretionary power in accounts without first getting written authorization from customers. 

The exchange found that Neil Philip Berman of Key Biscayne, Fla., entered trades in two customer accounts and exercised certain discretionary power in two accounts without proper authorization.
Without admitting or denying the findings, Mr. Berman consented to a censure and a three-year bar. 

James Alan Schneider, a Fair Haven, N.J., registered competitive market maker, consented to exchange findings that, among other things, he failed to engage in certain transactions that would contribute to a fair and orderly market.
He didn't admit or deny wrongdoing, but he consented to a censure, a $5,000 fine, and a bar from registration as a market maker for three years. 

Mr. Berman said, "I'm not in the business any longer.
I didn't do anything wrong, but who cares?" 

Mr. Yu declined to comment.
Messrs.
Gorman, Jackson, Villalobos, Podufaly, Zurek and Schneider and Ms. Koopman couldn't be reached for comment. 

Robert Daniels contributed to this article. 

