.START 

Birmingham Steel Corp., one of the nation's biggest minimills, accepted a $30-a-share offer from Harbert Corp., a closely held concern controlled by one of the Birmingham, Ala., company's outside directors. 

The transaction is valued at about $525 million, including assumption of about $100 million in debt and fees. 

The offer is subject to evaluation by First Boston Corp., which has been directed by the Birmingham board to solicit other offers and determine within 45 to 60 days whether the $30-a-share offer is fair.
Should a higher offer by a third party be made and accepted, however, Birmingham has agreed to reimburse Harbert $9 million for expenses. 

The Harbert offer was recommended by a special committee of outside directors. "We believe the proposed merger transaction provides stockholders with an opportunity to maximize the value of their shares at this time, with a reasonable expectation that they should be able to obtain at least $30 a share," said E. Mandell deWindt, chairman of the special committee. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Birmingham surged $4.50 a share to close at $29.125. 

Harbert, based in Birmingham, is involved in construction, real estate development and oil and gas exploration.
It is controlled by John M. Harbert III, who is also a Birmingham director and who owns, with affiliates, about 568,700 shares.
Birmingham, which went public in 1985, had about an average of 12.4 million shares outstanding in the year ended June 30. 

Harbert said it would contribute as much as $75 million in equity, and has received firm commitments for $100 million subordinated bridge financing from Bear, Stearns & Co. and $350 million in senior credit facilities from Continental Bank. 

Although the transaction doesn't involve current management, Harbert said it would invite top managers and employees to invest in the new company.
Harbert also said it plans to keep management and won't get involved in the day-to-day operations.
Birmingham's management has been credited with acquiring and turning around a half dozen ailing minimills. 

Should the acquisition be completed, as expected, during the last two weeks of calendar 1989, Birmingham would be the third major minimill to go private in less than two years.
Northwestern Steel & Wire Co. and Florida Steel Corp. both went private in leveraged buy-outs. 

John Tumazos, an analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp., said managements at minimills have been disappointed with the market's treatment of their stocks.
In fact, Birmingham Steel withdrew a public offering last year because the company wasn't satisfied with the price.
And in spite of management's record, Birmingham hasn't received the same market welcome as Nucor Corp., considered the Wall Street darling of minimills. 

Raymond Harbert, Mr. Harbert's son and a vice president of the holding company, said Birmingham would help balance the company's other operations and provide a steady earnings stream. 

However, Mr. Tumazos said Birmingham, which provides steel bar used in construction, was hurt by heavy rains this spring that damped construction and caused a 6% drop in spot bar prices.
Such softness, he said, is expected to continue through the year, at the same time minimills are adding capacity. 

"The fact that a spring rain can cause prices to fall 6% to 8% suggests that the demand-supply balance isn't too stable," he said. 

Birmingham, for example, had been planning to build a flat-rolled sheet minimill in Texas, along with other partners.
Raymond Harbert said that construction program would be reviewed. 

