.START 

Cocoa futures prices plunged to a 14-year low following the failure of the International Cocoa Organization (ICCO) to agree on price-supporting measures at a weeklong London meeting. 

Reports that a deal involving 500,000 tons of Ivory Coast cocoa and a major New York trade house had fallen through also spurred selling of contracts, analysts said, but confirmation wasn't available. 

The December delivery ended with a loss of $67 a ton, at $1,035, after trading as low as $1,031.
All contracts traded at new life-of-contract lows.
Yesterday's prices were the lowest since May 1975, one analyst said. 

The ICCO meeting, which began Sept. 11, was extended until early Saturday, when members weren't able to agree on price-supporting measures. 

"The major stumbling block proved to be that there wasn't any money forthcoming from producing member countries to pay the estimated $120 million they owe the organization from export levies," said Arthur Stevenson, analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities, New York. 

Thus, Mr. Stevenson said, "the organization lacked the funding to reinstate price-supporting measures." 

The ICCO has a procedure by which the "buffer stock" manager buys cocoa beans when the market price falls below certain levels.
In meetings earlier this year, various proposals to support prices were rejected by ICCO members.
Efforts to lower the intervention price at which the buffer stock manager can buy cocoa were rejected as well. 

The buffer stock is at its 250,000-ton limit, and the manager, without a mandate or money, is unable to buy more cocoa. 

According to one news report, there was a proposal at last week's meeting that would have enabled the buffer stock manager to buy an additional 120,000 tons, but the plan was rejected.
The proposal would have cut both import and export levies and would have brought in an estimated $30 million to finance the purchases, the report said. 

The cocoa market has been and is expected to continue to be under the pressure of surpluses.
Prudential-Bache's Mr. Stevenson said the excess from the 1989-90 season, which begins Oct. 1, may be as much as 150,000 tons, the sixth consecutive year of surpluses. 

One London trading firm estimated the cumulative surplus as of Sept. 30, the end of the current season, at 1.06 million tons. 

With such surpluses, said Bernard Savaiko, an analyst at PaineWebber Inc., if it is true that the deal between the Ivory Coast and the New York trade firm has actually broken down, "that 500,000 tons of unsold cocoa beans would create a great weight on the market." 

Mr. Savaiko also noted that more efficient cocoa producers, such as Malaysia, "which isn't a member of the ICCO and apparently hasn't any intention of joining, are making hefty profits even at current low prices.
They're flooding the market with cocoa and are expected to expand production even more in the next few years.
It's a time bomb hanging over the market." 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

SUGAR: Prices rose on concern over possible danger of Hurricane Hugo to Caribbean sugar-producing areas.
The October contract advanced 0.39 cent a pound to 14.36 cents.
According to one analyst, "This was a knee-jerk reaction.
The hurricane has passed Puerto Rico and at least one weather report says it will pass about 500 miles from Cuba.
If it does, instead of causing damage, it will provide some much-needed moisture for the crop on that island." However, the weather concern did prop up prices and enabled the London market to close firm, as well, another analyst said.
He added that increased buying interest for sugar in the world market might also have contributed to a stronger tone in futures.
India, which has failed to buy three times recently, is expected back in again this week, as are Egypt, North Yemen and Syria, the analyst said. 

GRAINS and SOYBEANS: Futures prices fell because of a lack of demand from exporters and warm, dry weather across much of the Midwest, analysts said.
Corn futures for December delivery on the Chicago Board of Trade dropped 2.5 cents to settle at $2.28 a bushel.
Traders attributed part of the decline to comments made last week by a Soviet Union official indicating that Soviet grain imports may not pick up for several weeks.
Wheat futures for December delivery fell five cents to end at $3.9125 a bushel.
Fair weather depressed soybean futures prices by nearly eliminating the fear that an early frost might reduce the soybean harvest by freezing soybean plants before the beans were fully developed, said Mickey Luth, a futures analyst with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in Chicago.
Farmers in certain areas have just begun harvesting soybeans in portions of the Farm Belt during the past week.
On average, about 20% of the soybean crop is harvested by the first week in October.
Soybean futures for November delivery settled eight cents a bushel lower at $5.685 a bushel. 

COPPER: Futures prices rose as labor talks at a major producer broke down.
The December contract ended with a gain of 0.95 cent a pound to $1.2770.
Traders ignored an increase in London Metal Exchange warehouse stocks last week of 9,525 tons to 92,700 tons, the highest level since early April, an analyst said.
One reason, he said, was that it had been expected that a shipment of Zambian copper would be put into LME warehouses.
Labor negotiations at the Highland Valley Mines in British Columbia were broken off over the weekend, William O'Neill, vice president of research for Elders Futures, New York, said. "Apparently the key issue was the contracting out of work," Mr. O'Neill said.
The analyst said that Poul Hansen, president of mining company, was quoted in news reports as saying, "I have no idea when negotiations will resume" in the bitter contract talks.
The news reports also quoted Mr. Hansen as saying: "It was obvious at the negotiating table there was no reason to go on." Mr. O'Neill observed: "General expectations had been that the strike would be settled by the end of September.
It doesn't now look like it will." 

ENERGY: Petroleum futures were mixed.
Crude oil was generally lower.
But gasoline posted gains after hurricane Hugo forced the closings of at least two refineries, one in the Virgin Islands and the other in Puerto Rico.
West Texas Intermediate crude for October delivery was down eight cents a barrel to $19.88 on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Unleaded gasoline for October delivery was up 0.52 cent a gallon to finish at 58.13 cents.
Except for the hurricane, there was little news to affect the oil markets.
But there were reports that Hisham Nazer, the influential oil minister of Saudi Arabia, is recuperating from recent surgery and isn't expected to be at the meeting of the ministerial monitoring committee of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, which begins Saturday in Geneva. "In his absence, it will be unlikely anything substantial will come out of this meeting," said Shahrokh Nikkhah a Prudential-Bache senior vice president. 

