.START 

The battle lines were drawn when Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. blasted Rep. John Dingell, in full-page newspaper ads, "for creating a climate of fear and distrust within the entire generic pharmaceutical industry." 

Rep. Dingell, a Michigan Democrat, has been leading a House subcommittee probe of questionable practices by generic-drug companies.
As part of that inquiry, he prodded the Food and Drug Administration into investigating Bolar, based in Copiague, a tiny company by Wall Street standards but flagship of the public generic-drug companies. 

The ads this month in the New York Times, USA Today and Newsday angered subcommittee members who saw Bolar's highly unusual tactic as an effort to cow congressional investigators.
But others familar with Bolar say the company acted out of frustration, concerned that its credibility was being unfairly assailed. 

"We're caught in the middle of a big power play," asserts Robert Shulman, Bolar's co-founder, who contends the company has become a pawn in a political fight between Rep. Dingell and the FDA. 

With his open shirt, jeans and jogging shoes, Mr. Shulman looks more like one of his pill-factory workers than president of the company.
While he has run in five New York and Boston marathons, 55-year-old Mr. Shulman now faces his biggest challenge: successfully defending the integrity of the company and its products. 

Rep. Dingell has not only triggered the FDA's review of approvals granted, but surveillance of industry manufacturing practices.
Congressional investigators believe Bolar may have gained approval in 1987 of a big-selling generic version of the blood pressure drug called Dyazide by passing off the brand-name drug as its own, and pressed the FDA to investigate.
That was more than two months ago, and while the FDA inquiry drags on, Bolar's reputation has been deeply tarnished.
Moreover, the FDA is threatening to withdraw its approval of the company's generic version of Dyazide, a move that could cost Bolar as much as 40% of about $130 million in annual sales. 

It could also lead to higher consumer costs, because Bolar's is the only inexpensive version of Dyazide, sold widely as a brand name product by SmithKline Beecham PLC. Hemant Shah, a Warren, N.J. drug analyst, charges that "Bolar's unfairly twisting in the wind. {FDA Commissioner Frank} Young is trying to deliver bodies to Dingell to save his job." Still, he says Bolar's generic Dyazide sales haven't been significantly hurt. 

A spokesman for Rep. Dingell declined to comment about Bolar. "There isn't any point in commenting until the facts are known," he said. "The only concern is that the facts be known." 

The FDA has yet to rule on whether Bolar committed fraud in its approval application.
Generic-industry officials believe the ruling hasn't been made because of an internal FDA rift between officials who want to placate Rep. Dingell and others who believe Bolar did nothing wrong.
Meanwhile, Bolar's stock has plummeted, though it made a partial recovery in recent days in heavy trading, closing at $21.75 up $1.125, after gaining 75 cents on Friday. 

One indication of the FDA dispute is the conflicting positions of agency officials.
While FDA director Young has said he wants to strip Bolar of its approval for generic Dyazide, one of the agency's top scientists, Dr. Carl Peck, has stated publicly that Bolar's generic blood-pressure medicine is safe and effective. 

Bolar's Mr. Shulman contends that questions about generic Dyazide and the approval application for an anti-psychotic medicine were resolved to the FDA's satisfaction years ago. 

"I see it as a fight between the FDA scientific types and Young," says William Haddad, vice chairman of Schein Pharmaceutical Inc., of Port Washington, N.Y., which receives 50% of the profits from sales of Bolar's generic Dyazide as part of a marketing arrangement. 

Mr. Shulman says he doesn't intend to pull the blood-pressure medicine off the market.
The battle over the drug, he acknowledges, could drag out for a year or more.
During that time he predicts Bolar will prove Bolar's product is equivalent to the Dyazide manufactured by SmithKline, of Philadelphia. "Eventually our Dyazide will be cleared," he says. 

But an FDA official's testimony before the Dingell subcommittee last week severely damaged Bolar's credibility.
Paul Vogel, deputy compliance director, suggested that Bolar tried to pass off a Sandoz Phamaceuticals Co. anti-psychotic drug as its own in laboratory testing in 1982. 

If Bolar was trying to be sneaky, it muffed the job.
The faint outline of the distinctive Sandoz logo can be seen on the pills originally submitted to the testing laboratory. (Bolar eventually resubmitted different pills and won FDA approval.) Mr. Shulman insists that the problem occured when Bolar tried to match the color of its pills with those of brand-name Sandoz's and mixed up the pills of Sandoz with Bolar's.
He says if Bolar really wanted to cheat, it could have completely removed the Sandoz logo from the brand name pills and recoated them without a logo. "Nobody would try to wipe a logo off {a brand-name product}," Mr. Shulman said.
Nonetheless, he said Bolar plans an internal investigation into the incident. 

Yet Mr. Shulman says that his lack of political savvy probably has damaged the company.
In retrospect, he says, the newspaper ads "may have been a mistake," because they raised the ire of congressional investigators. 

