.START 

Weary of the Third World foibles and capital needs of big U.S. banks?
The investors' antidote may have arrived: Japanese bank stocks. 

This week, for the first time, investors will be able to trade American depositary receipts in one of Tokyo's leviathan banks, Mitsubishi Bank Ltd. Other Japanese banks, many of which have been listing their shares on European stock exchanges in the past year, are expected to follow suit in the U.S. soon.
An ADR represents a security that remains in a foreign country. 

Mitsubishi Bank's New York Stock Exchange listing is the first by a Japanese company since 1983.
The fourth-largest and one of the most conservative of Japan's banks, Mitsubishi is so financially sound it puts most U.S. banks to shame.
In the Form 20-F the bank had to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mitsubishi Bank became the first Japanese bank to explain its accounts in U.S. terms, but analysts said the filing contained no real surprises. 

With total assets of 46.61 trillion yen ($318 billion), Mitsubishi Bank is two-thirds bigger than America's biggest bank, Citicorp.
Moreover, like most Japanese banks, it owns a huge portfolio of Japanese stocks, mainly in the circle of so-called Mistsubishi group companies it lends to; its unrealized securities gains amount to 4.05 trillion yen. 

Even without that sum, Mitsubishi's capital-to-assets ratio -- a rough measure of how much cash a bank keeps on hand for every loan it makes -- stands at more than 10%.
That means the bank already clears the 8% hurdle that the world's central bankers have agreed to impose globally starting in 1992.
As a result, analysts say, Mitsubishi isn't likely to be making big capital demands on its stockholders, as some U.S. banks will. 

Nor are any ugly clouds looming on the horizon.
Mitsubishi's exposure to the debt-burdened developing world amounts to 0.84% of total assets.
That figure is hardly comparable to the profit-staggering levels many U.S. banks endure.
Besides, the establishment of new loan-loss reserves in Japan is tightly controlled by the powerful Ministry of Finance, which has kept such reserves to 15% of banks' exposure and isn't likely to significantly raise them. 

With such strengths, Mitsubishi Bank figured it was time to tap foreign investors, who now own just 1.5% of the bank's 2.55 billion shares. "We're in an era where Japanese can drive Cadillacs, wear Celine ties and Austin Reed suits," says Hisaya Nara, the bank's deputy president. "Investors should have choices, too." 

Mr. Nara notes that even though Mitsubishi has had an office in the U.S. almost constantly since 1920, and since 1984 has owned Bank of California, it recently has granted its New York-based North American subsidiary wide new autonomy to make loans and raise funds.
By listing its ADRs in New York, he says, the bank hopes it can raise its profile among U.S. corporate borrowers and institutional lenders.
Besides, he adds: "We think we should make an attractive investment." 

Analysts generally agree.
In a report comparing the bank's 20-F filing with its annual report, Salomon Brothers' banking analysts praise Mistsubishi's financial conservatism and predict its stock will outperform the broad-based Tokyo Stock Exchange index over the next six to 12 months.
That wouldn't be much of an aberration, though; unlike bank stocks in the U.S. and Britain, the Japanese financial sector has routinely outpaced the market as a whole during the past two years. 

Japan's closely regulated banking environment and booming economy have helped.
Most interest rate margins in Japan remain fixed and, while floating-rate loans now make up more than 50% of loans made in Tokyo, banks have a vast, cheap deposit rate thanks to a rigid savings ethic and a national savings-deposit rate of only 0.38%. 

"Investors have finally come around to the realization that the cheap source of deposits and rapid growth is showing up in profits," says J. Brian Waterhouse, a banking analyst at James Capel.
In the year ended March 31, 1989, Mitsubishi's net income shot up 50.6% to 60.5 billion yen. 

The bank can probably maintain its earnings stream, despite the likelihood of extensive deregulation in the coming decade. "It's pretty much guaranteed," says Robert Zielinski, a banking analyst at Jardine Fleming Securities. "They can just sell some of their securities holdings." He notes that the constant growth of profits at Mitsubishi Bank has helped the bank's share price to grow 1,631 times since 

Still, Mr. Zielinski cautions that Mitsubishi's high price -- it stands at more than 40 times prospective per-share earnings -- doesn't offer the spectacular gains other financial stocks might. "With some cheap U.S. banking stocks, you could get a great recovery story," Mr. Zielinski says.
Or he suggests cross-border investors buy stock in Tokio Marine & Fire Insurance Co., a company that's closely aligned with Mitsubishi Bank but carries a price-earnings ratio of closer to 30. "Mitsubishi Bank may be hard to justify if you're a value-oriented investor," Mr. Zielinski says.
But, he adds: "You can be sure it will gain as long as earnings keep going up." 

