.START 

but more for the whole meal. 

That's the prospect facing some long-term investors in several stock mutual funds managed by American Capital Management & Research Inc. 

The Houston-based fund group, majority owned by Primerica Corp., recently cut its fat up-front sales fee, to 5.75% from 8.5%, for six of its stock funds.
Sounds good. 

But here's the hitch: Now it's levying a separate, annual charge that could eat into returns for its buy-and-hold investors.
And that move is drawing criticism from some fund specialists. 

"It's like bait and switch," says Kurt Brouwer, a San Francisco investment adviser specializing in low-cost mutual funds.
Calling the lowered load "cosmetic," he says investors could end up shelling out more over time because of the funds' annual so-called 12b-1 fee, which soon will be levied to help market the funds. 

(These fees are named after the 1980 rule that first allowed funds to siphon cash annually from fund assets to pay for marketing and distribution costs.) 

Several stock funds have lowered their loads since Black Monday in an effort to revive sales.
Others have opted to cut out front-end loads altogether in favor of 12b-1 charges and exit fees.
But American Capital's new strategy is unusual because of its combination of both a steep up-front load and a marketing fee, at a time when investors increasingly are shunning high-cost funds. 

The six funds, with total assets of more than $4 billion, are American Capital Pace, Enterprise Fund, Fund of America, Harbor Fund, Venture Fund and American OTC Fund.
Investors will be charged an annual fee of 0.25% of assets, starting Sept. 29, for the life of the funds. 

American Capital officials shrug off the gripes.
The new fee strategy will help attract more money into the funds, they contend, which in turn will lower costs for all of their investors.
The new structure, they say, should help brokers who had been having trouble peddling stock funds to wary investors since the October 1987 crash. 

"Brokers said, 'Look, it's hard enough to sell equity funds -- much less with an 8.5% load, '" conceded Thomas Goodwin, American Capital's marketing specialist.
But, says Mr. Goodwin, "Investors seem to be able to swallow 5.75%." 

At the same time, American Capital officials maintain that the annual 12b-1 charge will give brokers more incentive to provide better service to shareholders.
And they say the new fee is too small to make much of a difference to investors. 

"We only have to do a tiny, tiny bit better in terms of investment performance to overcome it," says Don G. Powell, American Capital president and chief executive officer. 

