.START 

It sounds incredible, even for a boondoggler like Uncle Sam. 

But a Customs Service program run by Northrop Corp. to auction off property confiscated from scofflaws is losing money. 

No one seems certain exactly how much because, government auditors say, Customs' books are a mess.
House aides believe the program has fallen some $8 million in the hole since Northrop took it over in 1985.
Senate staffers put the loss at $10 million. 

"There have been real problems with how Customs has managed this contract from the very beginning," says Sen. Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat. "Now we're seeing some of the unfortunate results." 

The Justice Department, as reported, is investigating the matter.
Affidavits filed in U.S. District Court in Oklahoma allege that Northrop has been making "fraudulent claims" to the government and "deliberately billing" it for storage of items that have been out of the company's hands for up to three months. 

Northrop and Customs officials won't comment on the criminal inquiry.
But they say the program's critics fail to consider that even worthless goods must be stored while a suspect's case slogs through the legal system.
They also say balance-sheet estimates by Congress don't take into account property that the government decides not to sell off, but instead distributes to various agencies for their own use.
If credited for those transfers, they argue, the program would be in the black. 

"We've done a very outstanding job," insists Roy P. Hooks, the Northrop executive who runs the program. "We're providing an outstanding service to Customs and a benefit to the taxpayers." But Customs agents in the field tell a different story.
Documents unearthed by Sen. Levin's staff and made available to this newspaper suggest Northrop is mismanaging things, and that monitoring by Customs is deficient. "The administration of the Northrop contract may be leaving the Customs Service vulnerable to a charge of waste, fraud or abuse," warns a June 1988 memo from Customs' Southwest region office to Washington headquarters. 

The June memo says Northrop charged $25,516 for 16 days storage of 503 pieces of loose pipe.
When regional Customs officials, checking up on the company, solicited a comparative bid from a local pipe yard that serves as a bonded Customs warehouse, they found "an identical shipment with the same amount of sorting work would cost $4,300 for one month's storage, including all in/out handling charges," according to the memo. 

Mr. Hooks says Northrop's tally was justified because Customs ordered the pipes sorted, stacked and transported in unusually quick fashion.
He also says the company was unable to find a lower-cost alternative.
Still, a Customs spokesman says of the incident: "There is a problem there.
Thank God things like that don't happen very often." 

But they apparently do, if the memos obtained by Sen. Levin's office are any indication.
While examples in the documents generally don't involve big dollar amounts, critics of the program say they illustrate a pattern of questionable transactions. 

Specifically, the memos allege that Northrop has raised program costs by getting outside appraisals on jewelry when in-house Customs personnel could have done the job; by needlessly shuffling items from one district to another for auction; and by failing to get rid of merchandise in a timely fashion. 

Mr. Hooks disputes the allegations.
In the case of outside appraisers, he says, they are brought in because Customs personnel aren't always equipped to handle specialized work; the government, he adds, caps the amount that can be spent on that part of the project.
He also says goods are moved to a common selling point to "get a competitive crowd and maximize revenues." He denies that Northrop fails to dispose of items quickly, though he says the bookkeeping on that can be "skewed" because some bidders fail to claim their merchandise. "I have to sell some items three times," he says. 

Nonetheless, some lawmakers argue that there is a built-in incentive for Northrop to run up costs, all of which are covered by the government.
Though up to 80% of the company's fee is based on performance -- Customs consistently has rated it "very good" -- the basic fee structure that's negotiated at the outset of the fiscal year is linked to anticipated program expenses.
Thus, the more costs soar, the higher the next year's base fee is likely to be. "The contract is so loosely drawn, it's riddled with opportunity for fraud," charges Rep. E. Clay Shaw, a Florida Republican. 

The Customs spokesman contends that "the government is not out to make money" on the program, which he says is designed to free agents from "custodial duties" so they can concentrate on law enforcement.
But Rep. Shaw counters, "We seize hundreds of millions of dollars worth of assets, and then we throw it all away.
We envisioned the whole process as potential profit." 

Actually, most of the seized items aren't auctioned off at all; almost three-quarters are remitted, usually as part of a settlement in which the original owner pays Customs its costs -- and often a penalty on top of that. "Customs should be in the black no matter how you cut it," Sen. Levin's aide says. 

Part of the problem may be the way the government calculates costs.
Northrop, for instance, sold for $100 some jewelry that had been seized in El Paso, Texas.
Customs put the cost of the sale at $819.
But Northrop says $774 of that amount stems from a government formula to recoup overhead expenses. "Even if Northrop did nothing wrong, there's still obviously a problem here," says the aide to Sen. Levin. 

Los Angeles-based Northrop was brought aboard to make the seized-property program run smoother after a 1983 report by the General Accounting Office, Congress's investigative arm, blasted Customs' management of the program and recommended hiring a private contractor.
Northrop won the accord because its sophisticated computer system could track Customs' nationwide inventories. 

Now, House and Senate committees are abuzz that it might be a shoo-in to win an extension of the pact, which recently was put out for bid.
But Northrop says it isn't even planning to go after the contract again because it's trying to focus on its core aerospace businesses. 

