.START 

In early June, Rep. Dan Rostenkowski stole away from the Capitol in his chauffeured Lincoln for a secret meeting at the White House with his old buddy George Bush. 

The two had been commiserating quietly for weeks about a common problem: how to achieve steep deficit-reduction goals without violating the president's no-tax-increase pledge.
And this time, they hit upon a solution that only a politician can fully appreciate.
They decided to try to reduce a tax in order to raise revenue. 

"I'll try to put together a bill that won't attract a veto," Rep. Rostenkowski promised the president.
They then went on to talk about capital gains. 

So began the bizarre saga that led last week to the House Ways and Means Committee's approval -- over Chairman Rostenkowski's opposition -- of a controversial cut in the capital-gains-tax rate.
It's a story of how the president flattered and feted the burly Illinois Democrat into taking his side.
Then, after Mr. Rostenkowski switched and opposed the tax cut -- he now calls it "a financial disaster for this country" -- Mr. Bush got his way anyway. 

In between, the usually shrewd Chicago pol acted like a puppy dog to Mr. Bush, weakening when his pride and vanity were stroked by the president.
At one stage, the chairman even embraced as his own a capital-gains scheme that was shaped by the Treasury and White House budget director Richard Darman. 

The consequences of Rep. Rostenkowski's miscalculations are enormous.
His loss of control will have a lasting effect on him and possibly on the new House speaker, Thomas Foley of Washington, who has put his prestige on the line to defeat the capital-gains cut.
The future of relations between the Democratic-controlled Congress and the Republican White House also is at stake.
Even after clearing the Ways and Means Committee, the proposed tax reduction faces a number of hurdles on the House floor.
And in the Senate, Finance Chairman Lloyd Bentsen opposes it.
Still, the odds now appear better than 50-50 that Congress will enact some kind of reduction -- a move that was all but unthinkable just a few months ago. 

The Ways and Means vote is a major victory for President Bush, who has made the cut a priority.
And it is proof of the power wielded by Rep. Edgar Jenkins of Georgia, the conservative Democrat who put together the unshakable Ways and Means coalition in favor of Mr. Bush's idea.
Both men advocate the tax change as a boon to the economy and an important investment incentive. 

Opponents, though, see it as a boon to the rich with no proven benefits to the economy.
They also say it's the first step toward unraveling the massive tax overhaul completed just three years ago. 

"Cutting capital gains is a knife at the heart of tax reform," laments Democratic Sen. Bill Bradley of New Jersey, a father of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
Adds Rep. Leon Panetta (D., Calif.), chairman of the House Budget Committee: "We're facing the danger of repeating the 1981 fiasco, when we lost control of both budget and tax policy." 

Back at the start of the year, there was no greater opponent of cutting the capital-gains tax than Rep. Rostenkowski. "It's a tax break for the wealthy that will significantly increase the deficit," he said then. "I can't imagine any member of Congress willing to take such a step." 

The chairman's negative reaction was fully in step with his fellow Democrats.
At the same time, though, he was also concerned about fast-approaching budget deadlines that raised the issue of how to increase revenues to help reduce the deficit.
And that concern brought him round again to the issue of capital gains.
The reason: Paradoxically, capital-gains cuts stimulate so many asset sales initially that in the short run federal revenues actually increase. 

There was another issue involved as well, of a far more-personal nature.
The chairman never tires of bragging that he and Mr. Bush are old friends; they served together on Ways and Means when Mr. Bush was a congressman in the 1960s, and have kept in contact ever since.
Just before Mr. Bush delivered his inaugural address last January, he acknowledged Mr. Rostenkowski -- to the chairman's delight -- with a "Hi, Danny" audible to the entire nation. 

During later talks with the chairman, Mr. Bush helped his cause by pushing all the right buttons.
At one meeting, the chairman invited the president to attend both a lunch and a dinner on the same day to honor the 200th anniversary of the Ways and Means Committee, a celebration of immense importance to Mr. Rostenkowski. 

At first, the president resisted attending both affairs.
But Rep. Rostenkowski continued to insist. "You're going to both of them]" the chairman recalls saying with a smile.
And, in a grand gesture, the president agreed. 

But the chairman's fondness for George Bush got him into deep trouble.
Soon after he went public with his new-found interest in capital gains, he closeted himself in a room on the second floor of the Capitol to hear what the Democratic majority on his committee had to say.
It wasn't pretty. 

From every corner of the cramped room, he was berated by his usual allies.
They complained that capital gains was a tax break for the rich that Democrats had no business in promoting.
They said it would distort the economy. "Democrats should not be undoing tax reform," California Rep. Robert Matsui declared, his voice rising.
Some even suggested that the chairman was playing footsy with the president to his own party's detriment. 

In the midst of the protests, a lone voice rose in favor of the capital-gains cut. "I don't want anyone to be under the misapprehension that capital gains won't be offered," said Rep. Jenkins, the soft-spoken Georgian. 

Faced with the depth of feeling at the meeting, Rep. Rostenkowski publicly backed away from the capital-gains tax cut.
But Mr. Rostenkowski had unleashed the possibility of such a cut, and it wouldn't just disappear.
Rep. Jenkins quietly began building a pro-cut coalition, carefully consulting administration officials as he crafted his plan.
The chairman didn't interfere, and although he denies it, some say he gave the Georgian his tacit support.
Some lawmakers who were fighting for some tax changes that would cost money were told by those close to the chairman to speak to Rep. Jenkins. 

In July, the committee met its basic revenue requirements for deficit cutting, and Mr. Rostenkowski made a plea to stop there.
But a slew of popular, soon-to-expire tax breaks still needed funding, raising again the issue of how to increase revenues -- and adding steam to the capital-gains-cut effort. 

As Rep. Jenkins gained backers, worried Democratic leaders counterattacked.
Speaker Foley and House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt of Missouri privately emphasized their opposition, and Mr. Foley persuaded a few wavering lawmakers, including Rep. Frank Guarini of New Jersey, to toe the party line. 

But President Bush was busy too, begging support for the Jenkins plan.
Ultimately, Mr. Jenkins put together a bare committee majority made up of six Democrats and all 13 Republicans.
When Rep. Foley appealed to one of this number, Democratic Rep. J.J. Pickle, the crusty Texan told him the request was "like waiting outside the delivery room and having your mother say, 'Son, you ought not to have kissed that girl. '" 

Rep. Rostenkowski argued that the tax cut was ill-timed, warning Mr. Bush that it would sour relations with Congress.
To the Jenkins Democrats, he predicted that a gains-tax cut would be part of a bigger tax bill next year that would also include a higher top tax rate for the wealthiest Americans. 

Dealing now with a weak hand, Speaker Foley hastily suggested an alternative plan: indexing capital gains to inflation.
Rep. Rostenkowski was deputized to take the idea to the administration in hopes of working out a compromise.
His conversations with budget chief Darman and Treasury tax experts led to two possible compromise plans, both of them based on the notion of rewarding those who hold assets a long time by giving them a bonus tax break based on the sales price.
The idea won over the Jenkins forces but it alienated the rest of the Democrats, who regarded it as all but indistinguishable from a rate cut.
Ultimately, Mr. Rostenkowski had no choice but to stand aside while Mr. Jenkins prevailed. 

Rep. Rostenkowski insists he has no regrets about how things turned out.
His goal, he says, hasn't ever been the elusive one of "tax purity" but of getting things done and writing new law. "I still view myself as the compromiser," he says. "Some shots make people happy, and some make people sad." 

David Wessel contributed to this article. 

tax proposal: "It's a tax break for the wealthy that will significantly increase the deficit.
I can't imagine any member of Congress willing to take such a step." 

June 7 -- Opening the door to a tax package that includes a cut in capital-gains taxes: "If my Democrats or my Republicans can offer me a way to raise revenue without a capital-gains tax, I'll jump at it.
But so far I haven't seen a way." 

June 28 -- After House Democrats resist: "I never anticipated there would be as much resistance to capital gains as there was." 

July 26 -- As talks with administration resume: "We're all working toward the same goal.
What's keeping us apart is (cutting capital-gains tax) rates as opposed to indexing." 

Sept. 14 -- After committee approves cut in capital-gains taxes over his opposition: "It is going to be a financial disaster for this country." 

