.START 

Although I am one of the two Johns Hopkins faculty members quoted by Charles J. Sykes ("Where Liberal Arts Starve Amid Federal Plenty," editorial page, Sept. 6), I have never spoken to him.
The quotation was lifted from a Jan. 25 article in the Chronicle of Higher Education.
I cannot imagine that the Journal would ever use an eight-month-old remark by an executive to characterize the current health of his corporation. 

Outlooks can change rapidly in the academic world, too, and I and many of my colleagues are now optimistic about the fiscal and scholarly prospects of the Johns Hopkins School of Arts and Sciences.
The worst is past, and the world looks much brighter than it did a year ago. 

The classics department, for example, far from being "beleaguered," has just added a new faculty member and is advertising a prestigious new chair to be filled this year.
It expects to fill another chair next year, and make one other appointment.
The university's commitment to the classics is unwavering. 

Jerrold S. Cooper 

Chairman, Near Eastern Studies 

Acting Chairman, Classics 

Johns Hopkins University 

Baltimore 

As an alumnus of Johns Hopkins (B.A. '81), I read Mr. Sykes's article with great interest.
He is painfully correct in most matters -- with one exception. 

Johns Hopkins's academics are unsurpassed.
Even though the school's reputation is that of a science haven, the liberal arts have the highest ranked departments (according to the Gourman Reports, the departments of history, English and art history are ranked in the top 10 in the country -- the basic sciences are a few notches lower).
But the university has done a poor job of promoting its own best qualities.
In fact, the undergraduate application literature takes on an apologetic tone for excelling in the humanities, simply because the incorrect reputation is that of a pre-med colony. 

With accessible teachers such as John Barth, Richard Macksey, Hugh Kenner, Kenneth Lynn and Ron Walters, a school should brag about its strength in the liberal arts rather than laugh at the stereotype that prohibits a greater pool of liberal-arts applicants. 

The school could be one of the great undergraduate schools, but with the little sense of community spirit offered, Johns Hopkins will remain a first-class university that many students avoid. 

Rob Friedman 

Short Hills, N.J. 

Try some shocking facts: 

-- The U.S. has become increasingly less competitive and productive in a global economy.
One reason is our failure to do enough research, especially non-defense-related research. 

-- Universities in the U.S. provide the best education available in the world, but they are underfunded for their mission.
They will be unable to support research and students as they have in the past, if federal policies continue to increasingly squeeze their budgets. 

Mr. Sykes is concerned about the future of the liberal arts.
More power to him.
But if we listen to his imprecations about universities' efforts to foster graduate education and research, we will convince ourselves that demolition is creation and penury wealth. 

Steven S. Manos 

Executive Vice President 

Tufts University 

Medford, Mass. 

While Johns Hopkins began at the top, its various programs had their ups and downs with only one exception: classics.
The founding professor, Basil Gildersleeve, was a great scholar.
So were his successors.
Students in the department were devoted to a degree I have never seen in any other department anywhere.
Outstanding graduates and doctors came through it. 

In recent years the department repeatedly nominated for promotion its brilliant, young, untenured professors, but the administration did not promote them.
They went away.
When the sky is polluted, stars are hard to see. 

Clifford Truesdell 

Emeritus Professor of Rational Mechanics 

Johns Hopkins University 

Baltimore 

