.START 

Imagine a day when a Wall Street analyst gets paid $50,000 for every good prediction, gets docked $50,000 for every bad one and otherwise gets only a cup of coffee for showing up in the morning. 

That time may not be far away.
Seeking to squeeze more profits from their research staffs at a time when the securities business isn't robust, many big Wall Street brokerage firms are starting to pay more of their analysts and researchers based on whether their work actually helps sell stocks and bonds. 

This performance-oriented pay system is a departure from the pre-crash days when Wall Street lavished big salaries and perks on star securities analysts, regardless of how wrong they were. 

Lawrence Eckenfelder, a Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. brokerage industry analyst, said that with deteriorating profits from stock sales and trading at many firms, "there seems to be more focus on analysts actually being able to make money.
More firms seem to be looking at it." 

Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., a 62%-owned unit of American Express Co., has just put more of its analysts on a 2 1/2-year-old system that ties stock picking and salary so closely that it's called "Bonus." Shearson analysts rate stocks as either Buy, Outperform, Neutral, Underperform or Sell (the first letters spell "bonus"), and at year end the firm's computers check how well the analysts did. 

"It's not a game.
It's real money," said Jack Rivkin, Shearson's director of equity research.
Brokerage firms "are always in competition for good brokers and retaining clients.
And an element of retention of clients has to do with the quality of advice analysts give them, rather than {the firm's} overall image." 

For investors, the new pressure on analysts to serve their sales force is another reminder that the advice they get from Wall Street may not always be totally objective.
The danger is that some analysts may be pushing stocks simply to show they can generate a lot of business.
The trend toward performance-based pay has hit full force at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., a unit of Sears, Roebuck & Co., where the research department's main purpose these days seems to be to generate ideas for brokers, securities-industry analysts said.
A Dean Witter spokesman said the firm has decided to tie a "portion of pay of an analyst to his ideas, and also the result of the ideas," and to require analysts to spend more time in brokerage offices. 

The new focus on generating products for brokers is one factor that led to the resignation this month of John Mendelson, a widely quoted Dean Witter stock-market analyst.
Dean Witter brokers said Mr. Mendelson's resignation was tied to the firm's desire to link his pay to how much he helped brokers sell stocks.
Mr. Mendelson said he plans to become a professional trader, manage some money and write a market letter for institutions. 

Analysts said there is a new push at Prudential-Bache, a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, to make stock-picking more a part of analysts' pay.
Michael Culp, Prudential-Bache's research head, confirmed the firm is considering "minor modifications" in how analysts are graded, with stock-picking prowess a part of the measurement. 

Most of the firms stepping up the pressure on analysts stress that they know when to stop.
Prudential-Bache's Mr. Culp, for example, said he recognizes that there are analysts who know their industries well but just can't pick "hot" stocks, and they should get paid for their skills. "If an analyst is under too much pressure to pick stocks, he may look for flimsy reasons to recommend stocks," Mr. Culp said. 

At Merrill Lynch & Co., which has an elaborate model to measure monthly performance of analysts' ideas, research head Jack Lavery stressed the importance of "subjective evaluation on top of these inputs." Others agree that the trend toward computer evaluation of analysts can be dangerous. 

"The basic trend toward paying people based on good investment ideas is justified, but you have to be careful not to crimp or take away the creativity of analysts," said D. Larry Smith, a C.J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc. analyst who was formerly head of research at Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. "Analysts who make money for people have to have courage, and sometimes they're wrong." 

