.START 

First of a Series.
This marks the beginning of a wide-ranging series of stories exploring consumers' buying habits and their attitudes about the American marketplace.
The weekly series will be based on reporters' interviews with consumers, marketing consultants and other industry experts, as well as in-depth consumer surveys conducted by Peter D. Hart Research Associates and the Roper Organization.
The project is part of The Wall Street Journal's observance of its centennial year.} 

Each year, the nation's marketers embark on ever more intricate anthropological quests to answer their perennial question: What do consumers really want? 

To find out, companies stalk us in shopping malls and invade our homes.
They hire us for focus groups and grill us by telephone.
Each year, thousands of new products and tantalizing messages from Madison Avenue burst forth onto the consumer landscape. 

So what do most Americans want?
Not all that much, it turns out. 

If we landed an all-expenses-paid vacation in a sweepstakes, many of us would choose to stay at the Holiday Inn.
We still envision -- in our minds if not our garages -- the basic Chevy four-door sedan as the ideal car.
If we ever could manage to win a year's free supply of something, we would choose heartland Budweiser as our beer and middlebrow Baskin Robbins as our ice cream.
One of our most beloved home-entertainment appliances remains the no-frills color television, the same 21-inch box we could have bought in the '60s. 

This, at least, is the snapshot that emerges from a Wall Street Journal survey of the aspirations and attitudes of more than 4,000 consumers from all walks of life.
The in-depth probe of the consumer psyche was conducted in two separate polls by the Roper Organization and by Peter D. Hart Research Associates Inc.
The studies reveal that, despite all the hype about Rolexes, BMWs and "Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous," most Americans have remarkably modest aspirations and down-to-earth dreams. 

The prevailing levelheadedness suggests that the excess of the Reagan Gilded Age, if it ever was the consumer ideal, is passe.
The shop-till-you-drop types haven't disappeared.
But simplicity and homey comfort, not opulence, are the order of the day.
And there is evidence that Americans by and large are finding them -- at least in their private lives. 

Indeed, the people polled by Mr. Hart express a surprising degree of satisfaction about their place on the planet.
Three-fourths of the 2,000 consumers surveyed say they've fulfilled most if not all of their material needs.
Financially, they're either comfortable or can manage to pay the bills each month, while saving a little or spending a little, too. 

But if they're basically happy in their own back yards, when they enter the marketplace they turn into scolds.
The gripes of these prototypical purchasers probably sound much like yours.
Prices are up, but quality is down.
The middle class is squeezed by the soaring costs of home-buying and education.
Imports are supplanting U.S.-made goods. (These "bad news" headlines were the top picks of the consumers interviewed by Mr. Hart, when asked what the '80s were all about). 

Their verdict on American service: It's lousy.
Shopping has become such a chore that more people actually hate taking a trip to the supermarket more than doing housework. "I'm happier as a person than a purchaser," declares Peter Hanlon, a 32-year-old computer analyst in Spokane, Wash., and one of the consumers who took part in the Journal survey. "I live in the best country on the face of the earth, so I guess I'll put up with high prices, mediocre quality and poor service." 

Marketers beware.
The miffed mind-set is rampant.
Some feel shopped out after a grand fling with consumerism during the mid-'80s.
And others feel shut out as companies woo the silk-stocking set. 

"There is clearly an aspirational group in America who are seduced by high-end products and high-end advertising, and these are the people that marketing power is being directed to," says Richard Winger, a partner at Boston Consulting Group. "But the largest group are the go-along and get-along middle-of-the-roaders, and marketers today really aren't paying much attention to them." 

Thus, only 5% of the people in Mr. Hart's part of the study think that American business is listening to them and striving to do its best.
Almost one-third think companies and executives are too greedy -- a view that's especially popular with white-collar professionals and executives earning $35,000 to $50,000 a year. 

So what's a marketer to do?
How about lowering the stress levels of America's very stressed-out shoppers.
It emerges that one of their top pet peeves is waiting in long lines while other registers or windows stay closed.
The Journal research also suggests that many consumers seethe when they hear a recorded solicitation message. 

And if you want to drive people crazy -- especially working women -- have your service or delivery people fail to show up when they say they will. 

Joan Tinsman, a 52-year-old nurse in Topton, Pa., is still fuming at how a Kenmore washing machine repairman failed to show up at her house, even though the event occurred a decade ago.
Mrs. Tinsman, a respondent to the Journal survey, recalls: "He showed up a week late and said, 'Lady, maybe you'd better buy a new machine. ' I thanked him for his knowledge -- and bought a Westinghouse." 

Beyond such ABCs of service, people also crave anxiety-free products -- simple items without lots of fancy bells and whistles and complex instructions.
It's not just because souped-up gizmos cost more.
Consumers just don't want to squander their mental energy figuring out how something works. 

Jay Ogilvy, a futurist and founder of Holen North America Inc. in New York, says consumers in the '80s are victims of "involuntary complexity": traffic jams, delayed airplane takeoffs, junk mail and all the other hassles of contemporary life. "People are trying to escape from this involuntary complexity with voluntary simplicity in all aspects of their lives," he contends. 

Such loathing of things complicated explains why almost 50% of the individuals interviewed by Mr. Hart say they don't feel confident about buying computer equipment. "It might be even worse than the figures say," admits John Rossi, president of Blue Chip International Inc., which makes IBM-compatible computers. "Generally, we talk in what, for most people, amounts to a foreign language.
The only problem is the computer industry doesn't know it." 

Other intimidating buys: exercise equipment and stocks.
About half of the consumers polled by Roper confessed they wouldn't know how to go about buying 100 shares of a publicly traded stock.
And almost one-third of those earning more than $50,000 a year claimed ignorance, too. 

Perhaps the most heartfelt plea comes from Ray Struthers, a telephone repairman in Los Angeles. "American industry has really lost touch with the simple things that everyday Americans really need to use and buy," says this participant in the Journal study. 

Mr. Struthers's simple requests?
Stores that stock both black and white floor tiles and a pair of work boots that fit his sizenine feet.
The shopper claims that Sears's decision to shift production of its DieHard work boots from the U.S. to South Korea has caused his present podiatric problems. (Sears says it made the switch offshore about four years ago with "no compromise" in quality.) 

In the midst of so much frustration and inconvenience, it's easy to see why those polled were so grateful for technology's true achievements: TV remote-control devices, smoke alarms, microwave ovens and automatic bank teller machines.
But they tended to look askance at status symbols. 

"People are constantly looking for improvement -- but realistic, moderate improvement, not a revolution in their lives," explains Burns Roper, chairman of the Roper Organization. 

In part, that's because most Americans really aren't eager to outstrip the Joneses. "Mainstream America doesn't wish for the things that impress New Yorkers living on the Upper East Side," says Margaret Marks, director of consumer planning at the Young & Rubicam ad agency. "They wish for things that are valued by their friends and neighbors, and those things tend to be traditional brand names and products." 

In its ads though, Madison Avenue is apt to forget that most folks aren't members of the leisure class -- proud owners of Chanel scarves, Cole Haan loafers, and couscous cookers.
Us magazine recently flaunted the attitude when it ran a (now-discontinued) ad campaign, which featured a photo of beer-bellied fatsos seated together in a trailer park.
The elitist slogan? "Definitely not Us." But given what turns out to be most of America's expectations and chosen life styles -- comfy not snazzy -- is Madison Avenue selling the wrong message? 

"Advertising too often reflects the life styles of the creators rather than the consumers of the ads," says Al Ries, chairman of Trout & Ries, a marketing research firm. "Much advertising goes over the heads of the average consumers because they say, 'That's not me' or 'I couldn't afford it. ' Marketers are missing the mainstream of America by a mile." 

Donald Belway, an employee at Iowa Beef in Amarillo, Texas, and a survey participant, believes that increasingly there's lots of choice in the marketplace, but few real options. "Nowadays, all companies show you is commercials for expensive products," Mr. Belway laments. "It seems like companies really care only about the swells who can afford that stuff." 

Still, in our communication-cluttered society, ads may be more real in the minds of consumers than many products themselves.
Surprisingly, when asked what American business does best, people polled by Mr. Hart said advertising and promotion above all else -- homage that even a number of Madison Avenue executives were at a loss to explain.
Quality and durability were a weak second.
Good management and good prices came in dead last. 

But here's some even more ominous news for corporate America: The world's premier consumer society is breeding a new generation of purchasers suffering from shopping fatigue.
Now, they're purging jammed closets in what Carol Colman, a partner and trend-spotter at Inferential Focus in New York, calls the "clear-it-out" phenomenon.
And people have begun to yearn not for new products but new experiences. 

This trend showed up among the consumers interviewed by Mr. Hart when they were told to pretend they were competing for the grand prize on a game show just like "Let's Make a Deal." Behind door one was a new stereo system with a compact disk player, new living room furniture, and a fine piece of jewelry.
Behind door two was a lifetime health-club membership, a Hawaiian vacation, and a year's worth of tickets to local events.
More than half voted for experience-oriented door two. 

"It's not that we are spawning a nation of ascetics who will stop owning things like TVs and automobiles, but most people have taken care of those needs and are paying more attention to the satisfaction of other ones," says Mr. Ogilvy, the futurist whose specialty is telling companies what makes consumers tick. "People who aren't stalking saber-toothed tigers want to compensate for the relative dullness of their modern lives with vivid experiences." 

(See related story: "After the Beep: The Message Is Convenience Matters Most" -- WSJ Sept. 19, 1989) 

Madison Avenue, like Hollywood, loves to typecast.
In their struggle to understand consumers, many advertisers and market researchers study people's attitudes and values and segment them into little niches.
Then they invent catchy labels for these groups, names like the Insecures or the Strivers or the Master Consumers. 

To some people, such pigeonholing is simplistic and gimmicky.
But to others, it's a useful way to analyze consumer groups and plot marketing strategies.
With the caveat that such typecasting is more art than science, here is pollster Peter Hart's dissection of the American shopper.
He came up with these seven types of shoppers by doing a cluster analysis of the data from his poll on consumer buying habits and attitudes. 

Agreeable Shoppers (22%) 

These get-along, go-along consumers are especially susceptible to advertising and are most likely to shop at discount stores. 

-- Tend to be lower-middle income 

-- While 68% are white, this group has the highest proportions of Hispanics and blacks 

-- More likely than average to enjoy watching TV, shopping for groceries and doing household work 

-- High brand loyalty for everything from TV sets to tuna fish 

Practical Shoppers (21%) 

These are smart shoppers who research their purchases and look for the best deal.
They would shop at a store that sells off-price, name-brand clothing. 

-- Have the highest proportion of women and tend to be middle-income, younger and better educated than average 

-- More inclined than other groups to view items like TV remote control devices, CD players and video cameras as modern frills 

-- Three-quarters see the increased use of credit cards as a change for the worse -- but the same proportion sees automatic teller machines as a change for the better 

-- Pay more attention than most to food labels 

-- Tend to be the least brand-loyal of any group 

Trendy Shoppers (16%) These impulse buyers love to shop and stay up with the latest fads.
Look for them at fashion boutiques. 

-- Tend to be young, unmarried and politically liberal 

-- Have little brand loyalty 

-- Don't carefully watch the kinds of food they eat 

-- Least likely group to say they have most everything they need in life 

-- Only one in three believes America makes quality products, and less than three in 10 say American-made products satisfy consumers' tastes 

Value Shoppers (13%) 

Value Shoppes are cost-conscious but traditional, tending to believe the best products are those that have stood the test of time.
But they often don't have the money to buy the very best, and they shop at mid-priced department stores. 

-- Middle income, and more likely to be homemakers and retirees 

-- More likely than others to be "extremely satisfied" with the quality of their lives 

-- More likely to view shopping as a chore 

-- Care more about saving money than time, and rarely buy on impulse 

Top-of-the-Line Shoppers (10%) 

These buyers put a premium on a product's reputation for quality and believe they've earned the right to buy the best.
They're apt to shop at upscale department stores. 

-- The highest median income and the oldest group 

-- Tend to believe foreign goods are better than American ones 

-- Fully half say they have most everything they need in life 

-- Less likely than most to enjoy browsing or window shopping 

-- Less inclined to want the latest gadgets 

Safe Shoppers (9%) 

Rather than research a purchase, Safe Shoppers look for familiar products that make them feel comfortable.
They're inclined to shop at the well-known mass merchandisers. 

-- Most likely to be white and male 

-- Most likely to feel they have the same values as their parents 

-- Find shopping a chore 

-- Less confident than any other gorup that they are savvy grocery shoppers, and pay little attention to nutritional labels on food 

Status Shoppsers (5%) 

Sometimes impractical in their buying habits; a day without a new gadget is a day without joy.
They love to buy designer labels. -- Youngest group, with highest percentage who have never been married 

-- Most politically conservative group 

-- Second-highest median income gorup 

-- Most likely to own cordless phones, CD players and answering machines.
Items they would most like to own: computers, car phones, fax machines 

-- Most likely group to spend an extra hour browsing or shopping, and most likely to buy on impulse 

