.START 

Dear Milton: 

There was little, if anything, new in your open letter to me calling for the legalization of drugs (The Wall Street Journal, Sept. 7).
As the excerpt from your 1972 article made clear, the legalization argument is an old and familiar one, which has recently been revived by a small number of journalists and academics who insist that the only solution to the drug problem is no solution at all.
What surprises me is that you would continue to advocate so unrealistic a proposal without pausing to consider seriously its consequences. 

If the argument for drug legalization has one virtue it is its sheer simplicity.
Eliminate laws against drugs, and street crime will disappear.
Take the profit out of the black market through decriminalization and regulation, and poor neighborhoods will no longer be victimized by drug dealers.
Cut back on drug enforcement, and use the money to wage a public health campaign against drugs, as we do with tobacco and alcohol. 

The basic premise of all these propositions is that using our nation's laws to fight drugs is too costly.
To be sure, our attempts to reduce drug use do carry with them enormous costs.
But the question that must be asked -- and which is totally ignored by the legalization advocates -- is, what are the costs of not enforcing laws against drugs? 

In my judgment, and in the judgment of virtually every serious scholar in this field, the potential costs of legalizing drugs would be so large as to make it a public policy disaster. 

Of course, no one, including you, can say with certainty what would happen in the U.S. if drugs were suddenly to become a readily purchased product.
We do know, however, that wherever drugs have been cheaper and more easily obtained, drug use -- and addiction -- has skyrocketed.
In opium and cocaine producing countries, addiction is rampant among the peasants involved in drug production. 

Professor James Q. Wilson tells us that during the years in which heroin could be legally prescribed by doctors in Britain, the number of addicts increased forty-fold.
And after the repeal of Prohibition -- an analogy favored but misunderstood by legalization advocates -- consumption of alcohol soared by 350%. 

Could we afford such dramatic increases in drug use?
I doubt it.
Already the toll of drug use on American society-measured in lost productivity, in rising health insurance costs, in hospitals flooded with drug overdose emergencies, in drug caused accidents, and in premature death -- is surely more than we would like to bear. 

You seem to believe that by spending just a little more money on treatment and rehabilitation, the costs of increased addiction can be avoided.
That hope betrays a basic misunderstanding of the problems facing drug treatment.
Most addicts don't suddenly decide to get help.
They remain addicts either because treatment isn't available or because they don't seek it out.
The National Drug Control Strategy announced by President Bush on Sept. 5 goes a long way in making sure that more treatment slots are available.
But the simple fact remains that many drug users won't enter treatment until they are forced to -- often by the very criminal justice system you think is the source of the problem. 

As for the connection between drugs and crime, your unswerving commitment to a legalization solution prevents you from appreciating the complexity of the drug market.
Contrary to your claim, most addicts do not turn to crime to support their habit.
Research shows that many of them were involved in criminal activity before they turned to drugs.
Many former addicts who have received treatment continue to commit crimes during their recovery.
And even if drugs were legal, what evidence do you have that the habitual drug user wouldn't continue to rob and steal to get money for clothes, food or shelter?
Drug addicts always want more drugs than they can afford, and no legalization scheme has yet come up with a way of satisfying that appetite. 

The National Drug Control Strategy emphasizes the importance of reclaiming the streets and neighborhoods where drugs have wrought havoc because, I admit, the price of having drug laws is having criminals who will try to subvert them.
Your proposal might conceivably reduce the amount of gang- and dealer-related crime, but it is fanciful to suggest that it would make crime vanish.
Unless you are willing to distribute drugs freely and widely, there will always be a black market to undercut the regulated one.
And as for the potential addicts, for the school children and for the pregnant mothers, all of whom would find drugs more accessible and legally condoned, your proposal would offer nothing at all. 

So I advocate a larger criminal justice system to take drug users off the streets and deter new users from becoming more deeply involved in so hazardous an activity.
You suggest that such policies would turn the country "into an armed camp." Try telling that to the public housing tenants who enthusiastically support plans to enhance security in their buildings, or to the residents who applaud police when a local crack house is razed.
They recognize that drug use is a threat to the individual liberty and domestic tranquility guaranteed by the Constitution. 

I remain an ardent defender of our nation's laws against illegal drug use and our attempts to enforce them because I believe drug use is wrong.
A true friend of freedom understands that government has a responsibility to craft and uphold laws that help educate citizens about right and wrong.
That, at any rate, was the Founders' view of our system of government. 

Today this view is much ridiculed by liberal elites and entirely neglected by you.
So while I cannot doubt the sincerity of your opinion on drug legalization, I find it difficult to respect.
The moral cost of legalizing drugs is great, but it is a cost that apparently lies outside the narrow scope of libertarian policy prescriptions. 

I do not have a simple solution to the drug problem.
I doubt that one exists.
But I am committed to fighting the problem on several fronts through imaginative policies and hard work over a long period of time.
As in the past, some of these efforts will work and some won't.
Your response, however, is to surrender and see what happens.
To my mind that is irresponsible and reckless public policy.
At a time when national intolerance for drug use is rapidly increasing, the legalization argument is a political anachronism.
Its recent resurgence is, I trust, only a temporary distraction from the genuine debate on national drug policy. 

William J. Bennett 

Director 

Office of National Drug Control Policy 

