.START 

BUSH IS GRANTING Hungary permanent most-favored-nation trade status. 

Responding to spreading political liberalization in Eastern Europe, the president announced the new trade status for Budapest, which ensures that its exports to the U.S. won't face discriminatory tariffs.
Hungary is expected to receive the new status next month.
Speaking in Montana, Bush also cited "encouraging signs" that might help Moscow win similar status.
He also said "it isn't time for normalcy" in U.S. ties with China, despite contacts between the two nations since last summer's crackdown on dissent in Beijing. 

Bush urged tree-planting in the U.S., and unveiled plans to train Peace Corps volunteers to help protect the environment in developing countries. 

HURRICANE HUGO POUNDED Puerto Rico after lashing other Caribbean islands. 

The storm, which has left at least 14 people dead and tens of thousands homeless in the Caribbean, slammed into the U.S. commonwealth's eastern tip with winds as high as 125 mph.
While there wasn't any immediate word on casualties, extensive damage was reported.
The governor said he would ask Bush to declare the island a disaster area.
The hurricane was headed toward the Dominican Republic and the Bahamas. 

Tropical Storm Iris rose in the wake of Hugo, and forecasters advised residents of the battered Leeward Islands to keep a close watch on the new storm. 

ISRAEL AND EGYPT HELD talks in Cairo on the prospects for Mideast peace. 

Israeli Defense Minister Rabin met for three hours with Egyptian President Mubarak and said Israel would accept a Cairo-sponsored dialogue with Palestinians in an effort to end a 21-month-old Arab uprising in the occupied lands.
Both leaders expressed cautious optimism about talks, but the two sides are divided on the composition of the Arab delegation.
Shamir opposes Mubarak's plan. 

Wrangling between Israel's coalition partners intensified over Mubarak's plan, and officials said the rift could turn into a government crisis. 

Defense Secretary Cheney ordered the Pentagon to develop plans to strengthen the U.S. military presence in the Caribbean and along the nation's southern border to curb cocaine smuggling.
The plans are to be completed by Oct. 15.
He also asked the military to accelerate training and other assistance to military and police in Latin America. 

Colombian officials said drug traffickers were suspected in a rocket attack on the U.S. Embassy in Bogota.
The rocket, fired from blocks away, struck the embassy but didn't explode.
It was the first assault on a U.S. target since a war on drugs began a month ago with Washington's support. 

Israel and Hungary restored full diplomatic ties, more than 20 years after Budapest severed relations to protest the Israeli occupation of Arab territories in the 1967 Mideast war.
Hungary is the first East bloc nation to renew ties with Israel, which expressed hope that the move would lead to improved links with the Soviet Union. 

Artillery battles erupted in Beirut after the Christian army commander rejected creation of an Arab League security committee to oversee a cease-fire in Lebanon.
Police said at least six people were killed.
Gen. Aoun had sought written Arab guarantees that Syria would withdraw its forces as a condition for accepting the proposal. 

Poland's Communist leaders proposed transforming the party into a "new socialist party" that would be able to flourish under democracy.
At its first meeting since a Solidarity-led government was installed this month, the party's ruling body warned Central Committee members that only radical change could save the party from oblivion. 

A bomb exploded and killed five people in the republic of Azerbaijan, where rival ethnic groups have carried out violent protests, the Soviet Communist Party newspaper Pravda reported.
The unrest came as Communist leaders gathered in Moscow for a Central Committee meeting this week on ethnic problems in the Soviet Union. 

India and Sri Lanka signed an accord calling for the New Delhi government to withdraw its 42,000 peacekeeping troops from the island nation by the end of the year.
While some officials said the pact, which ended a three-month diplomatic deadlock, could help end ethnic violence, others expressed concern about more fighting. 

Argentina's President Menem said 18 retired generals and admirals facing trial on charges of committing hundreds of human-rights abuses in the 1970s will be pardoned.
He said the cases of six other people, including two ex-presidents already convicted and sentenced, will be considered later. 

China's Deng has named Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party chief, as his successor, the New York Times reported.
The senior leader reportedly chose the former Shanghai mayor during "informal talks" with other officials in May and June. 

