.START 

Robert Campeau's son, Jacques, failed in a court attempt to take possession of two million Campeau Corp. shares controlled by his father. 

A justice of the Supreme Court of Ontario dismissed a motion Friday in which Jacques Campeau, 35 years old, asked for control of the shares.
The shares are held for Jacques Campeau in a trust and he is entitled to the dividend income from the shares.
But voting rights to the stock are currently controlled by Robert Campeau, chairman of the real estate and retailing concern, which owns Bloomingdale's and other big department store chains. 

The shares represent about 7.2% of the Campeau common stock held by the elder Mr. Campeau, who has a total equity stake of 62.5%, or 54% fully diluted. 

In an affidavit filed with the court, Jacques Campeau said he is concerned about Campeau's financial condition and the recent drop in its share price.
He said he has incurred a "paper loss" of 17 million Canadian dollars (US$14.3 million) on his Campeau stock recently and he is "extremely concerned" that his quarterly dividend income from the shares of about C$200,000 is in jeopardy. 

"It is my primary source of income and if it stops or declines substantially I will suffer great hardship," the son said in the affidavit. 

Campeau stock ceased trading Wednesday afternoon and hasn't resumed.
From Sept. 7 to Sept. 13, the stock fell from C$22.25 to C$13.50 in Toronto Stock Exchange trading. 

Robert Campeau sued his son last year over voting rights to the shares.
That case isn't expected to go to trial for several months.
The elder Mr. Campeau also sued his daughter, Rachelle, to keep voting rights to 1.6 million Campeau shares held in trust for her. 

In documents filed previously with the court, Robert Campeau has argued that he is entitled to vote the shares held in trust for his son and daughter and that the stock should remain part of a "unified voting control block controlled by members of the Campeau family or by Robert Campeau." 

