.START 

In the wake of the Jim Wright and Tony Coelho ethics scandals, bills have been introduced to limit PACs, ban honorariums and restrict lobbying by former Members and congressional staffers.
Status: All are stalled.
But one ethics-related bill is doing very well, this one to place curbs on the outside lobbyists who often compete with Members of Congress to get action from the executive branch.
Its status: Passed in both chambers, with approval last week in the House by a vote of 410 to 3.
Any businessman can see what's going on here: Congress is sticking it to its competition. 

The anti-lobbyist bill requires anyone who is seeking a federal contract or grant to disclose the identity of the lobbyist who helped him get it.
West Virginia's Senator Robert Byrd devised the bill after a private lobbyist beat him to the pork barrel for one of his constituents. 

Recall that Senator Byrd stepped down as Majority Leader last year to chair the Appropriations Committee, saying then that he'd now be in a better position to funnel money to West Virginia.
Officials at West Virginia University discovered last month how seriously Senator Byrd took his renewed commitment to the pork barrel; he withdrew his support for a federally funded research center on their campus.
The university had sinned against Beltway orthodoxy by hiring a lobbying firm to secure funds for the project.
Mr. Byrd resented this. "Why," he asked the school's officials, "do you waste your money on a lobbyist when I'm being paid to be your Senator?" He thereupon introduced his anti-lobbying bill, and his colleagues whooped it through both chambers. 

Meanwhile, the Beltway bellows on for yet another month about "influence peddling" at HUD. Ethics aside, one of the most interesting revelations from the HUD scandal is that so many developers felt they had to bypass a largely Democratic Congress and hire professional lobbyists to win contracts from a Republican administration.
In fact, over the past decade the number of lobbyists has gone up by some 50%.
Divided government is fostering competition -- and Congress doesn't like it. 

Of course, the Members resent the notion that there's anything analogous between what they call "constituent service" -- the pressure they exert on behalf of special interests or campaign contributors -- and what they call "influence peddling" -- defined as former Republican administration officials lobbying on behalf of paying clients. 

This theological distinction was raised directly at one of the recent congressional hearings into the HUD scandal.
Former HUD Regional Administrator Joseph Monticciolo had estimated that at least half of Section 8 HUD contract decisions were politically motivated and went on to say that Members of Congress as well as former Reagan administration officials had improperly lobbied HUD. 

Rep. Tom Lantos asked: "Would you like to rephrase your last few sentences, because they didn't strike a very reasonable chord?" Mr. Monticciolo quickly backed down from his heresy. 

We have no real problem with Senator Byrd's attempt to force lobbyists into full disclosure, but why not mandate the same treatment for Congress?
Executive-branch agencies already keep thorough records of their contacts with lobbyists, but not with Members of Congress.
A good way to tell which congressional calls to an executive agency are legitimate business and which are Jim Wright-style arm-twisting would be to have the agencies publicly report all contacts with Members and their staff on specific contracts or cases. 

This idea was actually floated on Capitol Hill, and Congress recoiled more or less the way Bela Lugosi did at the sight of a cross.
In fact, Congress has just made such reports illegal: The current Interior Department appropriations bill carries with it a measure that flatly prohibits its employees from logging any contacts with the legislative branch. 

What's Congress afraid of?
Perhaps if reporters or even average citizens had access to a record of such congressional interventions it'd become obvious what much of modern Washington is all about.
Voters might see that a Congressman's job today has less to do with forming public policy and more to do with helping special interests get their piece of the $1 trillion federal pie Congress bakes every year.
In turn, grateful PACs underwrite their incumbencies. 

It will be hard to take Washington's handling of the ethics issue seriously until it subjects itself to the same commandments it keeps handing down for everyone else to obey.
The Byrd lobbying amendment should include Congress. 

