.START 

Horst W. Schroeder, Kellogg Co. 's president and heir-apparent to its chief executive officer, resigned unexpectedly, citing "personal reasons." 

Kellogg had no further explanation for the 48-year-old executive's sudden departure, which comes as the world's largest cereal company fights to regain market share.
The company issued its three-sentence announcement yesterday at the same hour that rival General Mills Inc. reported nearly a three percentage-point increase in its share of the U.S. ready-to-eat cereal market -- a gain made largely at Kellogg's expense. 

Mr. Schroeder, who was named president and chief operating officer only last December, couldn't be reached for comment.
A company spokesman said Mr. Schroeder hadn't come to work, indicating that his letter of resignation apparently was submitted to the chairman and chief executive, William E. LaMothe, over the weekend. 

The spokesman said that Mr. LaMothe had neither sought nor anticipated the resignation.
But, the spokesman added, "in his 40 years he's seen other things like this and he's not alarmed." Mr. LaMothe couldn't be reached. 

Mr. Schroeder's appointment as president and chief operating officer -- positions that were vacant for two years -- had been interpreted as a prelude to Kellogg's chairmanship for Mr. Schroeder.
The current chairman is 62, and traditionally company officers retire at age 65. 

Moreover, because Messrs.
LaMothe and Schroeder had appeared at a major news conference together just last month -- they announced proposed industry standards on the touchy issue of health claims for food -- analysts suggested that some recent event had altered Mr. LaMothe's view of the West German as his successor.
Several mentioned reports that Mr. Schroeder's direct, no-nonsense manner had upset subordinates, who may have made their feelings known to the chairman. 

"He wasn't getting the right relationship with people below him, with those ultimately responsible for market share and for beating General Mills," said William Maguire of Merrill Lynch & Co. Another analyst, John McMillin of Prudential-Bache Securities, said that Mr. Schroeder "wouldn't have left unless he thought he was in jeopardy of losing the CEO's job." 

Kellogg's board is to meet later this week, and some on Wall Street expect that Mr. LaMothe will use that occasion to elaborate on his chief lieutenant's departure -- and perhaps name a successor.
Among those prominently named for the presidency are two executive vice presidents: Gary E. Costley, who is in charge of the U.S. Food Products division, and Arnold G. Langbo, head of Kellogg International. 

Until a successor is named, Mr. LaMothe will assume the responsibilities of the president's office, Kellogg said.
Part of Mr. Schroeder's tasks was to oversee marketing strategy for the $4.3 billion company, which, with a market share of nearly 39%, continues to dominate the domestic cold-cereal market. 

But while Kellogg was at the forefront in promoting cereals as healthy foods, General Mills has done better at cashing in on that belief -- particularly in feeding the nation's oat-bran craze with its war horse Cheerios.
Yesterday, General Mills announced it had achieved a 27% market share during its first quarter ended Aug. 27, up from a 24.6% in fiscal 1989. 

"Much of this gain reflects growth of the three Cheerios brand products," General Mills said.
Cheerios and the spinoff Honey Nut and Apple Cinnamon varieties, with a combined 10% market share, recently knocked off Kellogg's Frosted Flakes as the biggest selling brand in the country. 

Kellogg has been scrambling to recover, and in addition to several oat-based cereals recently announced Heartwise, a cereal containing psyllium fiber.
But on that score as well, General Mills was out in front, with its Benefit flakes introduced last April.
Psyllium is said by the cereal makers to be instrumental in reducing levels of blood cholesterol. 

While such health-oriented cereals as Common Sense oat bran have been doing well for Kellogg, stalwarts such as Corn Flakes, Rice Krispies and Frosted Flakes have been giving up share. "The poor performance of the company recently in terms of market share . . . may have disrupted relations between Mr. LaMothe and Mr. Schroeder," said Nomi Ghez, food analyst at Goldman, Sachs & Co. 

Although he came from a financial background, Mr. Schroeder made points at Kellogg by pushing the Mueslix brand cereal concept several years ago -- despite a chorus of doubters within the company.
An adaptation of an old-line European cereal, Mueslix is a mix of dense flakes mixed with dried fruits and nuts. 

Mr. Schroeder joined Kellogg in 1970 after working as an accountant in Hamburg, West Germany.
He spent most of his 19 years with Kellogg on the international side.
Because of solid sales gains in that division, Mr. Schroeder was promoted to president of Kellogg North America in 1986.
He was elected a director of Kellogg this past April. 

A West German by birth, Mr. Schroeder remains a citizen of that country.
Immigration and Naturalization Service records show that Mr. Schroeder has lived and worked in the U.S. under a so-called green card since 1985 and that he has not applied for American citizenship. 

