.START 

First Pennsylvania Corp. agreed to be acquired by CoreStates Financial Corp. for stock valued at $18.75 a share, or about $730 million, passing up a sweetened, eleventh-hour bid from Meridian Bancorp. 

The acquisition of First Pennsylvania would make CoreStates the third largest banking operation in Pennsylvania, with about $23 billion in assets and about 280 branches in southeastern Pennsylvania and southern New Jersey.
It would also prevent Meridian, an aggressive and rapidly growing rival of CoreStates, from gaining a much bigger share of the lucrative Philadelphia-area market. 

In accepting the CoreStates offer early Monday morning after a weekend marathon of negotiations, First Pennsylvania left on the table a bid from Meridian valued at about $20.85 a share, based on Friday's closing stock prices.
But First Pennsylvania's board was swayed by terms of the CoreStates offer and promises that branch offices and operations could be consolidated without massive layoffs among First Pennsylvania's staff. 

Leslie Butler, First Pennsylvania's vice chairman, said his company's board "believes it accepted the offer which provides the best long-term value for our customers, employees, shareholders and community." 

Under the terms of the CoreStates offer, First Pennsylvania shareholders would receive CoreStates stock in a tax-free exchange valued at $18.75 for each First Pennsylvania share.
First Pennsylvania shareholders are guaranteed of receiving $18.75 a share in CoreStates stock as long as CoreStates' share price rises or falls no more than 6% from Thursday's close of $49.50 a share. 

Wall Street reacted quickly when the agreement was announced yesterday morning.
In over-the-counter trading, CoreStates shares fell $2.125 to close at $47.50, while Meridian shares rose $1.125 to close at $23.50.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, First Pennsylvania shares also rose, closing at $16.75, up $1.50. 

Over the weekend, in an effort to respond to deadlines imposed by the CoreStates bid, Meridian raised its initial offer of $18 a share to about $20.85 a share.
But First Pennsylvania officials said the sweetened Meridian bid was difficult to evaluate because it offered the bank's shareholders a fixed number of Meridian shares to be exchanged for their First Pennsylvania holdings.
Thus the final purchase price of the Meridian offer could fluctuate if Meridian's stock price were to rise or fall before the merger could be completed. "The risk would be entirely borne by our shareholders," explained First Pennsylvania's Mr. Butler. 

Meridian declined to comment on the specifics of its bid.
A spokesperson said the Reading, Pa., bank had signed a confidentiality agreement with First Pennsylvania pledging not to disclose details of their negotiations. 

People familiar with the negotiations said some Meridian representatives feel betrayed by the outcome because Meridian's final bid was higher, although not guaranteed, and because it had made the first bid. "It's as if they've been kicked below the belt," said a person who followed the negotiation process.
Others suggested that First Pennsylvania's choice was influenced by CoreStates being based, like First Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia. 

The merger agreement is subject to approval by regulators and First Pennsylvania shareholders.
To carry out its transaction with CoreStates, First Pennsylvania will have to extricate itself from a 1986 merger agreement with Marine Midland Banks Inc., a unit of Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp. of Hong Kong.
Marine Midland had offered $15 a share.
That combination was supposed to be completed after March 

First Pennsylvania will pay $45 million in cash to buy back warrants held by Marine Midland that would have given it a 24.9% voting stake in First Pennsylvania. 

Meridian had offered Marine Midland $30 million for the First Pennsylvania stake.
To terminate its prior agreement with Meridian, Marine Midland said Meridian will receive $22.5 million. "We're splitting the $45 million in effect," said a Marine Midland spokesman. 

CoreStates emerged as a suitor for First Pennsylvania only after Meridian put the Philadelphia bank in play.
In an interview, CoreStates Chairman Terrence A. Larsen said he had been watching First Pennsylvania "for some time," although he hadn't thought of making an offer until recently because he believed both First Pennsylvania and Marine Midland were content with their merger plans. 

CoreStates said the acquisition would result in a per-share earnings dilution for the combined company of about 7% to $5.13 a share, based on analysts' forecasts for 1990 and assuming 10% annual earnings growth.
Even so, CoreStates believes it can offset the dilution by consolidating operations and cutting some expenses.
CoreStates predicted that in the first 24 months after the merger is completed it could realize expense savings of about $89 million, with nearly half of that amount coming from back-office and systems consolidation.
Savings of about $57 million would be needed to offset the dilution in the first year of the merger. 

CoreStates is "one of the few major banks that actually comes through on what it promises," said Thomas Hanley, a securities analyst at Salomon Brothers.
He noted that the bank holding company has achieved substantial economies of scale in previous acquisitions. 

Mr. Larsen plans to dispose of First Pennsylvania's $485 million portfolio of loans to lesser developing countries as quickly as possible, but additional reserves of about $150 million might be needed to liquidate it.
First Pennsylvania already has set aside about $145.5 million of reserves to cover this portfolio. 

Although CoreStates will be aggressive in cutting costs and eliminating overlapping operations at First Pennsylvania, Mr. Larsen said the process wouldn't entail massive layoffs of First Pennsylvania employees.
Mr. Larsen said CoreStates is seeing enough growth in its basic businesses to allow it to use the additional staff. 

A similar promise was made when CoreStates acquired Hamilton Bank in Lancaster, Pa., in 1983.
CoreStates moved many administrative operations to Philadelphia and Wilmington, Del., and eventually eliminated 265 jobs in the Lancaster area. 

The issue of layoffs was a big concern for First Pennsylvania in its negotiations with Meridian.
Meridian "didn't say that there would be layoffs specifically.
But with the cost-savings that would have to be achieved to offset the dilution, there's no question that there would be layoffs," said George A. Butler, First Pennsylvania's chairman. 

Robin Goldwyn Blumenthal in New York contributed to this article. 

