.START 

It was some entrepreneur's big opportunity: Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientists already had worked on the problem for 15 years.
The researchers had spent over $3 million before results of the first animal tests emerged.
And now, they had developed a method to inhibit cataract formation in eyes. 

At this point, such a project often falters.
Commercializing such university research frequently proves slow and frustrating, and opportunities are missed.
But in this case, a team of special MIT licensing executives quickly helped round up investors and encouraged formation of a new company, Oculon Inc., based in Seattle, to make its fortune off the research.
MIT and its scientists working on the project all get a share of the action. 

These days, many universities and nonprofit research institutions are scrambling -- often with limited success -- to commercialize their research.
But in the past three years alone, MIT has helped professors and others start over 50 companies, all aiming to turn the fruits of MIT research into cash. 

Traditionally, the world of university research has had trouble connecting with the world of money to commercialize research. (Indeed, many academics say such efforts aren't in keeping with a university's commitment to pure research.) Until it radically changed its methods three years ago, MIT also suffered its share of frustrations -- even though its laboratories are world-famous and its research budget exceeds $700 million a year. 

MIT gets results these days because it can "understand the demands of business and the investment community and link them with the needs of scientists," says John Clark, a scientist and one of the founders of Oculon. 

For starters, MIT invests heavily in patents -- sometimes over $50,000 to get world-wide coverage.
It helps its own scientists form new companies and recruit investors.
And it routinely acts as a "high-tech yenta" to introduce patents and research to potential investors, an official says. 

The start-up companies receive a license to use MIT's technology and agree to a timetable for developing it; in return, the institute gets a small stake and royalties from sales. 

In the Oculon case, the institute first filed several patents.
Then its licensing executives began to explore a business use for the results.
With all the work that already had been done, "we began to look for the best way to transfer that technology," says John Preston, head of the MIT licensing office.
After polling a number of potential investors and licensees, Mr. Preston decided that a start-up would be the best way to exploit the technology. 

While Mr. Clark and physics professor George Benedek, an early researcher on the project, negotiated $5 million in financing from investors, the licensing office drafted an agreement that would give MIT a stake in the company and a share of future sales. 

"MIT was extremely valuable in contacting venture-capital sources.
They knew who to contact and who would be interested," Mr. Clark says. "They also helped us educate investors about the long-term nature of the project and what the potential obstacles could be." 

It wasn't always this way.
In the early 1980s, MIT scientists complained that the university's licensing operation was staffed by bureaucratic lawyers who often became obstacles to good deals.
Back in 1983, for example, when computer technologist Daniel Hillis wanted the university to file patents for his designs for a sophisticated computer he had developed at MIT, the licensing office balked.
It was so indecisive, Mr. Hillis says, that he filed the patents himself and launched his Thinking Machines Corp. with about $8 million from private investors. 

But in 1986, MIT restaffed its licensing office with executives who themselves had been entrepreneurs or worked in entrepreneurial businesses.
The institute gave the licensing group broad guidelines and autonomy to run the licensing operations.
Today, the office of six professionals handles six to eight times as many start-ups as in the early 1980s, Mr. Preston says. 

As part of its new approach, the licensing group re-established relations with Mr. Hillis and formally licensed the technology to him.
In return, MIT has a small stake and a share of royalties of Thinking Machines.
Last year, the computer company had revenue of more than $40 million. 

"The one reason they've been so successful is because they concentrate on ways to get the technology out," says entrepreneur Steven Chubb, president of Matritech Inc., a Cambridge, Mass., start-up involved with new ways to detect cancer. 

In Matritech's case, MIT even helped the company find management.
MIT biologist Sheldon Penman and former MIT researcher Edward Fey had developed Matritech's basic technology, which uses antibodies to detect proteins within cells.
Mr. Chubb approached MIT for a license to develop the technology in a new venture.
Besides agreeing, MIT helped the company find $3.5 million in venture capital as well as managers to develop the business.
In most MIT projects that develop into start-ups, scientists such as Mr. Penman and Mr. Fey don't actually run the company, says Lita Nelson, an MIT licensing official.
In fact, she says, university policy prohibits faculty members from being line officers in any company.
Most of the scientists, however, continue to work with the companies as consultants, receive royalties and own small stakes as well. 

In some instances, MIT also combines its technology with that of others to form new companies.
Take the launch of Enzytech Inc., which uses enzymes and polymers in food additives and drug delivery.
The initial research was conducted simultaneously by Boston's Children's Hospital and MIT.
In 1987, the two institutions licensed their technologies to a start-up formed expressly for commercialization.
And venture capitalists put in over $5 million to keep the company going. 

Many venture capitalists say the projects at MIT are much more "state-of-the-market" than at other universities.
Says New York venture capitalist Fred Nazem, "It's a good place to get new technology." 

In 1986, Mr. Nazem was the first investor in Cirrus Logic Inc., which grew out of research at MIT. Mr. Nazem's $2.5 million investment in the Milpitas, Calif., maker of high-performance chips has a market value today of nearly $28 million. 

