.START 

President Bush, responding to spreading political liberalization in Eastern Europe, said Hungary will receive permanent most-favored-nation trade status and cited "encouraging signs" that eventually might help the Soviet Union win similar status. 

Mr. Bush, speaking at a news conference here, said the trade liberalization for Hungary was in the works before the Hungarian government made its recent landmark decision to allow East Germans to emigrate to the West from Hungarian soil.
But he also indicated that Hungary's role in helping East Germans flee from Communist rule encouraged his administration to push the decision along. 

Mr. Bush said Hungary is expected next month to get the new trade status, which ensures that its exports to the U.S. won't face any discriminatory tariffs.
By then, Hungary is expected to have passed a law solidifying free emigration policies. 

The White House also said Hungary will be granted beneficiary status under the Generalized System of Preferences, which will give duty-free treatment to some Hungarian exports to the U.S. Mr. Bush indicated that those steps are designed partly to encourage political liberalization elsewhere in Eastern Europe, saying the moves underscore "our willingness to help those countries." 

On other issues, Mr. Bush: 

-- Said he feels "no rush" to hold a summit meeting with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.
He acknowledged that the Soviets may raise the subject when Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze meets this week with Secretary of State James Baker, and said "we'll have to see what message Mr. Shevardnadze brings with him." Privately, White House officials said the administration might be ready to show flexibility if the Soviets strongly appeal for a summit. 

-- Indicated he doesn't oppose the eventual reunification of East and West Germany, which some analysts fear could disrupt European stability by creating too powerful a state in the heart of the continent. "I don't think we should view that as bad for Western interests," Mr. Bush said. 

-- Said there isn't any "hard intelligence" that Colombian drug traffickers have targeted him or members of his family for assassination, as some reports have suggested. 

On trade with the Soviet bloc, Mr. Bush said the possibility of granting most-favored-nation status to the Soviet Union might be discussed in the Baker-Shevardnadze meetings, as part of a discussion of the "whole economic front." He added: "There are encouraging signs coming out of the Soviet Union, and we're going to continue to look at them closely." 

The Soviet government has allowed an increasing number of Soviet Jews to emigrate, which has been one of the principal U.S. prerequisites for normalizing trade relations with Moscow.
But Mr. Bush also argued that some barriers remain, saying that some Jews still are punished for seeking to leave the Soviet Union. 

Hungary has been receiving most-favored-nation status on a temporary, year-to-year basis, as have some other East European nations.
The Commerce Department said Hungary will become the first East European nation to get permanent most-favored-nation status since 1974. 

The Generalized System of Preferences gives duty-free tariff treatment to a wide range of exports.
About $110 million -- or about one-third of Hungary's total $321 million exports to the U.S. in 1988 -- would benefit from GSP status, a Commerce Department official said.
The official added that granting of GSP status generally leads to a 10% increase in exports. 

Meanwhile, while meeting with Hungarian leaders in Budapest, European Community Commissioner Frans Andriessen promised to push for measures to expand trade between the East bloc country and Western developed countries. 

His promises stopped short of the more far-reaching help sought by the country's economic reformers.
The Hungarians want quick changes in tariff levels and other trade restrictions maintained by most developed countries. 

Mr. Andriessen, EC commissioner for external affairs, was acting as a representative not only of the community, but also the group of 24 industrialized countries that earlier this year put the EC in charge of coordinating Western aid to Hungary and Poland.
He was to meet Polish leaders today in Warsaw to conclude a trade and cooperation agreement with the 

Mr. Andriessen said at a news conference that he believed the EC would be willing to "go further" than a December trade agreement between the EC and Hungary.
He said he would urge EC leaders to act faster in removing quantitative restrictions against Hungarian exports and to import more Hungarian farm products. 

Mark M. Nelson in Budapest contributed to this article. 

