.START 

NBC News is trying to lure the executive producer of "Entertainment Tonight," to work on the morning "Today" show and develop a variety of programs for the network, people close to the talks said. 

The executive producer, Dave Nuell, has reportedly been offered in excess of $2 million over three years, an unusually high sum for a producer.
Mr. Nuell, a former news director at the NBC-owned station in Washington, D.C., prior to joining "Entertainment Tonight" in 1987, is credited with the ratings and editorial resurgence of the daily program, produced by Paramount Television, a unit of Paramount Communications Inc. 

The deal does not only include NBC News, however, an NBC spokeswoman said.
Mr. Nuell would also work with NBC Sports and NBC Entertainment in a unique relationship to develop programs for three divisions of one network.
The negotiations involved NBC Entertainment President Brandon Tartikoff as well as the presidents of NBC News and Sports. 

Mr. Nuell didn't return phone calls to his office. 

NBC News, a unit of General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co., is the only one of the three major U.S. network news divisions not to have a regularly scheduled program in prime time.
NBC News' most recent attempt, "Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow," has had three airings.
The program has done well in the ratings, but has been drubbed by critics. 

The "Today" show has undergone a number of changes since last month, when NBC asked NBC Sports President Dick Ebersol to assume the additional responsibility of overseeing "Today." Mr. Ebersol, who has been an executive producer of the network's "Saturday Night Live" and "Friday Night Videos," replaced on-air correspondent/news reader John Palmer with Deborah Norville.
Ms. Norville also has served as a substitute for co-anchor Jane Pauley. 

Mr. Ebersol also couldn't be reached to comment.
The "Today" show is in a battle for the top-rated morning show with Capital Cities/ABC Inc. 's "Good Morning America." The ABC show is produced by ABC's entertainment division. 

