.START 

Disappointing earnings news from Stratus Computer and Landmark Graphics sent those technology issues tumbling and contributed to the Nasdaq over-the-counter market's fifth decline in six sessions. 

The Nasdaq Composite Index eased 0.68 to 466.89 in what traders said was light trading.
Decliners beat advancers, 1,047 to 872. 

But some traders remained upbeat.
Richard Bruno, head of OTC trading at PaineWebber, was encouraged that volume totaled only 105 million shares.
He said it proves that investor sentiment isn't overwhelmingly negative. "There are more buyers on the upside than there are sellers on the downside," he asserted. 

The OTC's biggest stocks were mixed, with the Nasdaq 100 Index declining 0.42 to 443.50 and the Nasdaq Financial Index rising 0.57 to 464.11. 

Shares of Stratus Computer plummeted 22%, or 7 1/2, to 26, after the maker of fault-tolerant computer systems said revenue and earnings for the third quarter would be below expectations because of weakness in the domestic market.
Fault-tolerant computer systems keep running even if some parts fail. 

Stratus's turnover of 3.2 million shares made it Nasdaq's most-active stock; the stock's trading volume was 14 times its normal daily average.
The Marlboro, Mass., company said it expects third-quarter net income of 35 cents a share to 38 cents a share on revenue of about $82 million.
That would compare with earnings of 37 cents a share on revenue of $68.9 million in the year-earlier period. 

The company's president said he doesn't foresee "enough business developing during the last two weeks of the quarter" to allow the company to achieve its original revenue target of $88 million. 

Stratus has been a Wall Street favorite recently.
In a page-one article in this newspaper, securities analysts predicted that Stratus will be a Fortune 500 company someday.
Just last Sunday, Stratus was the subject of a complimentary article in the New York Times.
The article quoted several analysts who recommended buying the stock, praising it as grossly underpriced and worthy of serious attention from investors. 

But most of the attention yesterday was from investors who wanted to dump their shares. "It's another case of disappointing earnings," said Gary Rosenbach, manager of equity trading at Needham & Co. "People are so nervous that when they see {indications of} bad earnings they don't think it's a one-time occurrence.
They just want it off the books." 

James Tarantino, head of OTC trading at Hambrecht & Quist in San Francisco, said he and other traders and investors were "caught off guard" by Stratus's announcement.
Also, he speculated that with less than two weeks left in the third quarter, mutual-fund managers who held the stock in their portfolios "were eager to blow it out, and others were reluctant to buy it." 

Landmark Graphics plunged 3 3/8, or 16%, to 18 1/4 on 1.6 million shares, 12 times its daily average.
The maker of computer systems for oil and natural gas exploration said it expects revenue for its fiscal first quarter, ending Sept. 30, to be slightly lower than analysts' expectations. 

The company said it anticipates earnings of 19 cents to 21 cents a share, rather than the 24 cents predicted earlier.
Landmark said its order backlog at the end of September will be down, adding uncertainty to the results for the fiscal second quarter. 

For the year-earlier first quarter, Landmark reported net income of $1.2 million, or 21 cents a share, after an extraordinary credit of $314,000, on revenue of $9.2 million. 

Campeau's shares didn't trade for a third consecutive session.
The retailing conglomerate has continued the trading suspension pending more news. 

Thus far, most of the news about the debt-laden company hasn't been encouraging for investors.
Olympia & York Developments, which agreed to loan Campeau $250 million to meet pressing debt obligations and cash needs, will have greater influence over Campeau's management under terms of the loan pact, according to executives close to the two companies. 

Campeau's financial problems also have prompted more factoring companies to tell manufacturers to stop shipping merchandise to Campeau's Federated Stores and Allied Stores units.
Factoring companies buy retail receivables from apparel makers and, in many cases, act as their credit managers.
In a related development, some off-price retailers said they have been approached by apparel makers trying to unload merchandise originally intended for sale to Federated and Allied. 

MicroBilt tumbled 2 3/4 to 14 3/4 on 143,000 shares.
H&R Block and MicroBilt agreed in principle to revise the terms of the proposed acquisition of the communications systems developer by Block.
The revised terms make a portion of the payment contingent on MicroBilt's future performance, reflecting its previously announced financial results for the six months ended July 31, which were lower than expected. 

The original terms of the proposed transaction called for the issuance of $18 of Block common stock for each MicroBilt common share. 

First Interstate of Wisconsin jumped 5 1/2, or 31%, to 23 on 168,300 shares.
Norwest and First Interstate said they signed a definitive agreement calling for the exchange of First Interstate shares for shares of Norwest. 

