.START 

It looks like California securities brokers won't be going to real estate school after all. 

Gov. George Deukmejian is widely expected to sign Senate Bill 1209, a measure to exempt licensed broker-dealers from a requirement to also be licensed as real estate brokers.
The bill was approved by the California state legislature last week. 

The real estate license requirement, which applies to business brokers, protects sellers of grocery stores, gasoline service stations and other businesses.
However, a recent appellate court decision extended the requirement to include mergers-and-acquisitions specialists engaged in traditional investment banking activities. 

The court decision was so sweeping, attorneys said, that it could be applied to most large transactions, such as a tender offer to California investors by an out-of-state company.
The Securities Industry Association, a large trade group, retained a law firm to get an amendment to the state code passed before the end of the legislative session Friday. 

"There's no opposition to the bill," said a legislative assistant in the office of Sen. John Garamendi (D., Sacramento), who introduced the measure for the Securities Industries Association.
The California Association of Realtors and the state departments of corporations and real estate agreed with the language, said the aide. 

Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York: "Masterworks of Ming and Qing Painting From the Forbidden City" -- Seventy-six hanging scrolls, handscrolls and albums from Beijing's Palace Museum.
The museum is located in the former Imperial Palace, also known as the Forbidden City, a 180-acre complex of gardens, courtyards and buildings in the heart of the city, whence the 24 emperors of the Ming (1368-1644) and Qing (1644-1911) dynasties ruled. 82nd Street and Fifth Avenue, through Oct. 29. 

National Museum of American Art, Smithsonian Institution, Washington: "Masterworks of Louis Comfort Tiffany" -- Sixty-five of the rarest and most technically brilliant creations of Louis Comfort Tiffany, most of which have never before been seen in a museum exhibition.
Included are leaded-glass windows, lamps, glass vases, jars and bottles, enamels, bronzes, mosaics, wooden objects, jewelry and paintings.
Renwick Gallery, Sept. 29-March 4.
The show then can be seen at New York's National Academy of Design, March 27-July 8. 

Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh: "ART/artifact: African Art Through Western Eyes" -- More than 160 objects -- jewelry, masks, knives, beadwork, textiles, utensils, carved figures -- selected from three of the oldest collections of African art in the U.S. (those at the Buffalo Museum of Science, the Hampton University Museum and the American Museum of Natural History). 4400 Forbes Ave., Sept. 30-Dec. 

New York Film Festival: This year's edition of Manhattan's annual movie marathon has everything including "The Kitchen Sink" (a short from New Zealand).
The festival opens Sept. 22 with "Trop Belle Pour Toi" ("Too Beautiful for You"), a new take on sexual attraction by France's Bertrand Blier, and wraps Oct. 9 with "Breaking In," a wry look at a pair of small-time thieves from Scotland's Bill Forsyth.
The 31 offerings in between include "Mystery Train," the latest from offbeat American Jim Jarmusch; "Strapless," a psychological study by Britain's David Hare; and "A Short Film About Killing," a hard-hitting drama from Poland's Krzysztof Kieslowski.
Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center. (212) 362-1911. 

American Indian Dance Theatre: After transfixing audiences from Tucson to Tokyo, this ensemble of Native American dancers, musicians and singers makes its Manhattan debut with a two-week engagement at the Joyce Theater.
The pan-tribal troupe, in brilliant handcrafted costumes, performs a variety of traditional rituals adapted for the stage, including the stately Zuni Rainbow Dance, the eerie Apache Crown Dance, and the dervish-like Fancy Dance. 175 Eighth Ave. at 19th Street, Sept. 19-Oct. 1, (212) 242-0800.
After this the company starts a North American tour, with dates including: Calgary, Alberta (Oct. 10); Billings, Mt. (Oct. 12); Helena, Mt. (Oct. 13); Spokane, Wash. (Oct. 14); Tacoma, Wash. (Oct. 15-16); Bellingham, Wash. (Oct. 17); San Diego (Oct. 19); Riverside, Calif. (Oct. 20); Los Angeles (Oct. 21); Tucson (Oct. 22-23); Moorhead, Minn. (Oct. 27); Minneapolis (Oct. 28); Indianapolis (Oct. 30); Des Moines, Iowa (Oct. 31); Dayton, Ohio (Nov. 2); Skokie, Ill. (Nov. 3), Springfield, Ill. (Nov. 4); Chicago (Nov. 5); Interlochen, Mich. (Nov. 6); East Lansing, Mich. (Nov. 9). 

New York Philharmonic: Zubin Mehta opens the orchestra's 148th season tomorrow night with a benefit concert featuring soprano Jessye Norman, then returns Sept. 22 and 23 to lead a double bill of Mahler's Symphony No. 5 and Mozart's Symphony No. 40.
Later on the maestro presides over the world premieres of two works -- Roger Kellaway's "Songs of Ascent," for tuba and orchestra (Nov. 24, 25, 28); and "Steps," by the Philharmonic's composer-in-residence, David Del Tredici (March 810).
Among other highlights are Leonard Bernstein conducting an all-Copland program (Oct. 19, 20, 21, 24), and two weeks of performances (beginning Oct. 5) with Stuttgart's Gachinger Kantorei under the direction of Helmuth Rilling, including the U.S. premiere of "Messa per Rossini" (Oct. 12, 13, 14, 17).
Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center. (212) 

Carol Neblett gives a recital Oct. 1 featuring soprano arias from Korngold's "Die tote Stadt," Massenet's "Le Cid," Verdi's "I Masnadieri," and Bellini's "La Straniera"; songs by Scarlatti, Debussy, Brahms and Rachmaninoff; and a new song cycle written for Ms. Neblett by Thomas Pasatieri, who will accompany her at the piano.
Sherwood Auditorium, La Jolla Museum of Contemporary Art, La Jolla, Calif. (619) 

