.START 

Ferranti International Signal PLC confirmed it may have been defrauded on some big weapons contracts, as British government concerns mounted about the defense contractor's future. 

In a statement to its 24,000 employees yesterday, Britain's third-biggest defense-electronics concern said, "It appears certain that the company and its advisers have been at least misled, and possibly made victims of serious fraud" in a subsidiary's contracts.
The contracts, including a Pakistani arms sale whose value may have been overstated in Ferranti's books, have been the subject of an intensive company audit since last week. 

The statement was Ferranti's first mention of possible fraud in the contracts and underscores the company's deepening problems.
Last week, when it indefinitely halted trading in its shares here, it cited only "significant irregularities" in the contracts.
The Ferranti audit focuses on contracts booked by International Signal & Control Group PLC, headquartered in Lancaster, Pa., an arms merchant with which Ferranti merged last year.
Transactions involving International Signal's former chief executive officer, James Guerin, are being investigated by U.S. government agencies for compliance with U.S. export-license requirements and other laws. 

Ferranti continued its weeklong reluctance to discuss any details of its problems, but one company official confirmed reports that auditors are examining whether certain contracts booked by International Signal ever, in fact, existed. 

Official concern over Ferranti's problems is growing in Britain, amid market speculation that large contract losses may force a government-orchestrated rescue of the concern.
Yesterday, the British Trade Department and Scotland Yard's Serious Fraud Office confirmed they have had contact with Ferranti over the contracts but are postponing any action until after the company reports its audit results.
British Defense Secretary Tom King said he's "very concerned" about Ferranti's problems and hopes for a speedy resolution. 

Ferranti's problems put the British government in a pickle.
Just last month, it blessed a restructuring of its defense-electronics sector by clearing the planned purchase of Plessey Co. by Britain's General Electric Co. and West Germany's Siemens AG.
The Defense Ministry was counting on Ferranti to be the main competitor of that new powerhouse, thereby ensuring competitive tendering on its electronics contracts.
But Ferranti's sudden problems could shred the government's plan and cause it political embarrassment. 

Analysts estimate Ferranti's possible loss on the questioned International Signal contracts at #150 million ($235.6 million) to #200 million -- about three to four times its #55.8 million pretax profit for the year ended March 31.
Write-offs of that magnitude, said analyst Simon Gleeson of London stockbrokers Williams De Broe Hill Chaplin & Co., could force Ferranti to seek a rescue by another defense contractor. 

In an interview with the British Broadcasting Corp. yesterday, Sir Derek AlunJones, Ferranti's chairman, acknowledged that the scandal is expected to create "a hole in {the company's} assets . . . which we will ultimately have to replace." He said the options under review include selling assets and entering into a partnership with another firm.
He said "the information we relied on" to merge the firms "has proved to be incorrect." 

In Philadelphia, Joseph Tate, Mr. Guerin's lawyer, confirmed that a federal grand jury there is conducting a separate investigation of his client's business transactions.
That investigation began long before the Ferranti scandal became public. 

Andy Pasztor in Washington contributed to this article. 

