.START 

The dollar sank as confidence in the U.S. currency faded following Friday's sudden plunge. 

Foreign-exchange dealers reported that trading was thin and choppy, with most participants too numbed by the dollar's cascade last week to venture new positions.
An abundance of ready sellers, presumably still holding uncomfortable long-dollar positions, quashed every attempt to nudge the dollar higher, dealers said. 

"When people lose that much money they don't bounce back," said Susan Babcock, vice president of corporate foreign exchange at Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp. "They don't say, 'Hey, we were buying it at 1.99 marks Friday, and now we can buy at 1.95 marks. '" 

Although many traders said it could take several weeks to repair Friday's damage to the dollar, several were optimistic that the U.S. currency will again push toward the year's highs, set in June around 2.0475 marks. 

"We're still close enough.
There's no reason to think the market is one-way down," said a vice president at a German bank in New York. 

Others, however, noted that with the chance for interest rate increases in Europe and Japan increasing, the dollar will find any climb a hard one.
And, after Campeau Corp. 's troubles with its junk bond debt, concerns about the health of other highly leveraged companies -- and their bankers -- add a fresh area of uncertainty to the market. 

In all, traders agree, the foreign-exchange arena will be kept on edge for the next week or two, and the likelihood of any assertive dollar moves during that period is slim. 

In late afternoon New York trading yesterday, the dollar was at 1.9520 marks, down from 1.9660 marks late Friday, and at 145.88 yen, down from 146.86 yen.
Sterling was at $1.5705, up from $1.5535.
In trading in Tokyo Tuesday, the dollar opened at 145.70 yen, down from 146.43 yen at Monday's close. 

The dollar waffled through Asian trading Monday, trading roughly in a relatively broad range as participants attempted to adjust their positions following Friday's helter-skelter tumble.
An intervention by the Bank of Japan when the dollar was trading around 145.75 yen hampered an already weak recovery, but the dollar eventually managed to build a base above 146 yen. 

Encouraged by the overnight dollar gains and expecting some correction from Friday, European players pulled the dollar higher.
The dollar encountered heavy selling as it rose in New York trading, however, and eventually the opposition scuttled the currency's chance for posting gains. 

Comments by Swiss National Bank President Markus Lusser that most central banks aren't prepared to alter their monetary policy to influence the level of the dollar did little to dissuade sellers, as did his praise of the U.S. Federal Reserve's management of the U.S. economy. 

James Maccario, vice president of foreign exchange at Shawmut Bank of Boston, said that although Friday's U.S. trade figures showed encouraging progress in reducing the country's trade gap, the decline in both exports and imports suggests economic activity may be more subdued than many had thought. 

A survey of international analysts indicates, also, that while the Bundesbank and other European central banks aren't likely to raise interest rates following the Bundesbank's Central Bank Council meeting Thursday, many analysts expect a coordinated credit-tightening on the Continent in the next four to eight weeks. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $361.70 an ounce, down $2.20.
Estimated volume was a moderate three million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Tuesday, gold was quoted at $360.07 an ounce. 

