.START 

Delta Air Lines Inc. is talking with NWA Inc. and Trans World Airlines Inc. about forming a joint computer reservation system that could become a significant new competitor for domestic travel-agency bookings. 

The move is Delta's second try at improving its standing in the computer reservation business.
Earlier this summer, the government effectively quashed on antitrust grounds a plan under which Delta would have merged its existing system with the Sabre reservation system of AMR Corp., No. 1 in the business.
AMR is the parent of American Airlines. 

The control of computer reservation systems is considered a big advantage in the airline industry.
The systems, which travel agents use to book airline, car-rental, hotel and other reservations, can generate substantial fees.
Industry experts say the systems also tend to create more bookings for the airlines owning them. 

The latest venture proposed by Delta would operate autonomously with its own management, according to Delta's brief announcement.
Beyond that, none of the companies would discuss what form the transaction would take. 

Currently, TWA and NWA, parent of Northwest Airlines, jointly operate PARS, the industry's fourth-largest reservation system.
Delta's system, Datas II, is in fifth place. 

"What we see is a combination of Datas II and PARS, resulting in a strong third company that's a more effective competitor for the two big systems, Covia and Sabre," said a Delta spokesman.
Covia, owned by UAL Inc. and several other carriers, is the second-largest system. 

A combined PARS-Datas II system would place it neck-and-neck with third-place SystemOne, a unit of Texas Air Corp. 

Delta was forced to give up its effort to combine its system with Sabre last June after the Justice Department said it would fight any merger of the systems.
A merger of Sabre with Delta's system would have given the two about 46% of the domestic travel-agency market. 

The Department of Transportation, which can make recommendations on airline mergers, also raised objections in May to the proposed AMR-Delta transaction.
It said the two airlines should include other partners in the new company. 

Although at least three smaller airlines said they were interested, the Justice Department still said it would sue. 

Delta was to have paid $650 million to AMR for the right to buy half of Sabre.
An interest in PARS isn't as valuable.
NWA paid TWA $140 million for a 50% share in 1986.
Today, Delta would have to pay roughly $125 million for a one-third share of PARS, analysts estimate. 

"Delta's bringing something to the table," said analyst Timothy Pettee of Merrill Lynch. "It's not like they don't have anything to contribute.
It's Datas II system and not just cash." 

In addition to providing travel agents with back-office assistance, computer reservations systems enable them to make reservations on any major carrier.
But the airlines operating the systems possess an edge, industry experts contend, because of so-called architectural biases in the software. 

Although Delta's Datas II system is considered technologically competitive with other computer reservation systems, Delta's late start in designing and marketing the system put it at a disadvantage.
Delta, unable to increase its base of 3,500 travel agents by winning them from rival systems, finally turned to the merger route last January with the unsuccessful AMR proposal. 

