.START 

Viktor Goncharov breaks the bad news as gently as he can. "If you put your name on the waiting list for housing it can take 10 or 12 years before you get a place," he says. 

The shy, disabled woman he is talking to, a blond 17-year-old named Lyubov, slumps in her chair, tears welling up in her eyes.
She is desperate to find a small apartment to escape turmoil at home with her parents.
But it seems hopeless. 

"There are so many questions I just can't answer," Mr. Goncharov sighs.
Walking over to comfort her, he gives her the phone number of a new support group for invalids. "Perhaps they can do something," he says. 

Mr. Goncharov is a foot soldier in the newly "democratic" Soviet Union -- the man this Ukrainian coal-mining town elected last spring to be its deputy in the national parliament, and solve its many local problems.
That election marked the first time the Soviet people freely chose its own legislature and was a milestone for Mikhail Gorbachev's reform movement.
Mr. Gorbachev had promised a freer press and economy and greater political representation when he took office in 1985.
Many ordinary people had taken heart.
They hoped for better housing, more food and fewer fights with the paper-pushing bureaucrats who run their lives. 

But so far, as Lyubov can attest, little has changed.
To watch Mr. Goncharov at work today is to catch a glimpse of the unrelenting hardship of everyday life in the Soviet Union, one that "perestroika" has failed to ease.
The "new" Soviet Union is still hobbled by the indomitable problems of the old Soviet Union. 

Instead of grappling with pressing issues of state, such as ethnic unrest, Mr. Goncharov, like most of his reform-minded colleagues, spends 90% of his time trying to sort out the mundane and often nightmarish problems of his 275,000 constituents: chronic housing shortages, bad sanitation, petty corruption.
Sometimes he can help.
Often he can do little.
Most of the time, he is so overburdened, he barely has time to read the piles of draft laws sent from Moscow. 

Instead, aside from the few weeks a year he spends in the capital, he labors in Yenakiyevo over problems that should have been dealt with long ago by local officials. "This shouldn't be the job of a people's deputy," says Mr. Goncharov's wife, Olga, who helps him in the office. "But the system just doesn't work.
The authorities do nothing." 

The result is a growing mood of frustration in the nation that poses a grave risk to perestroika.
Millions of people are disillusioned by the empty official talk of change.
Reflecting that mood, Yenakiyevo's 33,000 coal miners joined a nationwide strike this summer to push for more radical action. 

The government caved in to all their demands, granting higher wages and greater economic independence for individual mines.
But, as Valery Yemelyanenko, a member of the strike committee, concedes, "The strike was easy.
Trying to change things is very difficult." 

Mr. Goncharov, a boyish-looking 31-year-old whose father was a miner, confronts those difficulties every day.
He keeps a toy pistol in his office that he says was a present from a youngster who told him to use it "in my fight against the bureaucrats." At his most irritated moments, especially when arguing on the telephone, he reaches over his desk and theatrically brandishes the gun. 

For three days this month, in an unusual gesture of openness, he allowed a correspondent to attend his meetings, read his mail and follow him through the streets of Yenakiyevo, where a huge statue of Lenin dominates the town square and looks out toward the spewing chimneys of a steel plant.
The written requests for help come piling into his office every day and are stacked on a long table opposite his desk.
He usually passes them on to the relevant authorities, demanding a speedy reply.
His status as a people's deputy means they can't simply ignore him. 

One afternoon he and his wife discuss the plight of the 13 families who live at 99 Lenin Ave.
Their water was turned off weeks ago without explanation, and they can't get it turned back on despite urgent pleas to the water authorities. 

Mr. Goncharov skims through a noncommittal answer sent by the water department, which says the building will remain without water because there is trouble with a pipe.
He fumes. "Tell them to provide exact details about what is wrong with the pipe," he shouts across the room to his wife. "I want to know when they can fix it.
At the very least, they should take the trouble to go and inspect it." 

Although a member of the Communist Party, Mr. Goncharov, who tends to keep most conversation on a serious footing, doesn't hide his disdain for the uncaring system built up over 72 years of communist rule.
He tries to help people with problems, but firmly believes they should do more to help themselves and each other, too. "I want to build a new communist society," one based on social justice, he says. 

The bookshelf in his office is filled with Lenin's works.
But at home, he keeps a bible by his bed and discloses that he has been baptized.
One of his two young sons is called Nazar, the Russian variant of a Jewish name that means devoted to God. 

He is not always consistent.
Although professing to abhor privilege, he enjoys many perks as leader of the town's young communist league, the Komsomol.
He has a spacious apartment in a new building.
For breakfast, he eats cheese sandwiches and drinks coffee -- goods unavailable in the local stores. 

Still, without his official position, his mission would be even harder.
The Komsomol provides him with an office, a car, a driver and a secretary.
It pays his phone bills and gives him easy access to a print shop and supplies of paper that would otherwise be hard to find.
It also is a useful source of funds for projects. 

The college-educated Mr. Goncharov enjoys enormous popularity.
Walking down the street, people nod at him in recognition or stop to shake hands, often recounting their latest problem.
It is a sign of his standing that the town's miners immediately elected him a member of their strike committee. 

"People come to him because he gets things done," says Valentin Tutunik, a retired worker. 

Mr. Tutunik has stopped in at Mr. Goncharov's office in the red-brick town hall to get a few worries off his chest, one of about a dozen people who drop by every day.
He grumbles about a local factory director and tells Mr. Goncharov about a school that is in bad physical condition. "It should be closed," he says.
Mr. Goncharov scribbles down details in a notebook. 

The visitor then lowers his voice as he talks about his last worry.
Corruption is rife among the security guards at factories, Mr. Tutunik says.
Instead of protecting the premises, they often steal things themselves.
The job is so attractive that people pay bribes to be hired, he adds. 

Mr. Goncharov stops writing and looks at him earnestly. "We'll need a revolution before we can solve that problem," he says. 

One afternoon, four men and two women troop into the office for a regular meeting of the town's Komsomol executive committee.
After listening to a long budget report, the discussion turns to a proposal to set up a special chapter of Komsomol for the town's schools. 

Mr. Goncharov listens skeptically. "Why do we need it?" he asks in his deep voice. "What difference will it make in the schools?" 

The official who proposed the plan sputters and starts to give a vague answer.
Mr. Goncharov interrupts. "The only reason to change the structure is to improve the work," he says. "I don't believe in change for its own sake." 

After the session, he walks to a nearby house to attend the inaugural meeting of the Society for Public Opinion, one of several civic groups he helped establish.
The society will poll local residents on a range of issues and publish the results.
Mr. Goncharov hopes it will provide him with information he can use in parliament -- and ammunition he can fire at Yenakiyevo's town hall. 

A fierce argument is under way as he walks into the room.
Some of the society's members want to publish their own newspaper as an alternative to the town's drab Yenakiyevo Worker. "It's useless," shouts a woman in a red dress, referring to the Worker. 

Mr. Goncharov explains that, unfortunately, only official communist organizations can publish a paper.
But he does have some good news: He hopes to persuade Komsomol to allocate some funds for the new society. 

As the discussion bogs down in questions about voting procedures, some of the participants come to Mr. Goncharov's chair and confide into his ear. 

"I'm very worried about the Komsomol branch at the factory," says one elderly woman in a black-and-white striped dress. 

"So am I," Mr. Goncharov whispers back. "Come and see me and we'll talk about it." 

On the way home, at 9 p.m., he drops by a decrepit two-story building that is filled with bricks and scaffolding.
This is another pet project, a meeting place for the town's youngsters who now have nowhere to go in the evenings. 

"In the past, any youth activity was linked to {communist} dogma," Mr. Goncharov says. "We want to make this a place where young people can come and do their own thing." 

But refurbishing the building poses big problems.
Apart from the difficulty of finding funds, there is a nationwide shortage of construction materials such as bricks and cement.
Vitaly Arkhipov, a burly foreman, says he doesn't know when the building will be finished. 

Even when the materals do arrive, the workers often make mistakes, such as putting up walls in the wrong place.
Mr. Goncharov therefore regularly makes spotchecks.
On the way to work one morning, he stops at the building to tell Mr. Arkhipov: "Don't forget the drains today." 

Back in his office, the line of people waiting to see him has dwindled, so Mr. Goncharov stops in to see the mayor, Yuri Khivrich.
As he enters, Mr. Khivrich is on the phone to a nearby farm. "I need 240 tons of tomatoes," he shouts impatiently.
The visit is brief: Mr. Goncharov wants permission to change a sewer by the youth center.
Mr. Khivrich won't say yes or no.
He apparently has other things on his mind, perhaps his tomatoes. 

The next stop is a union meeting at an auto parts plant.
The Soviet labor movement, which played almost no part in the miners' strike, is under fire for doing little for its members.
The meeting shows why. 

After an hour-long speech by the plant's union chief that is filled with production figures and little else, a few officials stand up to complain about working conditions.
The factory director, who is sitting on the podium in front of a huge color picture of Lenin, gets up to answer. "Comrades, I've heard a lot of criticism," he shouts. "But I don't understand it.
We've already fulfilled all your demands." 

The labor officials listen in silence, not daring to disagree.
Mr. Goncharov, who has been reading a newspaper to relieve his boredom, walks out. 

Next morning, a burly miner with his right arm in plaster storms into the office. "During the strike, we were promised higher pay.
But my wages this month are half the usual amount," he rages. "You're my elected deputy -- do something." 

Mr. Goncharov remains calm and jots down the details. "What do the mine bosses say?" he asks.
They won't give an explanation, the miner answers. 

"You can't expect Goncharov and Gorbachev to do everything for you," Mr. Goncharov replies, irritated. "This is a matter for your work collective.
Demand an explanation." 

After a day of dealing with Yenakiyevo's problems and hopes, Mr. Goncharov is reflective about his new duties.
Bigger affairs of state will have to wait. "Perhaps in the future" there will be more time for work in Moscow, he says. "But people here trust me.
If I were away, a lot of things wouldn't get done." 

