.START 

The economy's slow, methodical growth is likely to continue into next year, the government's chief economic forecasting gauge suggests, although pockets of weakness still worry some economists. 

The index of leading indicators, a composite of 11 statistics designed to foretell economic activity six to nine months hence, made its best showing since April, climbing 0.3% in August, the Commerce Department reported. 

The increase -- the second in as many months -- suggests the economy is on "a pattern of slow but stable growth," said Gordon Richards, an economist at the National Association of Manufacturers. 

In July, the index rose a revised 0.1%, originally estimated at a 0.2% increase.
All the figures are adjusted for seasonal changes. 

Five of the indicators pushed the index up; they included stock prices, building permits and factory orders for consumer goods, which were driven by a surge in automobile demand. 

But some economists believe the economy is exhibiting enough weakness to keep alive the threat of recession.
Among the leading indicators, an index of consumer expectations dropped significantly.
Plant and equipment orders also fell.
And the average work week shrank. 

"Basically we don't see any strong sector of the economy, and we see several that are weak," said David Levy, a partner in Levy Economic Forecasts, Chappaqua, N.Y. "We believe the economy is going to have a very close brush with recession this year or early next, and the critical factor deciding whether it will drop (into a recession) or manage to avoid it is going to be Federal Reserve policy." 

The Fed policy-making committee is due to meet this week to set monetary policy for the next several weeks.
After pushing up interest rates from March 1988 to March 1989 to head off inflation, the Fed let rates slip a few times this summer.
But lately it has held them steady, waiting to see just where the economy is headed.
Many analysts believe the central bank won't make any further changes in policy for now, amid signs that inflation is tapering while growth continues. 

"I have to think the Fed is quite pleased with themselves at this point," said Daniel Van Dyke, head of the economic forecasting group at Bank of America in San Francisco. 

The index showed that the weakest area of the economy is clearly manufacturing.
For example, the prices of raw materials declined, making a negative contribution to the index. "That's good news for inflation but indicates there is slack in the industrial commodity area," noted Richard Peterson, senior vice president at Continental Bank in Chicago.
Economists also said they expected August's boost in the factory orders component to drop back after orders for cars -- brought on by sales incentives and new models -- subside. 

Many economists don't take the leading indicators index seriously as a forecasting gauge, reading it as an indication of current activity.
Nevertheless, the numerous monthly declines in the index this year had triggered fears that the economy was edging toward a recession. 

After the latest report, however, Lawrence Hunter, deputy chief economist for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, contended that the leading indicators "show that the economic slowdown should come to an end in the fourth quarter," and "the real gross national product should rise throughout 1990." 

Here are the net contributions of the components of the Commerce Department's index of leading indicators.
After various adjustments, they produced a 0.3% rise in the index for August and a 0.1% rise in July.
August, and the change from July, are: 

The ratio of coincident to lagging indicators was 1.09, down from 1.10 in July. 

