.START 

Eli Lilly & Co. is revamping quality-control procedures throughout the company following U.S. inspectors' discovery of widespread quality-control problems at an Indianapolis drug plant. 

Lilly wants to have "good, strong controls over the whole thing because we don't want more problems to emerge," said Richard D. Wood, chairman of the pharmaceutical maker, in an interview here Friday.
The steps mark Lilly's first acknowledgment of the seriousness of the Indianapolis situation, which arose from a U.S. Food and Drug Administration investigation. 

In a departure from industry practice, Lilly now will oversee quality control from its Indianapolis headquarters rather than leaving it up to individual facilities.
Centralizing responsibility means "we will have complete control at the corporate level," Mr. Wood said.
Before, "there was oversight but no direct-line responsibility" for monitoring production quality.
Lilly also is making some management changes as part of this overhaul, he said. 

Last month, Lilly halted the distribution of all drugs made at the Indianapolis plant and recalled 10 drugs after FDA inspectors sharply criticized quality-control procedures.
The problems centered on submission of false or incomplete data, poor record keeping and Lilly's failure to adequately train quality-control officers. 

The FDA's report triggered a separate probe by the investigations subcommittee of the U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee.
The panel wants to learn whether Lilly filed false or misleading information with the FDA about its manufacturing processes in Indianapolis.
In addition, the FDA now is looking at three other Lilly drug plants in Puerto Rico to determine whether they have problems like the ones found in Indianapolis.
Lilly officials have tended to downplay the Indianapolis plant's problems as largely technical aberrations.
The company hopes the facility "will shortly resume full production and shipment," Mr. Wood told a group of U.K. analysts and fund managers here. 

As part of the quality-control shakeup, Mr. Wood said Robert Williams has assumed the new post of vice president for quality control.
Mr. Williams previously was Lilly's vice president of agricultural research.
Two other Lilly executives involved with directing quality control or the Indianapolis facility have been demoted to less responsible jobs, the Lilly chairman indicated. 

