.START 

It would be poetic justice if glasnost, by allowing ever increasing emigration from the Soviet Union, would reconfirm Israel's original purpose of providing a haven for Jews unwelcome elsewhere.
It would also be a delicious irony if the task of absorbing such a huge mass of immigrants from a failing socialist system forced Israel to finally abandon its own anti-productive system, inspired by similar ideology, which impels many of its young to leave. 

How even more delightfully ironic if this made a hostile Kremlin an unwitting partner in solving some of Israel's most intractable social and economic problems, by moving it toward a free-market economy that would realize its tremendous human potential, talent and energy. 

Jewish emigration from the U.S.S.R. now runs at about 60,000 annually, up from 20,000 in 1988, 8,000 in 1987 and 900 in 1986.
But the people now leaving the Soviet Union decided to emigrate two years earlier, since it takes that long for the initial decision and application for emigrations to make its way through all the procedures.
We can therefore anticipate a snowball effect, which -- coupled with the progressive deterioration of the Soviet economy, increasing social and political instability and growing grass roots anti-Semitism -- will probably result in an unprecedented Jewish exodus.
Once asked how many Jews were in the U.S.S.R., a Soviet leader replied, "Two or three million." When asked how many of those people would emigrate if allowed, the official reply was, "About six million." 

However, most Russian Jewish emigrants wish to travel to America, not Israel.
Years of Soviet propaganda painting an uninviting picture of Israel has unfortunately been reinforced by the numerous failures of the Israeli bureaucracy in absorbing newcomers and by the hardships immigrants face in finding decent housing and jobs.
Political instability and the military threat posed by relentless Arab hostility have not helped either. 

But mostly, Jews escaping from a bankrupt Soviet state-dominated economy cannot see a future for themselves or their children in a country suffering from similar economic handicaps.
Israel's talented and well-educated population makes an average wage of only $1,000 a month. 

Soon, however, Jewish emigrants from the Soviet Union may have no choice but to come to Israel, since the U.S. government is unlikely to extend continuously its refugee quotas and resettlement budgets and is, indeed, more disposed to curb them. 

Many millions of refugees, in no less dire straits than Soviet Jewry, are knocking at America's doors, and, unlike Soviet Jews, have no other place to go.
Thus, the American Jewish community will find it difficult or even undesirable to prevail upon a reluctant administration to modify its immigration policy to favor Soviet Jewish emigrants. 

Fortunately, unlike 1939, when Jews trying to flee Hitler had no place to go, the establishment of Israel provides them with a viable alternative.
Israel desires and needs immigrants.
Without their human capital, Israel could never hope to defend itself and develop its economy. 

Despite its good will and genuine desire, though, Israel is unprepared to cope with large numbers of immigrants.
Even the small increase by a few thousand of immigrants in the past couple of years created a crisis in its state-dominated absorption and resettlement services.
Temporary residences for immigrants are overcrowded, permanent housing is hard to obtain and the unemployment rate is nearing 10%. 

With so few opportunities for Israelis, and with growing economic hardships, a wave of immigration will only strain the government's ability to provide resources from its already overextended budget.
It may also create great resentment against the special privileges -- tax relief, subsidized housing, etc. -- granted to new immigrants to compensate them for the inordinate handicaps posed by Israel's overregulated economy. 

Israeli politicians are aware of the system's inability to meet the historical challenges that increased immigration will pose.
They are acknowledging the need for basic structural reform and even taking a few steps toward reforming the financial system and reducing regulations. 

But their steps toward basic reform are halting and their initiatives palliative -- such as the recently proposed "Hundred Projects," designed to reduce the red tape on 100 projects handpicked by the bureacracy and system that created these impediments originally. 

Immigrant absorption cannot be improved outside the context of a general reform in Israel's economy, since immigrants must finally be integrated into the Israeli system.
Some researchers, observing how many immigrants from the West leave Israel after their first few years, claim that the special privileges of the absorption process are counterproductive, making the immigrant less prepared to withstand the full impact of Israel's bureaucracy and its confiscatory taxes.
So to attract and keep immigrants -- indeed, to prevent many of its young from leaving -- Israel must undergo radical reform. 

There must be a reduction of government regulation of the economy, which today controls everything from the size of a doughnut to the rate of interest.
Taxes must be lowered sharply and capital markets reformed to allow private capital formation and the launching of new businesses. 

The housing problem could be eased if the government released some of the land it holds -- 93% of the country's land is held by the government or the Jewish National Fund -- at non-monopolistic prices.
The government could also encourage housing by eliminating the rigidities and monopolies in the building trade, reducing taxes on building materials and cutting the bureaucracy that makes getting a building permit a nightmare. 

The government's first moves to sell to private owners its many companies -- which at the moment seem like sweetheart deals with investors enjoying access to the political system -- should be encouraged in the context of a truly competitive market environment. 

These are only a few of the steps that can be taken to create a productive and competitive economy without which immigrant absorption will falter.
Neither additional government allocations nor increased charitable contributions from abroad will suffice to provide housing and professional employment for the forthcoming masses of well-educated Soviet Jewish immigrants. 

A structural reform encouraging private initiative and creating economic growth, rather than redistributing existing resources, will enable Israel to absorb immigrants and to take advantage of the enormous human capital they represent.
Economic reform is an urgent necessity if Israel is to fulfill its historical mission. 

Mr. Doron is director of the Israel Center for Social and Economic Progress, a public policy group based in Tel Aviv.
Mr. Shtern, formerly an economist at the University of Moscow, is a citizen of Israel. 

