.START 

With the successful opening of two shows in a row, "Sweeney Todd" and "Orpheus Descending," the fall theater season has done a 180-degree turn from a year ago.
Then, Broadway was a disaster area, a sort of Beirut-on-Hudson.
The construction of new office buildings in the theater district, accelerated to take advantage of special inducements made to real estate developers, had torn the area asunder.
The Broadway Theater, where "Les Miserables" is playing, had to cancel Wednesday matinees because of construction noise next door.
And the Ritz Theater (soon to be the Walter Kerr Theater) had so much disruption on all sides of it that it lost out on several hits it might have landed. 

Even worse than the devastation outside the theaters was what was happening inside them.
In the four months of September through December last season only six shows opened.
Of the six, only one was a musical and that was the disastrous "Legs Diamond." Without question, it was the worst fall season in memory.
The situation was so grim that after "Legs" closed, the Nederlander Organization took the Mark Hellinger Theater, in which it had played, out of circulation.
The Hellinger, one of the finest musical houses in the city and home of such legendary hits as "My Fair Lady," was leased full-time for five years to a church organization. 

This year there appears to be a complete rebound.
Construction still abounds, but several buildings are nearing completion and inside the theaters there will be a veritable cornucopia of shows with nearly three times as many openings scheduled as last fall.
Among the musicals are "Grand Hotel," based on the Vicki Baum novel and directed by Tommy Tune; "Meet Me in St. Louis," based on the movie musical; "Dangerous Games," two one-act dance dramas created by Graciela Daniele; "City of Angels" by Cy Coleman and Larry Gelbart; and "Prince of Central Park," based on a 1975 novel.
Also in the musical column are revivals of "Gypsy" featuring Tyne Daly and "Threepenny Opera" starring the rock star Sting. 

In addition to his musical Mr. Gelbart will be weighing in with a political satire called "Mastergate," based on, guess what?
The other straight plays include "A Few Good Men," about the trial of two Marines for the murder of a third, by a new playwright, Aaron Sorkin; "Artist Descending a Staircase" by Tom Stoppard; "Secret Rapture" by another well-established British dramatist, David Hare; and Paddy Chayefsky's "The Tenth Man," which will be revived by Lincoln Center. 

The stars will be out too.
Along with Sting is Vanessa Redgrave in "Orpheus Descending." Dustin Hoffman will appear in "The Merchant of Venice," and three well-known performers -- Rex Harrison, Glynis Johns and Stewart Granger -- will be in a revival of Somerset Maugham's "The Circle." 

"Orpheus Descending" and "The Merchant of Venice" have more than their stars to recommend them.
They mark the first ventures of Sir Peter Hall in the commercial arena.
For 30 years Sir Peter has been the quintessential not-for-profit theater man.
In 1960 he founded the Royal Shakespeare Company, which he headed until 1968, and in 1973 took over the leadership of Britain's National Theatre, now the Royal National Theatre, from Laurence Olivier.
It was Sir Peter who brought the National to renown in its new home on the South Bank of the Thames.
Last year Sir Peter announced that he was leaving the National to form a commercial venture, Peter Hall Co., to produce classical plays in London, New York and elsewhere.
His first two attempts have been "Orpheus" and "Merchant," which, in London at least, have been enormously successful. 

Does the flurry of activity on Broadway mean that the long drought is over, that the problems that have plagued the theater for the last decade have disappeared?
Unfortunately, not in the least.
Ironically the volume of productions this fall is partly the result of problems that remain endemic.
One of these is the length of time it takes to move a production from the planning stage to an opening on Broadway, especially a musical.
Many of the musicals arriving this season are revivals, not only because they are proven commodities but because it doesn't take the same length of time to assemble all the elements.
Part of the explanation for the fall activity is that several productions that had been in the planning stage for several years, such as "Meet Me in St. Louis," are fortuitously ripe for Broadway at the same time. 

The problems in mounting a musical, especially the financial problems, remain very much with us.
A good example is "Jerome Robbins' Broadway," the dance compendium that opened last season at a cost of more than $8 million.
At capacity the show grosses $530,000 per week, but its expenses are around $420,000 a week.
It doesn't take very sophisticated arithmetic to realize that it will be 75 or 80 weeks playing to full houses before the show pays back its initial capitalization, let alone makes a profit. 

It is significant, too, that of the many offerings this fall only one, "A Few Good Men," is a new play by an American playwright.
Given this fact and the continuing high costs of all productions, both straight plays and musicals, the problems that have beset the theater are still very much with us.
Some of them may appear intractable, but others are the result of pure stubbornness and lack of vision.
For example, there are the smaller Broadway houses such as the Lyceum, the Belasco, the Cort and the Ritz.
Officially designated by both unions and producers as "endangered theaters," they are victims of an arbitrary division between Broadway and off-Broadway. 

Even with certain union concessions, cost remain so much higher on Broadway than off that today's young, independent producers find it more profitable to produce straight plays in smaller off-Broadway houses.
If everyone got together, however, to effect a compromise, the endangered Broadway houses could be filled with plays like "Driving Miss Daisy" and "Other People's Money" rather than standing empty.
Several formulas have been suggested to solve this problem, but so far no driving force or catalytic agent has appeared to bring it about. 

Even so, those who care about the theater can revel in this fall harvest.
The theater, like the stock market, thrives on optimism; perhaps this burst of activity will become a self-fulfilling prophecy and producers who were ready to despair will sally forth despite the odds. 

