.START 

Thanks to Whittle Communications, advertisers have already infiltrated the classroom and the doctor's waiting room.
Apparently, that isn't enough. 

Whittle's latest plan is to create a massive national promotion around its Special Reports, a series of free magazines found only in doctors' offices.
The promotion, which the media company discussed late last week, will take advertiser tie-ins to extremes -- becoming perhaps the brashest, most blatant attempt yet by a magazine to custom-make a demographically correct audience for its advertisers.
And it's coming, for six months in 1991, to a shopping mall near you. 

The new promotion will revolve around a Special Reports series, "Families of the World," profiling family life in different cultures.
It will call into play virtually every marketing tie-in known to man: an elaborate mall exhibit, sponsored by local retailers and Special Reports advertisers, reinforced by product sampling, and beefed up by a national sweepstakes and local contests.
It might include distributing Special Reports to schools nationwide, an international marketing conference and a network television special.
And that's just for starters. 

The traveling show is the latest in a string of increasingly elaborate promotions, the biggest being the TV show/merchandising tie-ins between CBS-K mart and NBC-Sears going on now.
It is also shrewdly timed: Whittle is currently negotiating with advertisers to extend their two-year ad contracts with Special Reports, and wants to hold out the prospect of additional bells and whistles. 

In an interview, Alan Greenberg, vice chairman of Whittle, stresses -- over and over again -- that this is a "journalistic idea" that came out of Whittle's editorial side.
The concept had nothing to do with advertising, honest. 

But the Special Report series, which will be published at the same time the mall show is on, so far hasn't chosen the "five renowned international editors" that a video describing the project promises.
Its "international board of advisers," made up of sociologists, anthropologists and others, hasn't yet been assembled.
The "30 top foreign correspondents" haven't yet been hired.
Only some mock magazine covers -- "The Families of Africa," "The Families of Japan," and so on for the Soviet Union, Europe, Australia and the U.S. -- have been produced. 

On the other hand, the advertising side of the enterprise is in full swing.
Over the past two weeks, Whittle has quietly made a slick video presentation to all of the dozen advertisers currently in Special Reports, as well as to all of those advertisers' ad agencies.
And the advertisers, Mr. Greenberg says, are quite interested. 

"It has the potential to add some top spin to the basic magazine concept," says Rich Hamilton, a senior vice president at D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, whose clients include Whittle advertiser Procter & Gamble.
He says he needs more details -- prices, for example, haven't yet been worked out -- but "the concept is very timely and provocative." 

Keith Bellows, Special Reports editor, dismisses as "baloney" the suggestion that the project is designed for advertisers. "It's an editorial idea, and a very expensive one," he says.
Potential writers, editors and advisers are all being contacted now, he says, and aren't in place yet simply because Whittle is still researching which areas of the world and what types of subjects to write about. 

"Our goal is to become a great general-interest family magazine," Mr. Bellows adds.
He says he wants the six special issues of Special Report to "capture the atmosphere of family life . . . the traditions, the rituals, the folklore." The promotional video, with characteristic Whittle brassiness, dubs the Special Reports families series "one of the most ambitious and revealing productions of our time," as well as "the publishing event of the coming decade." 

What it certainly is, is a marketing event of gargantuan proportions.
It starts with the mall exhibit, basically a walk-through version of the magazine that will travel to about a third of the 600 major malls in the U.S. Sharing prime exhibit space, of course, will be Special Reports advertisers: "Tide might show Tide boxes from 40 countries, with a slogan like 'Tide cleans the world, '" Mr. Greenberg suggests. 

People going through the exhibit will also be given samples and coupons for the advertisers involved.
And by entering a sweepstakes to win a big prize, perhaps a trip around the world, they'll unwittingly help Whittle assemble a huge mailing list and research pool.
When permitted by the malls, Whittle staffers will also be on hand to sell Special Reports copies. 

Whittle also plans to sign up the major newspaper, television stations and radio station in each market.
They in turn will be encouraged to create their own local promotions.
Whittle hopes newspapers, for example, will agree to buy up enough copies of the "Families of the World" Special Reports to distribute to all the local schoolchildren in its area. 

With the promotion, Whittle also hopes to take advantage, for the first time, of its tie with Time Warner, which last year bought 50% of the company.
Mr. Greenberg says Whittle will likely talk to Time Warner or its HBO unit about jointly creating a "Families of the World" TV documentary.
It may also consult with Time Warner "down the road" about selling subscriptions to its Special Reports series, which now is free, he says. 

And Whittle has even bigger plans: the rest of the world. "We haven't explored that to any great extent," Mr. Greenberg says, but adds that the series' global theme might open up distribution possibilities for both the magazines and a TV show abroad.
Special Reports advertisers, naturally, would get first dibs. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

ERNST & YOUNG: Ernst & Young, New York, awarded its ad account to Grey Advertising, New York.
Billings weren't disclosed.
The accounting firm was created by the merger of Arthur Young and Ernst & Whinney.
Previously, Arthur Young's advertising had been handled by HDM, New York; Ernst & Whinney's account had been serviced by E.B. Wilson Advertising, New York. 

GREY ADVERTISING: Alan Fendrick, executive vice president, secretary and treasurer, will step down at the end of 1989 and assume an advisory post as executive vice president, chairman of the finance committee.
Steven Felsher, now senior vice president, general counsel, will replace Mr. Fendrick as executive vice president/finance world-wide.
Also, William Garvey, senior vice president, will be promoted to executive vice president/chief financial officer, U.S. operations. 

LEVINE HUNTLEY SCHMIDT & BEAVER: Five senior vice presidents were promoted to executive vice president at the New York agency: Terry Bonaccolta, Jim Brandhorst, Jim Dragoumis, Jane Pack and Tony DeGregorio. 

NEW ACCOUNTS: Arnell/Bickford Associates Marketing, New York, picked up ad accounts for Levi's sunglasses and Donna Karan DKNY sunglasses, both of which are made by Bausch & Lomb.
The agency was also named to handle advertising for Fendi's Manhattan store.
Combined billings are $3 million. 

