.START 

Coca-Cola's board is scheduled to meet today to decide whether to accept Sony's tender offer for Coke's 49% share of Columbia Pictures.
Coke's board is reportedly happy about Sony's offer, and it is unlikely it will hesitate to accept the bid.
Columbia's employees, on the other hand, are said to be quite apprehensive about the prospect of working for Japanese owners.
While it's impossible to say at this point how far Sony would go in changing Columbia's style, it's fair to assume that Columbia's employees will be exposed to Japanese management style at some level of operation.
How will they adapt to this new style? 

In 1986, I was part of the Japanese team that established the Panasonic subsidiary Kotobuki Electronics Industries, in Vancouver, Wash.
When we celebrated our first anniversary, I asked our American employees how they enjoyed working with us.
For the most part they were happy, but I was surprised by some of the criticisms they made: 

-- Japanese managers don't trust American workers and are too secretive. 

-- American managers have many responsibilities but little decision-making authority. 

-- The Japanese do not give their employees clear job descriptions. 

-- Japanese management is too slow to make decisions. 

-- Japanese managers are too negative; they criticize but never praise. 

I hadn't realized until then that my American workers were experiencing culture shock.
Culture shock in the work context can be a source of damaging misunderstandings and intolerable frustrations.
It became clear to me that I had a formidable management challenge to communicate the reasons for our Japanese ways to our American employees. 

Culture has two aspects.
One is easy to understand because it is clear to see.
Foreigners recognize it in the etiquette, customs, trade practices, folklore and all the various objective products and behaviors of a culture.
The other aspect is less easy to understand because it requires a foreigner to enter deeply into the subjective reality of an unfamiliar culture.
One needs to understand the reasons behind its people's behavior.
Why do they think the way they do?
What are their deepest values? 

Our American employees were not having difficulties with our Japanese management on the first level, but on the second.
They needed to better understand our way of thinking and our values.
I realized I needed to better understand these things myself.
So much of one's culture is taken for granted.
It is like the air we breathe -- always there supporting our life, but rarely thought about.
So here is my attempt to explain the values behind the Japanese management style, a style that I hope will be easier for Americans to live with if they understand the cultural reasons behind it. 

Do Japanese managers mistrust Americans and keep secrets from them?
I don't think so.
The problem lies more in the fact that, in American terms, the Japanese are simply poor communicators. 

In Japanese culture silence is golden, and the real messages are often communicated nonverbally.
Japanese speak with great reserve, and their messages are often communicated subtly.
Japanese value a listener who uses his perceptiveness to understand the speaker's meaning.
From a small bit of information -- perhaps from a simple gesture or the speaker's tone of voice -- the Japanese listener gleans the whole meaning.
The Japanese have learned from a very early age how to understand one another without direct verbal communication. 

Americans understandably interpret this behavior as secretive, and they think that Japanese consciously withhold information because they don't trust them.
I think the problem lies rather on the level of a misunderstanding because of different communication styles. 

But perhaps Americans also feel mistrusted because they don't have the authority that the same level of responsibility or job title would give them in an American company.
Again this has nothing to do with Japanese mistrust.
Authority to make decisions is shared in Japanese companies in ways Americans are unused to.
And whether a manager is American or Japanese, the authority he is granted is more a function of time than of his job title.
Authority is a reward for loyalty and a consistent demonstration of responsibility. 

Before being promoted to manager, Japanese employees are assigned to different departments over the course of 10 to 15 years.
During this time they work alongside many different people to give them the chance to develop extensive working relationships based on trust and respect.
This is why job descriptions are not specific; a manager in a Japanese company is expected to be a generalist, an all-round player.
At the end of this long process, a manager -- whether Japanese or American -- is granted a degree of authority because he has proven himself trustworthy. 

But even when a manager earns this trust, he is rarely given the kind of individual authority that is common in American companies.
Americans value an aggressive, quick, individualistic decision-making style.
But for the Japanese it is more important to have consensus than to have a quick decision.
Working relationships in Japanese companies are long-term, and loyalty, cooperation, and harmonious interpersonal relationships are very important.
A participative management style has developed in Japan to induce better cooperation.
This means less individual authority and a much longer decision-making process than Americans are used to.
In this system the nail that sticks out tends to get hammered down. 

Maybe some Americans who were used to standing out and who expected praise as a result were bewildered when no praise came.
But it is important for Americans to understand that Japanese rarely praise others because they are uncomfortable when others praise them.
Praise is confused with flattery, and flattery is a cause of mistrust. 

Japanese children are raised in a way many Americans would find severe.
After a wonderfully frivolous early childhood, they are exposed to rigid discipline as soon as they enter school.
They are continuously indoctrinated to avoid shame and disgrace.
They know they are expected to do well, and they do not expect to be praised unless their work is truly outstanding.
Perhaps one could say that the Japanese are motivated more by fear of shame than by desire for praise, but there is also a profound desire to excel and to do a better job.
For this reason the Japanese always look for a better way to do something.
This is the motive for criticism -- not to be negative, but to find a better way. 

So there is an understandable truth at the root of each of the American criticisms.
The Japanese do not communicate clearly.
They do not give much individual authority.
They make decisions slowly.
They do not praise.
But there are deep cultural reasons for these behaviors and policies -- not an anti-American bias. 

Mr. Kageyama is president of American Kotobuki Electronics Industries, a subsidiary of Panasonic. 

