.START 

McKinsey & Co. is close to an agreement to acquire Information Consulting Group, an affiliate of Saatchi & Saatchi Co. that handles computer systems integration, industry executives said. 

They said final terms haven't been set, but a letter of intent could be signed as early as next week.
Officials at McKinsey and ICG declined to comment. 

The move would mark an aggressive expansion by McKinsey, which has done well in strategic consulting with clients' senior executives on how they should use computer systems but hasn't had the nuts-and-bolts expertise that ICG sells.
The move would also mark the beginning of the unwinding of Saatchi's consulting operations, which are expected to be sold off piecemeal in coming weeks and months. 

In addition, this would mark a scaling back of some of ICG's ambitions.
Founded by a former Arthur Andersen & Co. partner, with backing by Saatchi & Saatchi, ICG had intended to build big computer systems for customers and take on Andersen and the other giants of the systems-integration business.
But McKinsey, which is talking internally about "taking on ICG's staff," rather than buying the business, would have ICG's 17 partners and 200 professionals focus on strategic issues rather than on implementation. 

"This is an extraordinary and daring move by McKinsey," said Andrew Whittaker, editor of Management Consultant International, a newsletter. 

He said McKinsey was the world's third largest consulting firm last year, with more than $600 million in revenue and 1,800 people on its staff.
But he said McKinsey needed to do something because its position was being eroded by firms with the technical skills it lacked and by some of the big accounting firms, which could offer both strategic advice and technical expertise. 

Saatchi, which backed ICG financially in return for an option to buy it, decided to back away from that option and to sell most or all of its consulting business so it could focus on its advertising operations after a major earnings disappointment this year. 

Saatchi reportedly is close to selling some of the other operations, including Hay Group, which does personnel consulting, and Gartner Group, which does computer consulting and market research.
Some securities analysts, however, have said Saatchi may end up presiding over a fire sale and may not get the #250 million to #350 million ($402.6 million to $563.7 million) it said it expected. 

The decision by Saatchi left ICG stranded.
It had expanded rapidly in its year of existence -- so rapidly that Arthur Andersen sued it, alleging that ICG was raiding its staff.
But building computer systems requires huge amounts of capital to finance the acquisition of the hardware and the building of the software, so ICG had little choice but to find another corporate home. 

