.START 

(During its centennial year, The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history.) 

A GAS FLARE-OFF FROM AN OIL DRILLING SITE near Prudhoe Bay on the Arctic Ocean could be seen by Alaskan bush pilots miles away.
The event, on March 13, 1968, also marked the start of a fight between oil companies and environmentalists that continues to this day. 

The long-sought oil stirke by Atlantic Richfield and Humble Oil & Refining, and a second nearby strike in June, confirmed an estimated field of up to 10 billion barrels -- larger even than a Texas field discovered in 1930.
And, briefly, it sparked a fever like the 1890s Klondike gold rush. 

"There will be real problems getting the crude (oil) out, but this field can reshape the world oil picture," said W.W. Keeler, chairman of Phillips Petroleum, one of many oil companies that bought leases in the area.
Problems there were.
The venturers were shipped by 50-mile-an-hour winds in the subzero winter, bogged in mud and eaten by mosquitoes in the spring and summer, and attacked by nature lovers year round. 

Plans of eight oil companies for and 800-mile pipeline from the North Slope to a new ice-free ocean tanker port terminal at Valdez were delayed for four years in court actions by such foes as the Wilderness Society, the Environmental Defense Fund and Friends of the Earth. 

Congress, voting a bill mainly sponsored by Sen. Henry Jackson, finally cleared the project in November 1973.
It was completed on June 20, 1977, at a cost of $7.7 billion -- six years behind scedule and $6.8 billion costlier.
Its features included 550 pipeline crossings for migrating caribou. 

Alaska's more than one million barrels a day shaved U.S. reliance on Middle East oil.
But the troubles did'nt end.
On March 24, 1989, an offcourse Exxon tanker struck an underwater reef in Prince William Sound and spilled nerly 11 million barrels of crude.
On Sept. 15, Exxon, despite Alaskan protests, halted its cleanup of fouled beaches for the winter. 

