.START 

Ivan Boesky may have settled with the U.S. government for $100 million, but the government is receiving nearly $5 million less. 

The Securities and Exchange Commission Friday agreed to sell the government's 23% holding in Cambrian & General Securities PLC to Leucadia National Corp. for a total of about $38.3 million.
The shares were acquired from Mr. Boesky in 1986 as part of his settlement on insider-trading charges.
At the time, Mr. Boesky also paid $50 million in cash and relinquished his holding in Northview Corp. 

The SEC had valued the total package at $100 million, half of which would be returned to investors through a restitution fund.
Last year, Northview went private, buying back the SEC's holding for $4.3 million.
The government also has received about $2.5 million in dividends from the holdings, making the total the government received from Mr. Boesky $95.1 million. 

Becoming a shareholder put the SEC in an awkward position.
The commission became an interested party in the stock, in addition to its traditional role as regulator.
It appointed two members to Cambrian's five-member board. 

The SEC announced in August 1987 -- five days before the Dow Jones Industrial Average peaked for the year -- that it wouldn't liquidate its holdings.
Investigations into Mr. Boesky's actions were continuing, the agency said, and selling the stock would force the commission to disclose information about those probes.
Moreover, the SEC would be forced to release information that could have a material effect on the shares of the two companies. 

In a statement at the time, SEC Chairman David Ruder said, "The government, not investors, will bear any valuation risks that may exist" by holding the stock.
Such risks became evident two months later, when the stock market crash hammered the shares of Cambrian, a British investment trust.
The SEC, along with other stock-market investors, saw the value of its holdings plummet, despite a gain in the value of Northview shares that day. "The market break had a severe impact on {Cambrian"," said Michael Mann, the SEC's associate director for international affairs. "It had been an aggressive investment vehicle." 

Last year, Leucadia launched a tender offer for Cambrian, but the SEC again refused to sell its holding. 

But on Friday, the agency relented, selling the shares to Leucadia, which already held about three-quarters of the Cambrian shares outstanding.
The Boesky investigation has been concluded, and the agency said that Leucadia, as the major shareholder, fully understands the Cambrian holding. 

