.START 

A new American Bar Association program is grooming some Soviet lawyers to be matchmakers for U.S.-Soviet joint ventures. 

Larisa Afanasyeva, one of the first 17 Soviet professionals to take part in this program, is a recognized legal scholar at the Soviet Academy of Sciences' Institute of State and Law.
But, like most Soviet lawyers, she has little experience in bringing together clients from vastly different cultures and legal systems. 

Mrs. Afanasyeva will try to learn how to do that during a six-month stint with Arnold & Porter, one of the first U.S. law firms to build up a Soviet practice.
She concedes that her Marxist education hasn't prepared her for the complexities of the U.S. legal system. "You have case law determined by courts and judges, and we have codes administered by government agencies," she says. 

Irina Savelyeva, a law professor at Moscow State University who is interning at the Washington law firm of Heron, Burchette, Ruckert & Rockwell, already has been put to work representing J.V. Dialogue, a joint venture set up by a Chicago company and five Soviet state entities to produce Soviet software for domestic sale and possibly for export to the U.S. and Eastern Europe.
Currently she is looking into how her U.S. principals can repatriate profits from the Soviet Union.
The Soviet ruble still can't be freely converted into Western currencies. 

These Soviet interns were among several who were interviewed during their orientation course in Washington recently. 

Steven Raikin, director of the ABA program, promises that it will be a "two-way street," benefiting both the Soviet lawyers and their U.S. hosts. "These young lawyers will learn how the Western system works," he says. "At the same time they can give their American principals a better sense of Soviet law and psychology and help them locate potential Soviet business partners." 

There's no lack of potential business in the Soviet Union.
Since President Mikhail Gorbachev called for massive structural reform, as many as 5,000 state agencies and enterprises have obtained the right to deal directly with foreign principals. "They all want to do business with the U.S.," reports Alexander Podolsky, a Moscow attorney who will intern for six months with a San Francisco firm, Heller, Ehrman, White & McCauliffe. 

A major obstacle to doing business, Soviet lawyers say, is that many people in the Soviet Union proposing joint ventures have failed to provide enough information to interest potential foreign investors. "Two years ago nobody knew how to do this work," concedes Sven Papp, an Estonian lawyer who will spend a total of six months at two New York law firms, Haight, Gardner, Poor & Havens and White & Case. 

But the interns are bullish about the future of their once-downtrodden profession. "Gorbachev is a lawyer himself, so he is sincerely trying to turn our country into a law-based state," says Mrs. Afanasyeva. 

The Soviet legal community is divided into 80,000 "jurisconsults," or legal advisers to state entities; 25,000 advocates, or independent lawyers; and several thousand judges, prosecutors, law professors and scholars.
Some of the advocates are forming cooperatives -- the closest Soviet equivalent of Western law firms -- and are competing with the jurisconsults for the right to tap the growing joint-venture business. 

Konstantin Gavrilov is one of two jurisconsults in this first group of interns.
He has more exposure to joint-venturing than the average advocate because his electronics firm in the Volga region produces microwave devices in cooperation with a West German firm.
Mr. Gavrilov will intern with Boise Cascade Corp., a company interested in international timber ventures. 

The interns say they also are encouraged by the recent appointment of a recognized authority on civil law, Veniamin Yakovlevich, as minister of justice.
The minister is encouraging another change in the profession -- the newly authorized right of lawyers to negotiate fees with clients. 

The Soros Foundation, the program's financial backer, expects next year's class of interns to be nearly double the size of the first one.
The foundation's patron, George Soros, is a New York investor interested in improving economic ties with Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. 

Another intern is Valentin Blueger, an entertainment lawyer who represents rock star Laima Vaikule, the Soviet answer to Madonna.
He has chosen Nashville, Tenn., the country-and-Western music capital, as his place of study and will share his time between Parris, Warfield & Kanaday, a law firm that does entertainment business, and Vanderbilt University Law School.
Baiba Plaude, like Mr. Blueger a native of Riga, Latvia, will be interning at Jenner & Block in Chicago. 

The Latvians agree with their Russian colleagues' support of perestroika and the liberalized legal system -- only more so. "We traditionally have been more Western and business-oriented," explains Mr. Blueger. 

The ABA's Mr. Raikin says the U.S. sponsors have been "absolutely free" to conduct this program without Soviet influence or interference, and the interns have been making their orientation rounds without any visible attention from the Soviet Embassy. 

