.START 

The stock price of Ferranti International Signal PLC is expected to plummet when a three-week trading halt ends tomorrow after Ferranti's disclosure that its alleged fraud-related write-offs will total #185 million ($297.9 million) after tax. 

On Friday, the U.K. defense electronics company said a special audit has "convinced" its board that it was "the victim of a serious fraud" at Lancaster, Pa.-based International Signal & Control, with which it merged last year.
That company's books, it said, included nonexistent weapons contracts that inflated its reported assets.
Correcting Ferranti's own accounts, the company said, will mean a profit restatement. 

In an interview, Ferranti Chairman Sir Derek Alun-Jones said company lawyers are considering action to recover damages.
He said he is continuing efforts to seek a buyer for all or part of Ferranti and that he expects this week to prepare a list of three or four companies with which to intensify partnership talks.
He declined to name them, but London analysts speculated that they include British Aerospace PLC, West Germany's Siemens AG and France's Thomson 

The Ferranti statement "is very bleak reading," said analyst Miles Saltiel of Hoare Govett Ltd.
But forecasting market reaction will be difficult: Though the writeoffs have nearly halved Ferranti's net worth to #196.9 million, speculation about the price and timing of any merger would help buoy the stock price, analysts said. 

Sir Derek declined to identify suspects in the alleged fraud.
But transactions involving the U.S. unit's former chief executive officer, James Guerin, are being investigated by U.S. agencies for compliance with export-license requirements and other laws.
Friday's Ferranti statement said the books of an International Signal unit had reported "sales contracts and subcontracts which didn't in reality exist, {and} which led to the removal of money from the ISC Group in the guise of payments to purported subcontractors." 

Mr. Guerin, in statements issued by his attorney, has denied any wrongdoing.
His attorney couldn't be reached for comment over the weekend. 

