.START 

It's official: Time Warner Inc. is a "junk bond" company. 

Standard & Poor's Corp. on Friday lowered its rating on the senior debt of Time Warner, formerly Time Inc., to double-B, a speculative or non-investment grade rating, from single-A-plus, an investment-grade rating.
Moody's Investors Service Inc. had lowered its rating on Time Warner debt earlier last month.
Debt issues that have below-investment-grade ratings are usually termed junk bonds. 

In dropping Time Warner's credit rating, S&P cited Time's $14 billion acquisition of Warner Communications Inc., which will add about $7.5 billion to Time Warner's debt load. 

"The acquisition will dramatically reduce Time Warner's debt servicing capability, and coverage of preferred dividends is expected to be narrow," S&P said. 

Heather Goodchild, an S&P vice president, said Time Warner is adding "quite a large debt burden, and there are no immediate plans for major cost reductions through consolidations or very sizable asset sales" that would reduce debt. "When the rating is in the double-B category, the (interest) coverage is very thin.
There isn't a lot of room for error," Ms. Goodchild said. 

A Time Warner spokesman declined to comment. 

S&P also lowered its ratings on the debt of other Time Warner affiliates as follows: subordinated debt of Warner Communications and its Lorimar Telepictures unit to single-B-plus from single-A; commercial paper of Time Warner and Warner Communications to single-B from single-A-1; senior debt of American Television & Communications Corp. to double-B from single-A-minus; and American Television's commercial paper to single-B from single-A2. 

S&P said a total of about $1.5 billion in rated debt of the various companies was affected by downgradings. 

S&P also assigned a single-B-plus rating to two issues of Time Warner preferred stock that shareholders of Warner Communications will receive as part of Time Warner's acquisition of Warner Communications.
The two preferred issues have a total value of about $5.35 billion, S&P said. 

Time Warner common shares fell 62.5 cents on Friday to close at $138.875 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Warner shares rose 25 cents to close at $65.125 in Big Board composite trading.
Time currently owns about 59% of Warner and expects to buy the remainder by year's end. 

