.START 

The nominee for chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, concerned about brokerage firms' debt levels, wants the agency to have "explicit authority to monitor" the leverage at those firms. 

Richard Breeden, President Bush's pick for the SEC post, also said he supports halving the 10-day period for filing 13D statements, in which holders of a 5% or larger stake in a company disclose their holdings and their intentions.
He also would institute a standstill period during which the buyer couldn't acquire more shares until the 13D filing has been made.
But he doesn't support a proposal to reduce the 13D filing threshold to 3%. 

Mr. Breeden made the comments in written answers to nearly 200 questions from the Senate Banking Committee, which is expected to recommend his confirmation soon.
The answers give the first real glimpse at Mr. Breeden's prospective agenda as SEC chairman. 

In his answers, Mr. Breeden emerges as a regulator who would seek tougher fines for securities-law violations, would allow banks more leeway to run securities firms and wouldn't seek to give the agency the right to close the securities markets in an emergency. 

But Mr. Breeden shows his concern over brokerage firms -- especially their so-called bridge loans, the short-term financing often provided by investment houses to facilitate leveraged buy-outs. 

Currently the SEC monitors capital levels of broker-dealers.
Most firms, however, set up holding companies to issue bridge loans, because those hefty loans would drop capital below required levels.
The commission is powerless to determine debt levels, although agency staffers say the firms have been willing to share the data when asked. 

Still, SEC staffers want to monitor the information on a steady basis.
Mr. Breeden, a veteran of the savings-and-loan bailout, concurs. "I believe that it is imprudent for the commission to be unable to determine the degree of risk of such circumstances and the threat they represent to investor confidence and the financial system as a whole," he wrote. 

Mr. Breeden worries about the link between a broker-dealer and the affiliated company. "Sudden collapse" of the affiliate, he said, "could cause nearly instantaneous collapse of the broker-dealer's liquidity resources, with potentially enormous impact on the integrity of the market." He said he would consult the industry to ensure that there wouldn't be "unnecessary costs or unnecessarily expanded regulation." 

In another debt matter, Mr. Breeden agreed with senators' contention that U.S. tax law encourages the substitution of debt for stock and may fuel leveraged buy-outs. "Ultimately I believe that the current tax provisions that penalize the use of equity capital by U.S. corporations should be altered," he said. 

On other issues, Mr. Breeden offered these views: 

-- Little relief is likely for corporate bondholders in takeovers.
After the buy-out of RJR Nabisco Inc., bondholders screamed as their issues plummeted.
But Mr. Breeden, showing his free-market bent, offered little solace. "A bondholder's rights are purely a matter of contract," he said. "Thus a bondholder is treated `fairly' if he or she receives what was bargained for." He said he expects the market to respond to the added risk by changing some of the protections. 

-- On the prospect of stiffer SEC penalties, he said, "The potential of serious fines could serve as a powerful deterrent to unlawful activity." Mr. Breeden also would consider rules giving the SEC cease-and-desist authority similar to that of banking regulators. 

-- On support for limiting "poison pills" and "golden parachutes," he said that while the SEC in the past has deferred to state law on both issues, he is "not unsympathetic" to requiring shareholder votes to enact poison pills, which discourage hostile takeovers, and golden parachutes, which provide large payouts to executives in the event of a takeover. 

-- On repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act, Mr. Breeden supports the SEC's current position, which favors eliminating rules separating commercial banking and investment banking. "I do not know of any aspects of the securities business that should be unlawful per se for banks," he wrote.
He said the SEC should be in charge of regulating banks' securities activities and that the Bank Company Holding Act should be modified to allow non-banking financial companies to acquire banks without falling under the jurisdiction of that act. 

-- Mr. Breeden said the regulation system could be strengthened by improving coordination among regulators.
The SEC and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission "should try to develop mutually acceptable proposals to define product and jurisdictional lines," he said, and the lack of clarity in determining jurisdiction "does adversely affect U.S. competitiveness." 

But in response to a question from committee Chairman Donald Riegle (D., Mich.), he said margins for securities and futures needn't be uniform.
Margin changes, if any, should be set by Congress, not the SEC, he said. 

