.START 

Whittle Communications L.P. named Cynthia Samuels, 43 years old, a producer on the NBC television network's "Today" morning news program, executive producer of its "Channel One" news program for schools. 

Ms. Samuels's role will be a pivotal one in developing the tone and substance of the daily 12-minute program, which is due to be launched by Whittle in at least 1,000 schools next March.
The show was viewed in a $5 million, five-week test last spring at six schools.
The test shows were produced by Susan Winston, a former producer of the ABC television network's "Good Morning America," with help from William Rukeyser, editor of Whittle Communications. 

"Channel One" will be closely watched by educational groups, some of which have sharply criticized the two minutes of advertising the show carries.
Christopher Whittle, chairman and founder of the Knoxville, Tenn., company, said the advertising will pay for the installation of satellite dishes, video recorders and TV monitors in the schools. 

In a related development, a group of major cable programmers and cable system operators said it will form Cable Alliance for Education to examine the need for and use of cable programming in U.S. schools.
Whittle Communications is not part of the group. 

The group said its programmers, such as the Discovery Channel, the Family Channel and Cable News Network, will provide schools with commercial-free programming such as news shows and dramatic presentations. 

In addition, Amos B. Hostetter Jr., Alliance chairman, said system operators will "ensure that every senior and junior high school passed by cable will be provided a standard cable {connection} and free basic {cable} service within three years . . . as a working demonstration of the cable industry's commitment to education." 

Mr. Hostetter is chairman and chief executive officer of Continental Cablevision Inc.
The alliance is expected to be based in Washington, according to Mr. Hostetter. 

Whittle is also trying to reach principals and teachers who will be most directly involved with its program on a daily basis.
Mr. Rukeyser said Ms. Samuels will help develop teachers' guides and work closely with Whittle's advisory board on the network. 

Ms. Samuels, a nine-year "Today" veteran, is the author of "It's a Free Country]: A Young Person's Guide to Politics and Elections," published last year by Athenaeum.
She was also a senior producer of NBC News' "Main Street," a monthly news hour for teen-agers, which has since been canceled. 

"I don't see making any changes in the format {of 'Channel One'}; it's brilliant," said Ms. Samuels. "We will, however, make modifications along the way." 

Edward Winter, Whittle division president in charge of "Channel One," which will be produced initially in New York, said the choice of an executive producer is important in light of protests against "Channel One" and similar shows being planned on cable networks. 

"There is a perception that just anyone can do TV news for teen-agers," said Mr. Winter. "We want a great-quality show that is second to none." 

