.START 

Wang Laboratories Inc., struggling to regain momentum after reporting a record loss for the year ended June 30, said it expects revenue to continue to decline in the current fiscal year. 

The computer maker also said that despite cost-cutting efforts, gross margins are likely to continue to worsen "until at least the third quarter" ending March 31.
The Lowell, Mass., company made the disclosures in its annual report, which is being mailed to shareholders this week. 

The company didn't make a profit or loss projection for the full year, but the combination of declining revenue and pressure on margins is bound to make a return to profitability difficult.
Analysts have been forecasting that Wang may eke out a profit in the third or fourth quarter. 

Wang is struggling because of an industry-wide slowdown in sales of midrange computers, exceptionally high personnel costs relative to its sales levels, and heavy debt incurred when forecast sales gains failed to materialize. 

For the year ended June 30, Wang reported a loss of $424.3 million, or $2.59 a share, against net income of $92.7 million, or 56 cents a share, the previous year.
Revenue, restated to reflect discontinued operations, declined 1.6% to $2.87 billion from $2.91 billion. 

In the report, Wang also confirmed widespread speculation that it plans to sell several operations, including its lease financing subsidiaries, its Dallas-based Intecom Inc. unit, which makes telephone switches, and two smaller units that provide market quotations and voice and data communications services. 

Wang said it expects the sales of the financing units to generate more than $400 million and the other sales to provide more than $150 million.
It said proceeds will be used to reduce its borrowings, which include $622.5 million in long-term debt and $337.5 million in short-term debt.
It said it expects the sales to be completed during the current fiscal year.
In its annual report, Wang disclosed that it included in its loss for the year ended in June provisions for $94 million in losses on the disposal of the operations.
The restatement of revenue to reflect discontinued operations indicates they had revenue of about $150 million a year, mostly in the Intecom unit. 

Wang, which has been reducing its work force steadily in recent months, said it will recognize $13.3 million in termination costs for the fiscal first quarter, ended Sept. 30.
It already has said it expects to report a loss for that quarter on a 10% to 13% revenue decline. 

Wang said is considering further restructurings and cuts.
It said such restructurings may require waivers of its credit agreement because they involve writing down assets, and warned that such waivers may be difficult to arrange. 

