.START 

Their faces are lined, their hair silver, their voices often quavering.
They are, for the most part, the old men of Lebanon -- the remnant of a parliament that hasn't been able to hold an election since 1972. 

Their gathering at a Saudi mountain resort is considered by many Lebanese to be the last hope for their country's tattered democracy to prevail over the arguments of guns and shells. "Failure," says Hussein al-Husseini, speaker of the Lebanese parliament, "will lead to hell for us." 

Yet the hope that the meeting will bring much-needed political reform is as frail as many of the aged delegates.
Two days of talks in closed session have produced little of substance, with disagreements over the role of Syrian forces in Lebanon threatening to create an impassable barrier to progress. 

The meeting comes after months of mediation by King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, Morocco's King Hassan and President Chadli Bendjedid of Algeria, who agreed to tackle the Lebanon problem at a summit in Casablanca last May.
Hosting the meeting is an uncharacteristic gesture by the Saudis, who generally conduct their most daring diplomacy well behind the scenes.
Lately though, King Fahd has shown an increasing willingness to bluntly articulate the kingdom's position, talking tough to Iran as well as taking the lead on Lebanon. 

It is ironic that the Lebanese, who once boasted the Arab world's most vibrant democracy, now must seek the sanctuary of Saudi Arabia, an absolute monarchy.
But attempts last year to convene parliament in Beirut were unsuccessful, with intimidation by various factions' militias preventing the formation of a quorum of two-thirds of the members. 

This meeting is being attended by representatives of all of Lebanon's factions.
Deaths have left 26 of Lebanon's 99 parliamentary seats vacant, but 63 of the 73 surviving members arrived in Taif after a ceasefire Sept. 23 allowed Beirut's airport to open.
The arrival of all but 10 members, many of whom are too ill to travel, is cause for optimism, says Saud al-Faisal, the Saudi foreign minister and a key figure in convening the meeting. "The number indicates the general mood and feeling of all the Lebanese that this is the time to move forward," he says. 

Already there have been passionate exhanges over the issue of Syria.
But the debate hasn't followed strictly sectarian lines.
According to one observer, one of the sharpest exhanges followed a Sunni Moslem parliamentarian's bitter attack on the Syrians, saying that even he, as a Lebanese parliamentarian, wasn't free to go to his home town without Syrian say-so.
But others, including some Christians, who generally oppose the Syrian presence, have warned of chaos and violence that could follow a premature Syrian pullout if rival militias were left free to seize the streets. 

The Saudis have offered the parliamentarians a draft document of national accord, which suggests limiting the power of the Christian Maronite presidency, a post that has been vacant since Amin Gemayel's term expired last year.
It also proposes evening the parliamentary balance between Christians and Moslems, and suggests that a new Lebanese government be able to call for Syrian withdrawal after two years.
Michel Aoun, the Christian leader, wants the Syrians out before political reform. 

While the Saudi foreign minister says the kingdom's role is merely to facilitate the delegates' deliberations, the Saudis are well able to fuel any agreement.
While it isn't as flush with cash to bankroll Arab behavior as it was during the height of the oil boom, Saudi Arabia still can wield much leverage both with the Syrians and with the Iraqis, who back Mr. Aoun.
The Syrian economy is tottering, while Iraq ran up big debts to the Persian Gulf states during its long war with Iran. 

"The decision is yours," King Fahd said in a message read to the opening session by the foreign minister. "Lebanon and the Lebanese will be the winners if you come to agreement." 

