.START 

Marshall Field's Philip B. Miller has a flair for the dramatic. 

In his six years at the department store owned by B.A.T Industries PLC, the Field's chairman and chief executive officer has revived its fortunes by wooing famous fashion designers, installing flashy merchandise displays and improving service.
An energetic supporter of the arts, he also marched on stage recently as a spear carrier in a Lyric Opera of Chicago production of Guiseppe Verdi's "Aida." 

Now, the 51-year-old Mr. Miller is vying for an even bigger role: He seeks to lead a management buy-out of Field's. 

The 24-store Field's chain is one of several, including Saks Fifth Avenue, that B.A.T put on the auction block to try to thwart Sir James Goldsmith's $21.14 billion takeover bid. 

For Mr. Miller, engineering a buy-out bid is a daunting challenge.
He must raise about $1 billion to make a credible offer, but lenders are skittish these days because several retail buy-outs financed with high-yield junk bonds have faltered.
Mr. Miller may also find himself in a bidding war, possibly with Dillard Department Stores Co., May Department Stores Co. or others. 

Mr. Miller says he hasn't yet worked out details on financing or even how many managers would be involved beyond his 14-member executive committee.
But he acknowledges the difficulties he is likely to face. 

"What we need," he says, "is a strategic partner who wants to make a major equity investment in the business so we are not reliant on junk bonds and the business isn't bought on a highly leveraged basis. . . . It will not work as a purely financial bid." 

Mr. Miller's strength lies in merchandising.
He is widely credited with turning around Field's and giving it back a reputation for living up to its legendary motto, "Give the Lady What She Wants." 

Today, Field's commands a leading 14% share of the Chicago market.
In addition to Illinois, it operates stores in Wisconsin, Texas and Ohio.
It rang up sales last year of $1.02 billion and operating profit of $83 million. 

"He took a very tired store that was losing market share in Chicago and restored the traditions that made it great," says Judy Niedermaier, president of a Chicago-based designer and manufacturer of retail fixtures and displays. 

By the early 1980s, Field's, which in its heyday helped pioneer such practices as home deliveries, tea and dining service and a liberal exchange policy, had slipped badly.
Its performance was erratic and it became a perennial takeover target, turning eventually to B.A.T in 1982 to help fend off the overtures of Carl Icahn.
The following year, the British company recruited Mr. Miller from Neiman Marcus, where he had been president. 

Once at Field's, Mr. Miller concentrated on restoring Field's posh heritage.
He upgraded the merchandise, bringing to Chicago collections by top designers such as Christian LaCroix and Joseph Abboud, and he didn't spare funds in refurbishing the stores.
When Bloomingdale's moved in across the street from the Water Tower Place store on Chicago's Michigan Avenue, for instance, Mr. Miller was prepared.
He had already spent $10 million renovating the store, with the result that sales at Field's Water Tower store rose by double-digit percentages. 

One misstep was his buying six former Gimbel's stores to expand the Field's presence in Wisconsin.
Less than two years later, Mr. Miller closed two of the Milwaukee stores because sales failed to meet expectations. 

Now, Mr. Miller is in the midst of a $110 million renovation that he vows will transform his mammoth flagship store on Chicago's State Street into the "the finest store in the world." The project, which is one-third completed, is clearly close to his heart.
When the revamped men's floor opened recently, he took a personal tour and ordered a change in the way ties were knotted on mannequins displaying shirts and jackets.
He insisted on a slimmer, more "with-it" four-in-hand knot instead of the more traditional Windsor. 

Mr. Miller, an immaculate dresser who favors double-breasted suits, wasn't always a fashion maven.
The son of a telephone-company manager, he once dreamed of becoming a surgeon.
But he switched his major in college to business, then dropped out of school to support his wife and young child.
He wound up working for Hamburgers, a men's clothing store in Baltimore, eventually moving on to Bloomingdale's, Lord & Taylor and then Nieman Marcus. 

"He pushes himself harder than anyone and demands a lot of himself," says Gary Witkin, an executive vice president who followed Mr. Miller to Field's from Neiman Marcus. "Part of the demand he's made on himself is to develop the highest level of style and taste that's possible." 

