.START 

I predict a lot of highbrow-furrowing at the new PBS series, "Art of the Western World," which begins tonight and continues for eight Mondays (9-10 p.m. EDT and EST).
Connoisseurs will abhor seeing two millenniums of masterpieces crammed into that despicable invention, the cathoderay tube.
And intellectuals will detest hearing Western culture reduced to voice-over narration, even if it is delivered by several respected art historians and the ever-so-Oxonian host, Michael Wood. 

Yet I also predict that most viewers -- including the students who watch this series as part of an introductory college course -- will find it entertaining, edifying, even inspiring.
Certainly it's a cut above the type of college course in which students squint at blurry slides and memorize dates without grasping the broader historical context.
It also beats the sort of elite seminar in which students exalt trendy theories on pedestals of pure ignorance. 

Any educator worth his salt can tell you that it doesn't help Johnny to learn that Caravaggio's "Entombment" was painted in 1604, or that the painter's deep pictorial space currently influences the post-minimalist work of Frank Stella, if Johnny hasn't a clue about Caravaggio.
Better to let Mr. Wood describe Caravaggio's realism as an expression of resurgent Catholic faith poised between the Reformation and the Age of Reason -- while the camera compares the faces in the paintings with those outside in the Roman streets. 

Or better to let Mr. Wood describe the renewed prosperity of early 17th-century Rome to stirring baroque music -- while the camera pans a gushing Bernini fountain, sails into the high baroque halls of the Palazzo Barberini and hovers, like one of the family's heraldic bees, beneath an ornate Bernini ceiling.
To match this experience, Johnny would need a good reading list, a Walkman, a generous travel allowance and a pair of wings. 

Praise for the power and mobility of the camera is, of course, heresy to highbrows who blame the decline of Western art on the invention of that infernal machine.
It's true that photography helped stifle art's representational glory.
But the camera can also celebrate that glory.
For example, Program Four (Oct. 23) includes a stunning sequence in which the narrator reads Michelangelo's sonnet about the sin of worshipping art over God, and the camera circles the sorrowful "Rondanini Pieta." 

What the highbrows don't acknowledge is the fact that much of the magnificent art created before the invention of the camera is actually rather well-served by the camera.
Mr. Wood suggests, in his introduction to the book accompanying the series, that "film is the true successor of the Greek mimetic revolution, and the West is still in the grip of that obsession with the illusion of reality in art." 

Yet this compatibility between lofty art and lowly camera fades as the series proceeds.
Program Seven (Nov. 13) looks at impressionism, arguably the first period in Western art to define itself in opposition to photography.
The essential optical effects of impressionism aren't reproducible by the camera -- which is ironic, considering that impressionism is the most mass-reproduced style of painting in history. 

But optical effects are the least of it.
The film medium has been justly criticized for overwhelming the verbal with the visual -- for having a built-in bias against ideas.
This bias poses no problems as long as the series offers quick, light sketches of history while providing access to objects, buildings and vistas that viewers might otherwise never see.
But problems do arise when the series reaches the modern period with its abstract, difficult images and its reliance on complex ideas. 

Not that film is incapable of conveying any ideas.
In Program Seven, an art historian named Griselda Pollack delivers a feminist diatribe.
Standing next to Gauguin's "Spirit of the Dead Watching," a painting of a Tahitian girl cowering on a bed guarded by a black-robed spirit, Ms. Pollack complains, "The power that men enjoy makes women available for artistic experimentation and colonization." 

To drive home the point, the camera cuts between the girl's frightened face and a particularly menacing photograph of Gauguin.
Thus, the medium of film is better at conveying crude ideas than subtle ones.
Ms. Pollack approaches ideological censorship when she implies that the aesthetic concerns of such artists as Gauguin, Manet and Picasso were really just a cover for their aggressive feelings toward the female sex. 

Speaking of ideological censorship, Program Eight includes an intriguing look at the tripe preferred by that renowned art critic, Adolf Hitler.
Less intriguing is the dutiful way this segment tramps over the well-trampled ground of 20th-century "isms." And for all its groveling before feminism, the show proves surprisingly obtuse about African art (which influenced expressionism and cubism).
Christopher Green calls it "primitive" and "savage" in an echo of century-old prejudices. 

Program Nine, which tackles art since World War II, has an even worse time conveying the ideas behind its subject.
Most disappointing is its failure to display any self-awareness as a medium -- specifically, as a TV program presuming to deal with the plight of art in the age of TV. Ever since Pop Art appeared in the 1960s, the ubiquitousness of mass-media images has been the main preoccupation of artists such as Andy Warhol, whose gimmick (or inspiration, depending on your viewpoint) was to stick those images where people least expected to see them -- in the art museum. 

The joke has lost its punch, now that the scholarly study of art entails pondering such venerable masterpieces as Warhol's Brillo pads.
And as Jesse Helms can tell you, there isn't an image under the sun that people don't expect to see in the art museum.
By now most people have heard Warhol's observation that the effect of his celebrity was to recycle the images he originally took from the mass media back into the mass media.
At the very least, "Art of the Western World" ought to acknowledge that it is doing just that. 

But no such luck.
Instead, we get Rosalind Krauss declaring, in the middle of Times Square, "The media have created a world of images that separates us from nature. . . . Reality has become a TV tube." However diverting it is to hear such tidings from a person inside a TV tube, it's also annoying.
I mean, who is this flickering image to tell me, in such a deadly serious manner, that my sense of reality is screwed up?
It's too bad that "Art of the Western World" loses its light touch just when it needs it the most. 

