.START 

International Business Machines Corp. has begun its third early-retirement program in three years, a move that's likely to trim as many as 1,000 employees from its work force and that underscores its need to lower costs. 

The computer giant didn't announce the offer publicly but told employees of the move last Thursday, just one day after announcing that it will report third-quarter and full-year earnings well below analysts' expectations. 

A spokesman in Armonk, N.Y., said he didn't know whether IBM would have to take a charge against earnings.
But Jay Stevens, a securities analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., said that when he heard the news, he reduced his estimate for 1989 per-share earnings by 15 cents, to $9.50 a share.
That compares with 1988 earnings of $5.81 billion, or $9.80 a share. 

Mr. Stevens added that he considered the move to be positive in the long term. "Anything that takes employees out is a good thing," he said. 

The IBM spokesman confirmed that IBM had made the retirement offer to many of the 23,000 employees at four manufacturing sites.
They are in Manassas, Va., and Owego, N.Y., where IBM makes specialized equipment for defense contracts; in Endicott, N.Y., where it makes the 9370 minicomputer line; and in Lexington, Ky., where it produces typewriters and printers. 

Mr. Stevens said he expects IBM to expand the offer to cover other manufacturing operations in coming months.
IBM, which consolidated some operations last summer, has made clear that it needs to continue to streamline them. 

The company, which has a tradition of no layoffs, is offering employees one week of severance pay for each six months they have worked at the company, with the maximum severance being one year's pay.
That is much less generous than IBM's retirement offer last summer, when 6,500 employees left the company, and three years ago, when some 15,000 employees left.
But the IBM spokesman said the company still expects 600 to 1,000 employees to accept the offer. 

The earlier moves reduced IBM's work force substantially, to 387,000 world-wide and 223,000 in the U.S.
But analysts have argued long and loud that IBM's costs are still too high, especially given that it has started to compete aggressively on price. 

With IBM's announcement last week of soft earnings expectations, it appears that 1989 will mark the fourth disappointing year out of the last five for IBM. IBM blamed the problem partly on the strong dollar, which reduces the value of the earnings of IBM's enormous overseas operations when they are translated into dollars.
And that should be much less of a problem next year when the comparisons become easier. 

But IBM also cited a delay in the introduction of a new line of high-end disk drives, the latest in a series of manufacturing and development glitches this year that analysts have said could be linked to the loss of skilled employees in these early-retirement programs. 

IBM also blamed a shift away from purchases and toward leases, which may lock in a revenue stream for the long term but which generates much less revenue up front.
Analysts have said that IBM has spurred the shift by offering aggressive leasing terms, which they have said is a form of discounting that is hard for IBM to support given its high overhead. 

