.START 

"Drug Kingpin" is probably the worst label you can pin on anyone these days.
But not far behind is "Tax Addict." The Republicans and Democrats are now locked in a struggle over how to raise $5.3 billion of revenue without earning that title.
The Republican plan is to borrow the money from the future and call it revenue today.
That is "Capital Gains Tax Reform." The Democratic plan is to confine the tax increase to a very few rich taxpayers and fudge it over with IRA benefits for the more numerous middle-class. 

It is all silly.
We spent too much to buy these politicians to have them waste their time on $5.3 billion.
That is about 3% of the federal deficit, one half of 1% of the federal revenues, one tenth of 1% of the GNP. 

If we don't need a tax increase we don't need any of that, and if we do need a tax increase we need a lot more than that.
If deficits don't matter, we should give up struggling over $5.3 billion of revenue so that we would have more time to think about the Redskins.
If deficits do matter, they matter a lot more than $5.3 billion will fix. 

In my opinion, we need $50 billion to $100 billion in annual new taxes.
These will surely seem like outlandishly large numbers to most people.
That is because the magnitudes with which we now live are not yet commonly appreciated. 

I will give some examples of relevant magnitudes. 

The deficit-debt problem is large.
In 1985 Congress and the president hailed the new Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act as evidence of the nation's determination to reduce the deficit.
The act laid out a target for reducing the deficit in steps to zero in fiscal 1991.
These steps would have left a deficit of $532 billion for the fiscal years 1986 through 1990.
Even on the administration's estimates for 1989 and 1990, the combined deficit for those years is going to be about $240 billion, or 45%, above the target.
On a more realistic estimate the excess will be more than 50%.
Moreover, the excess of the actual deficit over the original annual target is not diminishing.
That excess was $47 billion in fiscal 1988.
It will be around $90 billion in both fiscal 1989, just ended, and fiscal 1990, just beginning. 

The original Gramm-Rudman-Hollings targets were subsequently revised to postpone the achievement of the zero deficit until 1993.
Hardly anyone thinks that with present policies that target will be reached.
There is now talk of revising the act to postpone the date at which the balanced budget would be achieved until 1999, so that we can enter the next millennium with a clean slate. 

There was some decline in the actual deficit after 1986.
Much of that has been due to the decline of unemployment and the rise of the economy toward its potential level of output.
The deficit has actually risen between 1987 and 1989, despite a rising economy.
There is no sign that if the economy rises only along its potential path, the kind of policy we have been practicing will yield a decline in the deficit.
And if there is a recession, as some day there will be, the deficit will rise. 

In 1974 the federal debt held outside the Social Security trust accounts was 24% of GNP. Now it is about 42% of GNP.
If the ratio of debt to GNP were now as low as it was in 1974 the debt would be about $900 billion less than it now is.
If we were to balance the budget immediately, which no one expects, and nominal GNP rose by 6% a year, the present ratio of debt to GNP would gradually diminish.
In about 10 years it would regain the ratio of 1974.
Even if we continue to run deficits, but the deficits were of constant size, the growth of the economy would eventually reduce the ratio of debt to GNP.
But if the deficit remains constant at the 1989 figure of $160 billion, and if nominal GNP grows by 6% a year, the ratio of debt to GNP will not regain the 1974 level until 2018.
That is a long time off.
And our children will be paying interest on the excess debt for all that time. 

Although $50 billion to $100 billion of additional annual revenue looks like an awfully large amount of money, in an economy with a GNP of more than $5 trillion it is not a daunting figure.
It can be raised without tax changes that are likely to have seriously adverse economic effects.
For example, one might consider the following possible revenue sources, with their annual yields as estimated by the Congressional Budget Office: 

-- Eliminate deductibility of state and local taxes -- $32.1 billion; 

-- Tax employer-paid heath insurance as income -- $25.1 billion; 

-- Raise premiums to cover 50% of the cost of Medicare Supplementary Medical Insurance -- $18.6 billion; 

-- Limit the value of the mortgage interest deduction to 15% of the interest, the amount of the first-bracket tax rate -- $14.5 billion; 

-- Increase the motor fuel tax by 12 cents a gallon -- $11.7 billion; 

-- Tax 60% of Social Security benefits as income -- $11.3 billion; 

-- Tax 30% of capital gains from home sales -- $7.5 billion; 

-- Tax capital gains at death -- $5.8 billion; 

-- Raise the tax on distilled spirits by 20% and raise beer and wine tax to the level of distilled spirits tax -- $4.4 billion; 

-- Double the cigarette tax -- $3 billion. 

That is $134 billion of revenue per year, which leaves some room for making choices.
On the whole, the incentive effects of these tax increases are more likely to be beneficial than harmful.
And they do not involve raising income tax rates, which could probably also go up moderately without significant adverse effects on the supply of labor, capital or entrepreneurship. 

Despite the economics of the case, the political argument against a large tax increase seems to be insurmountable. "The American people do not want a tax increase," we are told, and correctly.
Neither do they want to go to the dentist, or cut down on smoking.
But there is this peculiar and little noticed fact.
In the last seven years of the Reagan administration, the government enacted, with Mr. Reagan's signature, tax legislation that raised the revenue in fiscal 1989 by almost $120 billion, according to estimates in the last Reagan budget.
This consisted of the following legislation, with the amount of the resulting revenue increases: 

-- Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act, 1982 -- $55.7 billion; 

-- Social Security Amendments, 1983 -- $30.9 billion; 

-- Deficit Reduction Act, 1984 -- $27.7 billion; 

-- Budget Reconciliation Act, 1987 -- $13.9 billion; 

-- Miscellaneous other increases -- $18.4 billion; 

-- Tax Reform Act of 1986 -- $24.4 billion; 

-- Miscellaneous other decreases -- $2.6 billion. 

These add up to a total of $119.6 billion. 

Mr. Reagan retained his title as the world's champion enemy of taxes, despite all the tax increases enacted with his concurrence during his regime.
He was able to pass this title on to his heir, George Bush.
The lesson for politicians seems to be that you can get away with raising taxes if you talk as if you didn't do it. 

In summary -- a tax increase of $50 billion to $100 billion is not large relative to the size of our debt and deficit problem, relative to the amount that can easily be raised without adverse economic effects and relative to the amount that Mr. Reagan showed was politically acceptable. 

Mr. Stein is a self-employed taxpayer receiving his Social Security and Medicare benefits. 

