.START 

Chemical Banking Corp. is examining possible problems in its booming interest-rate options unit and may have to cut the stated value of its options position. 

An individual familiar with the situation estimated that the value of its trading book of interest-rate options could drop by as much as $30 million. 

A Chemical spokesman confirmed that an examination is under way but declined to comment on the $30 million estimate.
He said the examination is continuing and that no valuation decisions have been made.
He said there has been no suggestion of wrongdoing or of concealed trades. 

Separately, Chemical also said it is investigating allegations that the head of the interest-rate options unit and a trader had accepted gratuities, including vacation trips and meals at four-star restaurants, from a New York money broker. 

The Chemical spokesman said the examination of the interest-rate options trading book and the investigation into improprieties are unrelated. 

The head of the unit, Steven Edelson, couldn't be reached for comment, and the trader, Robert Press, declined to be interviewed. 

Any change in the value of the options book, the spokesman said, will be reflected in Chemical's third-quarter earnings statement, scheduled for release Oct. 12. 

In recent years, Chemical has become a leading player in interest-rate options, but some competitors have claimed that Chemical was underpricing its options.
In response to such criticism, Chemical, a competitor said, claimed that it had a "secret formula" that enabled it to price more competitively. 

In an interest-rate options contract, a customer typically pays a bank a fee for custom-tailored protection against swings in interest rates above or below certain levels for a specified period.
Banks use complex mathematical models to assess the risk and set the prices for such contracts and actively trade the accounts to manage their portfolio risk. 

"These are a very complex set of products that involve judgments on a number of factors in a very dynamic area," the spokesman said.
The issue in the valuation of the options contract is whether the overall economic assumptions in the formulas accurately reflected market conditions. 

