.START 

Your Sept. 14 page-one article "In Today's Adoptions, the Biological Parents Are Calling the Shots" omitted reference to a disturbing aspect of open adoption: a legal system that (laudably) protects birth parents, but falls far short of protecting adoptive couples. 

My wife and I recently were contacted by a couple wishing to place their infant son with a more stable and mature family.
California law permits adoptive parents to reimburse reasonable expenses associated with childbirth.
As your article aptly noted, the high demand for adoptable children renders payment of such expenses an unwritten sine qua non to any adoption.
Accordingly, when we took the child into our home (and hearts), we parted with a substantial sum to cover the birth parents' expenses in bearing, giving birth to and caring for the child. 

Several weeks later, the birth parents reappeared and reclaimed the child under circumstances that left no doubt that they had accepted money from us after deciding not to proceed with the adoption.
Upon checking with our attorneys and local law-enforcement officials, we were amazed to learn that while this constituted a crime under the California Penal Code, the statute simply is not enforced. 

It is true, as pointed out in your article, that open adoption is, first and last, an exercise in trust for all concerned.
However, most states have rigidly enforced laws designed specifically to protect birth parents (such as a "cooling-off" period after the birth of a child during which no consent to adoption is effective), which create a framework within which this exercise in trust takes place, thereby encouraging carefully considered, aboveboard adoptions.
We suggest that the comparatively meager legal protection afforded adoptive parents (such as a criminal penalty for using children as bait for a fraudulent scheme) be enforced with similar zeal. 

David E. Wood 

Los Angeles 

In quoting me, you omitted my reference to the many cases I illustrated of birth mothers duped by desperate prospective adopters who lured them with promises of openness and then reneged. 

You also neglected to mention that I speak not merely from my own perspective but as an author -- "The Dark Side Of Adoption" -- who spent 10 years researching this subject and as co-founder of Origins, a self-help organization for women who have lost children to adoption.
In these capacities I've dealt with aftermaths of many adoptions that started out open and became a closed door once the adoptive parents got what they wanted. 

Even under the best of circumstances, "biological" parents are not calling the shots.
Open-adoption agreements are unenforceable. "Seller" beware. 

Marsha Riben 

Old Bridge, N.J. 

Your article failed to mention the alliance formed by the adoption business and the anti-choice movement in response to the enormous demand for healthy white babies.
By quoting William Pierce, president of the National Committee for Adoption, without identifying him as a fierce opponent of open records for adult adoptees and an advocate of denying women the choice of whether and when to bear children, you told only part of the story. 

It's clear Mr. Pierce and his followers in the pro-sealed-records, anti-choice, adoption-business triumvirate are not operating in the best interest of the adoptee.
Rather, they are seeking to provide for the one-million-plus infertile and childless couples at the expense of all women. 

We welcome the social phenomenon that recognizes birth mothers' rights and the destigmatization of illegitimacy, and hope this overdue openness will be extended to adult adoptees being denied access to their birth records.
The notion that a baby surrendered for adoption is property to be bound in perpetuity by a contract signed by two other parties at his/her birth is morally indefensible.
If the mental health of the adoptee is one of the reasons for the current tendency toward open adoptions, we must prove our concern and unseal the records for all adoptees, not just those born during this period. 

Carol Berlin 

Alice Melott 

New York 

While total openness may not solve all the problems in adoptions, it would certainly go a long way toward curing two big shortcomings: the limited supply of adoptable infants from single mothers and the secrecy shrouding traditional adoptions. 

I'm an adoptee -- the first time I ever saw anyone of my own flesh and blood was at the birth of my first child, when I was 35.
Shortly afterward, I began an arduous search for my birth parents, and eventually found them.
For those adoptees who want to learn of their origins, open adoptions would be a blessing. 

Michael F. McCarthy 

Toledo, Ohio 

