.START 

Argentine President Carlos Saul Menem said his country has always honored its obligations, but said he wants its foreign bank debt cut at least in half. 

"We don't expect an 80% decrease, but at least a reduction of no less than 50%," Mr. Menem said in an interview. "We expect a plan like the Brady plan, but under better conditions than the one agreed on with Mexico," Mr. Menem remarked. 

The Brady strategy, launched this March, emphasizes debt reduction over continued bank lending.
But it recently has shifted some of its emphasis back to boosting bank loans.
Mexico, the first nation to agree to a package under the strategy, recently negotiated a proposed bank debt agreement that includes options allowing for a 35% cut in either its principal or interest payments. 

Mr. Menem, elected president of Argentina this year, has surprised some of his countrymen and foreign analysts by promising deregulation and tough economic reforms. 

Argentina, plagued by deep economic problems, has about $60 billion of overseas debt, most of it owed to foreign commercial banks.
It hasn't paid interest on its medium-term and long-term bank debt since April last year and is now more than $4 billion in arrears.
This June, U.S. regulators told their banks to write down their Argentine loans by 20%. 

In setting the reduction in Argentina's foreign bank debt, there should be "a balance between the nominal and the real value of the debt," said Mr. Menem, who remarked that his country's foreign bank debt now is trading at about 20% of face value. 

The Brady strategy sets a high premium on economic policies.
It is ironic that Argentina, which generally hasn't followed policies as consistent and strict as those of Mexico, considers itself a candidate for a bigger discount than Mexico.
But Argentina's recent economic difficulties have certainly been greater.
Mr. Menem says his government wants to straighten out domestic economic policy before talking with its bank creditors. "We didn't want to come to the U.S. before we'd drawn up our new economic policy," he said, emphasizing that Argentina during his visit reached an accord with the International Monetary Fund that includes a $1.4 billion loan and some economic targets.
Talks with banks will follow, he said. 

The new Argentine government has done some planning on its foreign debt, though.
It is prepared to exchange local equity investments with holders of foreign bank debt, Mr. Menem said.
But these should be at the "right price" and have to be "just and balanced," he said.
Economic growth also can't be sacrificed for the sake of debt payments, the president said. "We want to pay, but we also want to grow" economically, Mr. Menem said. 

The new government is planning to cut subsidies to local industry, a notorious source of graft and inefficiency.
It also is introducing tax reforms to reduce the number of taxes and to make tax evasion a criminal offense. "Sixty percent of Argentines don't pay tax," Mr. Menem said. "We haven't lived from our work, but from our wealth," the Argentine president said, discussing Argentina's long history of economic decline. 

There are some encouraging signs.
Argentina has recently received some capital inflow from abroad as its citizens repatriate funds.
Mr. Menem said new regulations allowing Argentines to hold U.S. dollar accounts have resulted in "deposits of $1 billion in Argentine banks," and the country's reserves have grown to "over $2 billion" from less than $100 million when he took office in the summer.
But Mr. Menem emphasized that his government will stick to its program: "We need at least three years," he said. 

