.START 

The Food and Drug Administration, responding to a rush among food companies to cash in on concerns about cholesterol, raised questions about the addition of the grain psyllium to products before its safety has been assured. 

The agency, as expected, wrote letters to General Mills Inc. and Kellogg Co., ordering them to show why they should continue to market cereals containing fibrous psyllium husks.
But the FDA stopped short of requesting that the cereals be taken off the market.
Both companies said they would cooperate with the government in the controversy, which comes amid heightened concern about health claims made by food makers. 

General Mills was the first manufacturer to seize on psyllium's reported therapeutic effect on blood cholesterol levels by introducing a cereal called Benefit last April.
The boxes advertise that, as part of a low-fat diet, Benefit can help reduce cholesterol.
Benefit also contains sugar beet fiber, and the FDA told the company to justify using that as well. 

Kellogg has marketed two cereals containing psyllium, Bran Buds and Heartwise, the latter an apparent response to General Mills, its chief rival in the ready-to-eat cereal business. 

The FDA didn't address the issue of psyllium's effect on cholesterol, something that disappointed Procter & Gamble Co., maker of the laxative Metamucil, which contains large amounts of psyllium.
The FDA has refused to let P&G make a link between Metamucil and cholesterol in its ads.
When General Mills did that with Benefit, P&G cried foul, arguing that the General Mills cereal "is a drug pretending to be a food." P&G said that either the FDA should prevent General Mills from making the claims or allow Procter & Gamble to make them as well. 

"We hope the FDA will take further action to eliminate the inconsistency in allowing these cereals to make cholesterol reduction claims while Metamucil cannot," P&G said in Cincinnati yesterday. 

The FDA agreed that the amounts of psyllium in both Benefit and Heartwise may define it as a drug.
The agency noted psyllium is described in government documents as "an evacuant to prevent constipation from impacted stools." It said that sharply increasing the amount of soluble fiber, such as psyllium, in a diet "has the potential for harmful intestinal effects including depletion of beneficial colonic bacteria, constipation, fecal impaction or altered nutrient intake or absorption." 

Accordingly, "we have serious concerns about the introduction of significant amounts of psyllium seed husks in food without an appropriate safety review," the FDA concluded.
Anticipating that other companies want to jump on the psyllium bandwagon, the FDA said it was "concerned about the cumulative exposure of the population to psyllium from all potential food sources, and strongly questions whether the available information justifies this potential exposure." 

Both Kellogg and General Mills were asked to submit data to demonstrate the safety of psyllium as a source of dietary fiber in cereals.
So far, the only FDA approval of psyllium in food has been for minute quantities in frozen desserts.
In Benefit, psyllium makes up about 8% of the weight, and the FDA told General Mills it was unaware of any data that would justify the use of psyllium at that level. 

In Minneapolis, a General Mills spokesman said, "We think we have the data gathered, and we've already begun work to prepare those documents for submission.
We feel very comfortable with responding to their request." 

While the spokesman said the psyllium controversy had damped sales of Benefit, he added that the FDA's expressed concern wouldn't affect the product's continued rollout. "We don't anticipate doing anything differently," he said. 

Benefit is available in about one-third of the states.
Texas has refused to allow its introduction because of misgivings about the product's health claims. 

In Battle Creek, Mich., Kellogg said: "We are confident psyllium is safe.
Psyllium is a natural grain that has been consumed by humans for generations.
We welcome the opportunity to provide the FDA with additional scientific data." 

