.START 

Congress is back, fiddling with the clock and moving a small Missouri hospital across county lines again to justify higher Medicare payments to its operators. 

The hospital, Missouri Baptist of Sullivan never, in fact, moves.
Nor does the line between Crawford and Franklin counties.
But money does -- in this case an estimated $1.2 million in Medicare reimbursements withheld by the Health Care Finance Administration after it claimed it had overpaid the hospital's previous owner, HEI Corp. of Texas. 

Congress moved the hospital in December 1987, when Missouri's Senate delegation attached an amendment directing the Office of Management and Budget to count the town of Sullivan -- and the hospital -- as part of the St. Louis metropolitan area.
This was refined last year to specifically move the hospital from Crawford to nearby Franklin County, thereby qualifying the 81-bed facility for higher reimbursements paid to urban hospitals. 

The effective date was Dec. 22, 1987, to accommodate the current owner, Missouri Baptist Medical Center in St. Louis.
But now the previous owner, HEI, and its allies in the Texas delegation are back with the same idea, only the effective date would be more than four years earlier, Oct. 1, 1983.
The impact would be to resolve the government's dispute with HEI in favor of the Texas corporation, which enlisted the support of Houston-area Republicans to include the date change in a Treasury and Postal Service spending bill for the current fiscal year, which began Sunday. 

Rep. Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, which has jurisdiction over Medicare, has protested the amendment.
But a principal architect is the Ways and Means panel's ranking Republican, Rep. Bill Archer.
Mr. Archer worked through a fellow Texan, Rep. Tom Delay, on the House Treasury and Postal appropriations subcommittee, which has no jurisdiction over Medicare but got involved in 1987 when the initial amendment made reference to OMB, which is funded by the subcommittee. 

A House-Senate conference last week accepted the provision with no discussion of the potential cost to the government.
Senators were initially reluctant but went along in what amounted to a swap in return for the House accepting a Customs Service provision also troublesome to Mr. Rostenkowski. 

HCFA had no comment yesterday on where it stands, but the agency has sometimes seemed overwhelmed itself by the vagaries of the complicated cost-containment and rate schedules for federal health programs.
Whether by error or purpose, the government, in fact, made reimbursements to HEI for some years based on the assumption that the hospital -- about 60 miles from St. Louis -- qualified for the higher urban rate.
In 1987, when reviewing the sale, the agency apparently took notice of the actual location in Crawford County, and this led to the withholding of $1.2 million from HEI and claims that as much as $1.4 million was owed because of overpayments. 

HEI President Robert Hux said yesterday that the publicly held hospital management corporation is the victim of a bureaucratic error, and the higher rate is justified in any case because of Sullivan's proximity to the metropolitan area. "It was something Congress had to resolve," he said. 

