.START 

The outlook for the British stock market is turning foggy. 

Britain's economy is slowing visibly and few people expect it to grow much more than 1% next year.
Inflation, which recently receded to a 7.3% annual rate, might turn higher because of recent and impending wage settlements for increases of around 9%. 

Many analysts expect a generally flat stock market near-term, although a few hardy optimists say the Financial Times 100-stock index may hit 2700 soon (it closed at 2299.4 Friday).
Last week's current-account figures for August showed the third-worst monthly deficit in history.
The numbers reinforced the belief that Britain's already high base lending rate will remain at 14% for several more months, and prompted fears that it could go higher. 

Britain's bulls have been counting on a continuation of the takeover boom here.
But George Hodgson, chief economist at Citicorp Scrimgeour Vickers, suspects the takeover explosion is coming to an end, with "fairly serious implications for the equity market." 

So much bank lending has gone to finance takeovers, he says, that companies now are using a record amount of internally generated money to finance capital expansion.
Soon corporate Britain will face a tough choice, he says: Curb takeovers, or pay for them with newly issued equities, which would dilute shareholdings. 

Despite a rocky week last week, the London stock market as measured by the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100 Share Index isn't too far from its historic high of 2443, set two years ago.
Although almost no one is predicting a repeat of the 1987 crash, many analysts are doing the British equivalent of circling the wagons.
They are looking for short-term defensive investments. 

Many say the best stocks now are the food retailers and manufacturers, brewers, life insurers, banks, pharmaceutical makers and international conglomerates whose industrial eggs aren't all in the U.K. basket.
Popping up on the "sell" lists these days are building and real-estate concerns (because of high interst rates), retailers (especially upscale ones), chemical companies and full-service insurers. 

Shares of many British companies are traded in U.S. markets through American depositary receipts.
Others can be bought or sold through U.S. brokers who place orders directly in London. 

Richard Kersley, U.K. equity strategist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, ticks off a "defensive" triad: Companies with hefty overseas operations, "particularly in dollars," cash-rich concerns able to sustain dividends and companies with "low volatility of earnings." 

Among food retailers, he prefers Tesco and J. Sainsbury, while among food makers, he says, United Biscuits and Unilever "are reasonable defensive plays, with the added spice" that they could be takeover targets.
Carolyn Moses, Shearson Lehman Hutton's investment strategist, calls food manufacturing "a solid area" now and finds Nestle well-placed in that group. 

Among brewers, Ms. Moses favors Guinness, while Mark Brown, U.K. equity strategist at UBS Phillips & Drew, has a longer list: Allied-Lyons, Greenall Whitley, Scottish & Newcastle Breweries and Whitbread.
Barclays' Mr. Kersley picks Legal & General Group as a good bet among life insurers, an industry he calls "a safe haven during anything that looks like a recession." Life insurers' average dividend yields of about 5 1/2% are above the overall market's 4% average, he adds. 

Banks, with an average 6% yield and a demonstrated willingness to bite the bullet on doubtful Third World loans, are on some "buy" lists.
Of Britain's Big Four, which include Barclays, Lloyds Bank and National Westminster Bank, only Midland Bank is giving analysts real pause. "There's a lot of fluff in Midland's price," asserts Ruth Hennefeld, director of European research at Merrill Lynch International.
She says that the price reflects repeated rumors of a takeover by Hongkong & Shanghai Bank and that on fundamentals, Midland is overpriced. 

Rounding out defensive lists at many firms are pharmaceutical makers Wellcome and Glaxo Holdings and conglomerates Hanson PLC, BTR and BET. 

What stocks should be avoided?
Mr. Kersley says that Taylor Woodrow and RMC Group are among the vulnerable builders. "Stay as far away as possible from the stores {retailing} sector," warns Shearson's Ms. Moses.
The group, already slumping, is in for "a much weaker" second half because high interest rates will further crimp credit purchases, she explains.
Storehouse, with its Habitat furniture chain, "is at the bottom of the barrel" and the Ratners Group jewelry chain also is worth unloading, Ms. Moses says. 

According to analyst Alasdair Nisbet of Phillips & Drew, Imperial Chemical Industries is grappling with rising labor costs and sagging prices for some bulk chemicals. "These point to a performance that can't be anything other than disappointing," Mr. Nisbet says. 

Insurers that rely on property-related premiums also are expected to come under pressure.
Mr. Kersley of Barclays says he's "particularly concerned about" Commercial Union Assurance, Guardian Royal Exchange and Royal Insurance.
But he is "quite keen on" Sun Alliance & London Insurance because its "very strong balance sheet" and cash flow augur a continued healthy dividend policy. 

