.START 

Like the proverbial man-bites-dog story, it is newsworthy when a top-ranking Soviet economist, adviser to Mikhail Gorbachev and influential contributor to "perestroika", extols Milton Friedman as "a great thinker" whose "concrete theories . . . can be of great use to us," and gives "quite high marks" to the privatization and taxation policies of Margaret Thatcher. 

These are among the lighter vignettes in Abel Aganbegyan's "Inside Perestroika: The Future of the Soviet Economy," (Bessie/Harper & Row, 241 pages, $19.95) -- a curious but revealing blend of economic exposition, personal memoir and political tract.
The book is a livelier, more candid and more discursive treatment of the subject than the author's earlier "The Economic Challenge of Perestroika" (1988). 

Mr. Aganbegyan's economic exposition leaves no doubt about the depths of the Soviet economic predicament at the start of the 1980s, and the compelling need for restructuring. "It is virtually impossible to live and work under such an inflexible administrative system," Mr. Aganbegyan writes, describing his country's cumbersome, centrally planned system for providing equipment, fuel, raw materials and spare parts.
Add to that leaders who, for the most part, "were complete fools with a worm's eye view of the world and a poor understanding of their jobs." 

While acknowledging a multiplicity of "mistakes" in perestroika's first four years, Mr. Aganbegyan calls for "radical economic reform," for changing from "diktat economies to economic management" that relies more on market forces.
He recognizes that monetary reform and "really radical price reform" are at the core of such restructuring.
Without monetary reform, the gap between the supply of goods, on the one hand, and money supply growth and the stock of accumulated monetary balances, on the other hand, would threaten rampant price inflation. 

Mr. Aganbegyan is much better on diagnosis than prescription.
Despite frequent references to market-based remedies, he gravitates toward a role for the state that remains so prominent as to be inconsistent with the market forces that effective restructuring requires.
His version of "radical price reform" calls for 60%-70% of all prices to remain "centrally fixed," with the aim of further reductions in this proportion five years after the planned 1990 price reform -- the date of which already has been further delayed since his book went to press.
While he acknowledges the desirability of a convertible ruble, Mr. Aganbegyan nevertheless advocates a "set exchange rate fixed by the state." 

To "facilitate the acquisition of consumer goods abroad for . . . the population," Mr. Aganbegyan proposes selling foreign currency to the public without indicating how the foreign currency is to be earned in the first place.
And he totally ignores the role, priority and size of the military, and the extent to which perestroika implies that these be drastically reduced. 

Why, in view of past debacles such as attempted agricultural and industrial reforms of the mid 1960s, should perestroika succeed?
He offers three reasons: (1) perestroika is "an all-around, holistic process, whereas past reforms were partial and limited"; (2) perestroika's reform of economic management will be more "radical" and market-based, whereas prior reforms retained the administrative apparatus in most of the economy; and (3) this time around, perestroika is to be accompanied by "democratization of our society," which Mr. Aganbegyan hopes and expects to be a guarantor of irreversibility. 

Those who, like this reviewer, are less optimistic, base their judgment partly on the prior history of failed reforms, and largely on the overly complex, bureaucraticized and regulated procedures governing such areas as price reform, monetary reform, the setting up of cooperatives, property leasing and enterprise accounting.
What Mr. Aganbegyan characterizes as "radical reform" sounds much too regulated and centrally managed to promise effective market-based results. 

Maybe he needs to thrash these matters out more in meetings at the Soviet Academy of Sciences, where he currently is head of the Economic Section.
His account of the bitter struggles there between reformist economists and conservative bureaucrats are among the more entertaining pages in "Inside Perestroika." 

While most of the book clearly reflects Mr. Aganbegyan's professed beliefs in market forces, his ideological commitments nonetheless bubble up from time to time.
For example, notwithstanding his praise for Milton Friedman, when it came to recommending Western economists to become foreign associate members of the Soviet Academy, Mr. Aganbegyan proposed J.K. Galbraith and Wassily Leontief, explaining that Soviet interest in them is keen because their works "show up the . . . darker side" of the free market. 

Since Abel Aganbegyan is one of the market's main proponents in the Soviet Union, his limited grasp of how markets really work does not provide much reassurance that the restrictive type of market-based reform described in "Inside Perestroika" will succeed. 

Mr. Wolf directs RAND Corp. research in international economics and is dean of the RAND Graduate School. 

