.START 

Let's stop taxing capital gains on financial assets.
Let's stop allowing deductions for capital losses from the sale of financial assets.
And let's eliminate the double taxation of dividends. 

Sounds radical.
It is.
But it's time to structure at least this part of the federal tax system to enhance equity and economic performance.
Get rid of the hypocrisy of calling for the rich to pay more, while simultaneously perpetuating tax breaks for this or that special interest and inventing gimmicks for the very rich or very clever to take advantage of. 

The proposal sounds like a big break for stockholders.
That depends on your point of view.
The fruits of being an owner of a U.S. corporation are now taxed three ways by the federal government. 

First, the income of the corporation is taxed.
Then that part of the corporation's income that is paid to shareholders as dividends is taxed a second time when those shareholders pay their income taxes.
Then fruits are taxed a third time indirectly when ownership is transferred.
That's the capital gains tax, which purports to be a tax on income but isn't. 

What it is, first of all, is a tax on inflationary gains in wealth.
The current congressional debate at least includes proposals to address the inflation problem.
But taxing non-inflationary gains in wealth is just as unfair. 

Income arises from the production and sale of a good or service.
When ownership is transferred, the only service performed is brokering.
The brokerage firm's commission is the only income. 

The person selling the shares hasn't produced anything.
The seller is only relinquishing his or her claim on the future dividends of the corporation and obtaining money.
The buyer is doing the opposite.
Neither is generating (or realizing) income.
And after the transaction, only the seller, by using the proceeds of the sale, can requisition goods and services for his use.
The buyer has transferred to the seller the ability to buy goods and services. 

So what we have with the present tax on capital gains is a discriminatory tax on wealth.
It is a tax on wealth only when it is transferred, and then only on any increase in the nominal monetary value of an asset during the time the seller held the asset. 

Relating income to the flow of goods and services, as I do, is consistent with the definition of income in the GNP accounts.
When a gain in the value of a financial asset reflects an increase in the income stream associated with the asset, the tax system captures part of that increased regular income. 

Of course, not all gains reflect increases in associated income.
A capital gain can reflect only the revaluing of an unchanged stream of income -- a change in the discount rate applied to the income.
In this case, there is no income involved.
And any "gain" to the seller from buying the asset, say, in January and selling it in June may be said to offset the "loss" to the buyer of having waited until June to purchase the asset. 

It follows that taxing income directly and only once means that shareholders, not corporations, pay taxes on net income.
A corollary is to stop taxing capital gains and stop allowing deductions for capital losses that arise from transfers of financial assets.
Only the flow of a corporation's income and loss will show up on individual tax returns, along with wages, salaries, rents, and so forth. 

Under this system, as a corporation loses the money it received from selling stock or the earnings it reinvested, each shareholder reports his proportionate share of the loss on his tax return.
When the corporation earns money, each shareholder reports his proportionate share of the earnings on his tax return (or, alternatively, gets a credit for the income tax the corporation paid). 

Gains and losses from the trading of financial assets would be, respectively, neither taxable nor deductible. 

If the government can't resist taxing the fruits of ownership more than once, it could still eliminate the double taxation of dividends, as recommended above, and consider replacing the present tax on realized capital gains with a tax on all financial wealth whose value can be readily ascertained or reasonably imputed.
That would at least be more fair and allow for a lower and less disruptive rate. 

Mr. Ruckdeschel is a retired Federal Reserve Board economist in Bethesda, Md. 

