.START 

Control Data Corp. Chairman Robert M. Price, acknowledging criticism of his leadership of the struggling company, plans to relinquish the position of chief executive officer soon. 

But the computer company's announcement that it would undertake a widespread search for a successor raised eyebrows, as its president and chief operating officer, Lawrence Perlman, is widely viewed as the obvious choice. "Inefficient cultures die hard," said one Wall Street securities analyst. 

A committee of the board intends to recommend a new chief executive within three months, the company said.
Asked why the board simply didn't name Mr. Perlman as the CEO-designate, a company spokesman said that Mr. Price considers "Larry clearly as the leading candidate" but that external candidates will be considered as a matter of due diligence.
The spokesman said Mr. Price believed the search process would "reinforce" Mr. Perlman's position. 

Mr. Perlman called the search "a reasonable, prudent thing to do" and said he didn't consider it a slight to his qualifications. 

"Larry Perlman is the obvious choice to lead the company into a more focused, more profitable future," said Frederick Wise, a computer-industry analyst at Bear, Stearns & Co. "Anything that would accelerate that process would be a positive." 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday, Control Data closed at $18.375, down 12.5 cents. 

Separately, Control Data today is expected to announce completion of the sale of its disk-drive business, Imprimis, to Seagate Technology Inc. for $450 million in cash and securities.
Under terms of the agreement, Seagate is to pay $250 million in cash, a $50 million note and about $150 million in newly issued shares for Imprimis, which last year had more than $1 billion in revenue.
Trained as a lawyer, Mr. Perlman enhanced his reputation as the company's "Mr.
Fixit" by reviving Imprimis after it had heavy losses in the mid-1980s.
The sale gives Control Data much-needed cash.
It also leaves the company with only one major hardware business -- the manufacture of large and mid-size computers -- along with a variety of computer services operations. 

In disclosing his intention to step aside, Mr. Price said he was "well aware of the criticism being leveled at the management of the company," adding that "the chief executive is rightfully the focal point of that criticism.
By taking this action, both the board and myself can put this matter in an objective framework and remove it from speculation and rumor." 

During Mr. Price's three years of leadership, Control Data had losses of hundreds of millions of dollars as it shed businesses while seeking profitable niches in the tumultuous computer industry.
Two months ago, the 59-year-old Mr. Price swept aside rumors that he planned to retire soon and pass the reins to Mr. Perlman, who is 51. "They're incorrect," he said at the time. 

Although he will give up the CEO's job, Mr. Price said he intends to remain chairman of the company, which he joined as a mathematician 28 years ago.
He was named to his current posts in 1986 as the hand-picked successor to founder William C. Norris, who relinquished power after Control Data went into a tailspin. 

Last December, the board transferred the title of president from Mr. Price to Mr. Perlman.
In August, Mr. Perlman took on the role of chief financial officer as well. 

At their meeting Friday, Control Data directors also elected Charles Marshall, retired vice chairman of American Telephone & Telegraph Co., to the board.
Mr. Marshall succeeds Ralph Hofstad, former chief executive officer of Land O'Lakes Inc., a dairy concern. 

