.START 

Savin Corp. said the top officers of its two biggest shareholders were elected the company's chairman and chief executive officer, while David G. Sadler resigned those posts. 

Charles A. Muench, the 52-year-old president and chief operating officer of Colorocs Corp., which holds 30% voting control of Savin securities, was elected chairman.
E.P. van den Boogaard, 40, chief executive of HCS Technology N.V., which holds 25%, was elected chief executive.
HCS, which holds 25% of Savin and has indicated that it might buy as much as 55%, holds about 30% of Colorocs, a Norcross, Ga., maker of color copiers. 

Mr. Sadler, 50, is credited with a major restructuring that decreased Savin's debt to $45 million from $223 million and increased equity to $66 million from a negative $94 million, the company said. 

The change in management reflects "the emergence of Savin from a period of financial uncertainty to one of growth and expansion," Savin said. 

Mr. Sadler, who headed the distributor of copiers and facsimile machines since December 1986, said he will "walk out with $3 million in cash" as severance pay and plans to take a sabbatical.
Mr. Sadler said he has been in talks with investment bankers about consulting or working as an interim chief executive. 

After five years of losses, Savin was profitable in 1987 and 1988, but sales have been weaker this year, Mr. Sadler said.
He added, "I think (Savin will) have a fairly strong fourth quarter." 

Savin closed at 37.5 cents, unchanged, on the New York Stock Exchange Friday. 

Mr. van den Boogaard and J.J.G.M. Sanders, the 33-year-old chief financial officer of HCS, were elected to Savin's 12-member board.
David M. Deans and J. Leland Strange, who represent Colorocs, resigned from the Savin board. 

Netherlands-based HCS has interests in software and hardware development, automation projects and visual communications.
Savin and HCS recently launched a joint effort to sell color copiers in Europe. 

No other management changes are expected, Savin said. 

