.START 

Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner forced Northwest Airlines to reduce a stake held by KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, but he didn't indicate how that will affect a bid for United Airlines by a group that includes another foreign carrier, British Airways PLC. 

Mr. Skinner insisted that he isn't setting a new policy for foreign airlines' stakes in U.S. carriers, only enforcing the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, which requires that U.S. airlines be 75%-owned and controlled by U.S. citizens. 

Even though KLM's $400 million stake in Northwest parent NWA Inc. represented only 5% of NWA's voting stock, Mr. Skinner said the size of the investment could enable KLM to exercise control.
He ordered Northwest to slash the investment to $176 million, or 25% of the $705 million in equity capital raised for the takeover. 

A strict extension of that logic could require changes in the British Airways role in the bid for United parent UAL Corp. British Air would be the largest single UAL holder, with 15%, and is contributing 78% of the $965 million in cash equity.
But any changes in the offer could upset the bid's fragile balance between labor and management. 

United management, led by Chairman Stephen Wolf, is likely to argue that the $240 million of annual cost concessions in the bid represents roughly $1.5 billion in "sweat equity" being contributed by UAL employees.
Pilots who are to own 75%, he could argue, would be the largest holder, and management, with 10%, could exercise control through its right to nominate eight outside directors. 

Mr. Skinner sought to leave himself room to come down either way on the UAL question. "Every company is individual; every one of these transactions will be analyzed on an individual basis," he said.
He has asked for details of the UAL bid by Oct. 10 -- two or three weeks before the purchase is due to be completed.
Both politics and economics are likely to play a role in Mr. Skinner's decision.
The bidders have on their side the popular idea of employee ownership.
On Friday, Mr. Wolf said he is "confident that the proposal for employee ownership of United Airlines" will win approval. 

Yet the prospective employee owners of United are white-collar professional workers, some making more than $150,000 a year.
United's larger blue-collar machinist union has attacked the plan and threatened to lobby against it.
The machinists are scheduled to meet with UAL management tomorrow. 

Mr. Skinner said he plans to consult with Bush administration officials before outlining his policy on airline buy-outs and foreign ownership at congressional hearings this week. 

In his NWA decision, Mr. Skinner noted that Northwest's new owners, led by Los Angeles investor Alfred Checchi, "appear to be exceptionally well qualified to expand Northwest's operations and improve its quality of service." 

But he also curbed the role of KLM's director on the 12-member NWA board.
The KLM director can't participate in matters where the two airlines compete or in international route negotiations affecting the Netherlands or KLM. 

The action provoked a formal objection from KLM.
But the airline stopped short of saying it would challenge the decision legally, saying it would pursue talks with the Transportation Department instead. 

The decision gives Mr. Checchi as long as one year to repurchase KLM's $225 million in preferred stock, which pays a dividend of 10% the first year, 12% the second and 14% the third.
To replace the funds, he probably would have to offer a higher dividend or equity, which would reduce his own stake of more than 50%. 

Asra Q. Nomani in Chicago contributed to this article. 

