.START 

The Federal Communications Commission voted to allocate a broadcast frequency nationwide for systems used to track down stolen vehicles. 

Allocation of the frequency 173.075 MHz follows a 1986 decision to allow Lo-Jack Corp. to test its tracking system in Massachusetts.
The company also was given permission recently to test its system in Florida.
The FCC said the spectrum allocation doesn't apply solely to Lo-Jack or any other company or technology but rather is being set aside specifically for systems to track stolen cars. 

The Lo-Jack system uses transmitting equipment at law-enforcement facilities, tracking devices in patrol cars, transmitters installed in customers' vehicles and a data base with vehicle identification numbers and special identification codes for each customer's tracking device. 

The system is designed to help police find a stolen vehicle shortly after the theft is reported.
According to the FCC, 95% of the stolen vehicles equipped with the Lo-Jack system were found.
Nearly 350 police cars in Massachusetts are equipped with the $1,750 tracking devices, and about 20,000 consumers have bought and installed transmitters for about $500 each.
Lo-Jack is based in Braintree, Mass. 

Some broadcasters complained that the new systems could create interference with television channel 7.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation also objected to allocating the frequency, which it has been using for concealed body microphones in undercover investigations. 

To avoid interference with channel 7, the agency generally is requiring applicants to install base stations at least 105 miles from a channel 7 transmitter.
As for conflicts with the FBI, Fred Thomas of the FCC's Office of Engineering and Technology said the National Telecommunications and Information Administration is working with the FBI to solve potential problems. 

Lo-Jack isn't the only new system being used to discourage auto theft.
A Pacific Telesis Group unit and North American Teletrac's International Teletrac Systems unit recently announced a tracking location system that combines paging, cellular radio and computer mapping technologies. 

Separately, the FCC voted to hold a hearing on the decline of AM radio, a concern of the commission's new chairman, Alfred C. Sikes, a former Missouri broadcaster. 

The commission set Nov. 16 to hear testimony from the industry and the public on current AM service and what steps the commission could take to improve it.
Mr. Sikes emphasized the session is aimed primarily at determining whether the industry, the public and the commission are in general agreement on the major problems and possible solutions. 

