.START 

An auction affecting $77 million of Tucson Electric Power Co. floating-rate preferred stock short-circuited Friday when too few bids emerged for the offered securities. 

Market sources said the limit on the securities' dividend yield and a recent drop in Tucson Electric's credit rating kept buyers away.
This lack of interest is only the latest bad news for the Arizona utility, which has slashed its common-stock dividend, warned of prospective losses and seen its chairman depart under cloudy circumstances that included the sale of much of his stock. 

Tucson Electric's also is the latest of several such stymied auctions for floating-rate preferred stock.
For example, attempted auctions of AMR Corp. preferred stock flopped at least three times in recent months, as investors shunned the securities because of takeover jitters. 

Auctions are held periodically, usually every 49 days, for floating-rate preferred stock outstanding, in a formal procedure that sets the dividend rate for the next period.
Though the market for such securities has been built largely on investment bankers' assurances of liquidity, failed auctions such as Tucson Electric's leave would-be sellers holding their stock until the next successful sale, thus calling into question one of the main features of the securities. 

Goldman, Sachs & Co., the underwriter of the $77 million issue of Tucson Electric's floating-rate preferred in 1986, declined to comment on last week's auction for the stock.
People familiar with the sale asserted that a provision limiting the securities' dividend yield to 130% of prevailing rates for double-A-rated commercial paper made their yield uncompetitive. 

Because potential new buyers shunned the stock at the maximum allowable yield, would-be sellers and other holders of Tucson Electric preferred must hold the securities at least until the next successful auction.
For the latest 49-day period, they will receive the 11.65% maximum yield.
The rate for the previous period was 10.99%. 

