.START 

Italy's national debt problems have often been described as pathological.
Perhaps that's why Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti has selected a psychiatrist to help resolve them. 

When the Andreotti government unveils its 1990 budget plans next week, they will bear the stamp of Paolo Cirino Pomicino, a 50-year-old Christian Democrat and Andreotti protege who has been the minister for budget and planning since July. "He's Andreotti's man in setting economic policy," says a leading banker. "And Andreotti is trying to restore that job to a power that it hasn't had for years." 

"The state has been in hiding when it comes to budget policy," declares the Naples-born Mr. Cirino Pomicino in an interview.
In recent years, he says, Italy "has concentrated only on monetary policy -- "by keeping interest rates high to finance its huge deficit. 

Mr. Cirino Pomicino hopes to change that by "picking out a few areas that are essential to the national interest and concentrating on making them work," he says.
He hopes to slash 40 trillion lire ($28.39 billion) from the government's budget deficit for 1990, limiting its borrowing requirement to 136 trillion lire, instead of the estimated 176 trillion lire it would reach without any government action. 

In a country where the fall budget process is referred to literally as an "economic maneuver," Mr. Cirino Pomicino has some unusual moves planned.
Sitting in a corner of his cavernous office adorned with an oil painting of Count Camillo Cavour, Mr. Cirino Pomicino says he'd like to set up a special state-owned fund to manage all the palazzi, lands, beaches and other bits of real estate owned by the Italian state. "The fund could manage things to make money; it could even sell some assets when appropriate," he says. 

Mr. Cirino Pomicino even professes not to oppose -- in principle -- the partial privatization of some of Italy's banks, which Treasury Minister Guido Carli openly proposed in a recent speech.
The idea is controversial in Italy because many fear taking Italy's banks private -- around 80% of them are state-controlled -- would mean turning them over to industrialists like Carlo De Benedetti or Fiat's Agnelli family. 

Political parties, which parcel out the top jobs at banks, are also loath to lose the power associated with state control of banks.
Mr. Cirino Pomicino thinks it would be better to wait "until our stock of debt is reduced and families are looking for investments as an alternative to Treasury paper." 

In the shorter term, he plans to target state aid to companies, highway building and defense for spending cuts.
Meanwhile, the prices of gasoline, water and train tickets -- all of which he says cost too little in Italy -- are scheduled for big increases. 

"Why should we be subsidizing research by big corporations?" he asks. "They don't need the government's money." Mr. Cirino Pomicino says he expects to save one trillion lire on subsidies to industry next year. 

A former head of the parliamentary budget commission, Mr. Cirino Pomicino has been one of the rising stars of the Christian Democratic party.
As minister of labor in the government of Ciriaco De Mita, he introduced important changes like part-time work and job mobility for publicsector employees. 

The budget post, however, is sure to be an even bigger challenge, because spending cuts involve attacking long entrenched interests -- something few politicians seem willing to do, especially in Italy.
By most counts, Prime Minister Andreotti has given the budget chief a lot of latitude in drawing up the budget plan -- unlike Mr. De Mita, whose own staff did much of the budget planning. 

"That way, if there are any disputes, Mr. Andreotti won't be seen as the cause of them and won't risk being unpopular," says the banker. "In fact, he'll be able to step in as the mediator." 

Whether Mr. Andreotti will be called in to mediate remains to be seen.
Confindustria, Italy's industry confederation, has already been loudly denouncing proposals that would cut back tax deductions for social costs.
And in a separate interview, Mr. Cirino Pomicino's colleague, Treasury Minister Guido Carli, is far more cautious about the budget process, declining to cite figures for spending cuts.
He does say, however, that in contrast to many past budgets, spending reductions in the next plan "will be concentrated in the first year." 

Mr. Carli, like Mr. Cirino Pomicino, is aware that many economists consider 1990 an important year for Italy.
Not only will a large portion of the country's short-term Treasury bills come due, but Italians after June 30 will for the first time be allowed to open foreign bank accounts.
Unless strong action is taken on the deficit, many economists have warned, Italy could face capital flight. 

But Mr. Carli thinks the significance has been exaggerated. "The change only applies to physical persons," he says, adding that "companies can already move their capital out of the country." 

Nonetheless, both he and Mr. Cirino Pomicino agree that strongly reducing the budget deficit and getting spending under control are critical problems for Italy. 

