.START 

In an unprecedented move, two of the Big Three auto makers are slapping rebates on many 1990 models even before they're introduced.
The goal: to keep sales from plunging in the last few months of this year. 

On Friday, five of General Motors Corp. 's six divisions -- all except Cadillac -- unveiled discounts on 1990 model car and trucks that won't go on sale officially until Thursday.
GM's move followed Chrysler Corp. 's Sept. 15 decision to offer incentives on many of its 1990-model trucks, which also haven't been launched officially.
So far, Ford Motor Co. has stayed on the sidelines, but analysts expect the No. 2 auto maker to join the fray soon. 

"This is clearly the earliest any manufacturers have turned to incentives," said Christopher Cedergren, an industry analyst with J.D. Power & Associates Inc., an Agura Hills, Calif., consulting firm. "It's a response to concerns that the 1990 models were going to stack up on dealer lots." Since 1985, Detroit has been selling cars like department stores sell shirts -- by putting them on sale at regular intervals.
But the auto makers have bravely waded into each new model year without incentives, hoping that consumers would like the new vehicles so much that discounts wouldn't be necessary.
Inevitably, though, dealers started to drown in unsold inventories, and new discounts followed. 

But this year, the domestic auto makers are dropping any pretense that consumers will start snapping up the new models without inducements. "We're rebate addicts, plain and simple," said Dick Smith, a Charleston, W.Va., Oldsmobile dealer. "Sooner or later we have to wean ourselves of the drug we're on because we're just reaching up and robbing sales we would have had in the future." 

Big discounts and consumer fears about whopping price hikes on the 1990 models helped spark a surge in auto sales in August.
But sales flattened out this month and dealers, fearing worse times ahead, became cautious about ordering new cars. "We want to keep sales momentum," said a spokesman for GM's GMC Truck division, in explaining the new discounts. 

It's far from clear, though, whether Detroit's gambit will succeed.
Sticker prices on many 1990 vehicles are rising 6% to 8%, the biggest increases in years, because auto makers want to cover the huge cost of their discounts. "One of the biggest reasons auto executives said they were raising prices this summer was to finance incentives," says George Hoffer, an economics professor who studies auto pricing at Virginia Commonwealth University. "It's a much different tack than foreign manufacturers are taking." 

Indeed, several foreign auto makers have lowered or only slightly increased sticker prices on their 1990 models.
Nissan Motor Corp., for example, cut the base price of its 1990 compact Stanza sedans by 6%, while Honda Motor Co. is freezing 1990 prices on several Acura luxury models.
The companies hope that the relatively modest price hikes will allow them to eliminate, or at least minimize, buyer incentives. 

What's more, the new incentives have arrived early, but they aren't as generous as the discounts on the 1989 models.
GM has raised the interest rates on its cut-rate auto loans; they now range from 6.9% on 24-month loans to 10.9% on 60-month loans, compared with terms on 1989 models as low as 2.9%. 

The rebates, likewise, aren't as big on the 1990 models as they were on the 1989s.
Oldsmobile, for example, offered rebates ranging from $1,000 on the 1989-model Eighty-Eight sedan to $2,500 on the 1989 Toronado coupe.
But on the new Olds Eighty-Eight, the rebates start at $200 on the base model, and reach $1,000 only on the fully loaded version.
The new Toronado doesn't carry a rebate, a least not for now. 

In another wrinkle, some of Pontiac's incentives are regional.
It's offering 4.8% financing for 48 months on its Grand Am model, but only in the Northeastern states. 

