.START 

THE SUPERPOWERS CLEARED an obstacle to a long-range missiles accord. 

In a weekend meeting in Wyoming between Secretary of State Baker and Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, the Soviet Union proposed dropping its demand that progress toward achieving a strategic-arms reduction treaty be linked to separate talks involving space-based weapons.
The two nations also said there would be a summit between Bush and Gorbachev in the late spring or early summer, and reached agreement or made progress on other issues, including verification of underground nuclear testing. 

Bush prepared to address the U.N. today.
He is expected to offer a proposal for a chemical-weapons ban and call for cooperation against drugs. 

A bloc in the Soviet legislature adopted a platform that calls for ownership of private property, prices set by market conditions and television free of Kremlin control.
The lawmakers in the Supreme Soviet, which convenes a new session today, also have drafted a bill that could lead to the formation of non-Communist political parties. 

The Kremlin has weakened plans for greater autonomy for the 15 Soviet republics as violence and nationalist unrest continued.
The final version of a plan by the Communist Party's Central Committee condemned moves by the Baltic states to form separate Communist parties and said Moscow's leaders could overrule local laws. 

Churches in Charleston, S.C., appealed for donations of food and clothing as victims of Hurricane Hugo remained without electricity.
State officials said property damage could reach $2 billion.
The death toll from the storm's six-day rampage through the Caribbean and southeastern U.S. stood at 51. 

Federal investigators sought to examine the wreckage of a USAir jetliner that crashed into New York's East River last week to determine if mechanical problems contributed to the incident.
Two people were killed in the crash.
The licenses of the pilot and co-pilot have been suspended because they left the accident scene. 

Cambodia's Hun Sen urged Asian and Western nations to end arms shipments to anti-Phnom Penh guerrillas once Vietnam completes its troop pullout tomorrow.
But the premier said the country's civil war would inevitably continue since his Hanoi-backed government and a three-party rebel alliance failed to work out a peace accord. 

A cease-fire in Lebanon appeared to be holding as Beirut's airport reopened and a cargo ship sailed unscathed into a Christian port.
Despite sporadic shellfire, a committee composed of officials from Lebanon's warring factions met with the Arab League to discuss implementing a peace plan. 

Colombia's 4,600 judges threatened to strike unless the Bogota government provides them with better protection.
The threat followed last week's resignation of Justice Minister Monica de Greiff, whose two months in the cabinet post had been marked by a number of death threats from the country's cocaine traffickers. 

Britain's Prince Philip condemned the "senseless" killing of 10 Royal Marines musicians in a bombing Friday in the town of Deal, in southeast England.
The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility for the explosion, and British Defense Secretary Tom King issued a warning to all military bases of the risk of similar attacks. 

Underground Arab leaders criticized Egyptian proposals for peace talks with Israel.
But the PLO-backed organizers of the 21-month-old Palestinian uprising in the West Bank and Gaza Strip stopped short of rejecting President Mubarak's initiative on elections in the occupied territories, which calls for Israel to trade land for peace. 

The World Health Organization reported that one of every five human beings, about one billion people, are suffering from disease, poor health or malnourishment.
The organization's director-general said the greatest burden of disease is in poor countries in Africa, Asia and South America. 

Haiti's military regime announced that general elections would be held in October 1990 for the transfer of power to a civilian president.
The elections would be Haiti's first since January 1988, when Leslie Manigat was elected in balloting regarded as rigged by the army.
The political scientist was ousted in a coup five months later. 

Died: Irving Berlin, 101, composer of about 1,500 songs, including "God Bless America," "Puttin' On the Ritz" and "White Christmas," Friday, in New York City. 

