.START 

Speculation is widespread that interest rates will drop over the next few months. 

Consider the latest weekly survey by C.J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc. of 50 professional money managers.
According to one part of the survey, these bond managers are more optimistic about bonds than at any time since the poll began in June 1988, says Nancy R. Lazar, senior vice president. 

Surveys and technical bond market readings indicate many money managers expect lower interest rates this fall.
One widely held theory is that the economy's sluggishness will persuade the Federal Reserve to ease credit.
Bush Administration officials, worried about a possible recession, already are leaning hard on the Fed to ease credit.
Additional pressure is coming from foreign governments.
They worry that high U.S. interest rates are keeping the dollar too high in the foreign-exchange markets. 

"Speculative enthusiasm has reached an extreme level," says Bernard Schaeffer, executive director at Investment Research Institute Inc., an investment advisory firm in Cincinnati.
He points to trends in the market in options on Treasury bond futures.
He cites a surge earlier this month in the number of open call option contracts on Treasury bond futures, which give holders the right to buy bond futures at a specified price.
That is a sign that investors are betting on significantly lower Treasury bond yields, he says. 

This optimism that lower rates lie ahead is prompting many money managers to buy longer-term bonds.
If rates do drop, prices of long-term bonds will rise more than those of short-term issues. 

The C.J. Lawrence survey asked money managers how their bond holdings' duration compares with whatever bond market index they are trying to beat. ÕDuration measures a bond's price sensitivity to interest-rate changes.å In the latest survey, more than three-quarters of the money managers said they hold bonds with a longer duration than the index they are trying to beat.
That is the highest such reading since the poll began and indicates a growing belief that rates will fall. 

Another part of the survey asks managers how bullish or bearish they are on bonds on a scale from one to 10, with one being the most bearish and 10 the most bullish.
An answer of four or less is considered bearish, while six or more is bullish. 

In the latest survey, only 14% are bearish on bonds, while 52% are bullish. 

C.J. Lawrence analysts share that bullishness.
Ms. Lazar and Edward S. Hyman, vice chairman, are predicting lower interest rates over the next few months, with further declines next year.
For example, they predict the yield on 30-year Treasury bonds, now about 8.2%, will drop to around 7 3/4% by the end of this year and 7% by the end of 1990. 

One reason they expect lower interest rates is low money-supply growth.
That, they say, means inflation will remain subdued. "We've had very, very low money-supply growth, which will put pressure on both the economy and inflation, creating a good environment for bonds," Ms. Lazar says. 

But all this bullishness makes a minority of money managers more convinced that rates are headed higher. 

They say investor survey results often provide excellent contrary indicators of where rates are going.
When large numbers of investors predict lower rates, that is frequently a tipoff that rates are going up -- and vice versa. 

Contrarian strategies long have been popular in the stock market.
When investors sound most confident that stock prices will rise, that often means they already have done most of their buying and thus lack additional firepower to keep the rally going.
Thus, bullish sentiment frequently means it is time to sell. 

Bond investors also have profited from contrarian strategies this year.
In March, for example, surveys showed widespread fears among money managers that higher inflation would drive up interest rates.
At that time, 61% of the money managers surveyed by C.J. Lawrence were bearish on bonds and only 11% were bullish.
That was right before rates plunged and bond prices soared. 

One contrarian is Mr. Schaeffer of the Investment Research Institute, who is urging investors to shun long-term bonds.
He says the current "extreme" bullish view of bond investors "is likely to be as incorrect" as the pessimism earlier this year.
The contrarians see another sign of possible trouble for bonds: A huge wave of government borrowing will hit the credit markets this week. 

Today, the Treasury will sell $14.8 billion of new short-term bills in its regular weekly auction.
That, as usual, will be divided between 13-week and 26-week bills.
Tomorrow, the department will sell $9.75 billion of two-year notes, followed by $7.75 billion of four-year notes on Wednesday. 

In addition, state and local governments are expected to issue large amounts of new bonds soon.
Municipal finance specialists expect as much as $4.5 billion of new issues over the next 30 days, including a large amount this week.
All this is coming at a time when dealers already hold large amounts of unsold recent municipal issues on their shelves. 

Also coming soon is a large volume of new bonds to be issued by a new government entity, Resolution Funding Corp., that was created to help rescue the nation's ailing savings and loan associations.
The size and dates of borrowings haven't yet been announced, but "we would ideally like to establish a market presence early in the fourth quarter," says Michael Basham, deputy assistant Treasury secretary for federal finance. 

Moreover, the Tennessee Valley Authority is likely to sell a huge new bond issue in October.
With all this borrowing coming soon, some traders fear interest rates have nowhere to go but up. 

Are the contrarians right that interest rates will soon rise?
Some bond bulls think the contrarians are overstating their case.
C.J. Lawrence officials say they don't sense an overwhelming amount of bullishness about bonds among investors. 

A separate survey by Market Vane's Bullish Consensus finds more investment advisers are bullish on Treasury bond futures prices than bearish -- but just barely. 

The latest Market Vane survey, which polls about 80 investment advisors each day, shows 54% bullish on Treasury bond futures, says Richard Ishida, senior market analyst.
That is down from 64% as recently as Sept. 5.
Mr. Ishida cautions that until the consensus gets above 75% in either direction, it usually isn't a good contrary indicator. 

Friday's Market Activity 

Treasury bond prices drifted slightly lower after hovering in a narrow range most of the day. 

Trading volume was sluggish, partly reflecting uncertainty among traders about what might emerge from the weekend meeting in Washington of the U.S. and leaders of six other major industrial nations. 

There has been speculation that the group of seven nations might increase their efforts to drive down the U.S. dollar in the currency markets, said Robert T. McGee, a senior vice president at Tokai Bank Ltd. "Certainly if the dollar were to be pushed down, that would be negative for bonds," he said. 

The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bonds, the 8 1/8% issue due 2019, fell 2/32 of a point to 99 5/32, to yield about 8.19%.
The latest 10-year notes also fell 2/32 point to 98 18/32, to yield 8.21%. 

Dealers also are concerned about how investors will react to a large supply of new Treasury bills and notes to be sold this week.
In when-issued activity, the new two-year notes to be auctioned tomorrow were quoted at 8.26%, up from 8.24% Thursday.
The new four-year Treasury notes to be sold Wednesday were quoted at 8.23%, up from 8.20%. 

Municipal bond prices were mixed amid nervousness about a large volume of new issues coming this week.
About $2.9 billion of municipal notes and bonds are tentatively scheduled for pricing during the week.
That total includes projected offerings of $50 million and above.
In the secondary, or resale, market, the New Jersey Turnpike Authority's 7.20% bonds due 2018 rose 1/8 point to 96 1/2 bid. 

Separately, the City of Oakland, Calif., which has never gotten over the departure of the Raiders professional football team to Los Angeles in 1981, is seeking to lure back the team.
This could involve the sale of $126 million of bonds. 

If the Los Angeles Raiders' maverick owner Al Davis accepts a proposal to come back, Oakland and surrounding Alameda county plan a joint bond sale involving a combination of taxable and tax-exempt debt.
Proceeds from the sale would finance improvements to the Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum, including the construction of luxury boxes, and the building of training facilities.
The Raiders used to play in the Coliseum, which now is home to the Oakland A's baseball team. 

A spokesman for the Raiders had no comment on the Oakland proposal "other than the fact that we're very appreciative of the interest shown." 

Oakland may have a chance to bring back the Raiders because the Los Angeles move hasn't been as successful for Al Davis as he originally hoped. 

In other major markets: 

-- Mortgage securities ended unchanged to down 3/32 point in light trading.
The Government National Mortgage Association 9% issue for October delivery finished at 97 1/32, down 3/32 point, to yield 9.54% to a 12-year average life assumption. 

-- Corporate bonds were flat in quiet trading.
New-issue activity was light, following a hectic week. 

