.START 

Bloomingdale's Chairman Marvin Traub is talking with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Blackstone Group about a leveraged buy-out of the famed department store chain, according to those familiar with the situation. 

Bloomingdale's, a 17-store chain acquired last year by Campeau Corp. in its $6.6 billion acquisition of Federated Department Stores, was put up for sale two weeks ago as part of a Campeau plan to ease a debt crunch. 

Mr. Traub, Bloomingdale's longtime top executive, first tried to put together a buy-out when Campeau made its bid for Federated.
His current effort faces competition from an array of retailing concerns, some of which are believed ready to pay higher prices than could be supported by Bloomingdale's revenue and profit alone. 

This possible "trophy pricing" could hinder Mr. Traub's attempt.
He is understood to be discussing a possible role for Drexel as financial adviser and for Blackstone Chairman Peter G. Peterson as an investor.
But papers haven't been signed yet.
Blackstone is a New York financial advisory and investment banking firm. 

Some Wall Street observers have speculated that Mr. Traub might try to duplicate the strategy of Macy's Chairman Edward Finkelstein in attracting a group of wealthy investors to finance a leveraged bid, without the involvement of a firm specializing in leveraged buy-outs.
Mr. Finkelstein led the Macy buy-out with backing from investors such as Detroit real estate mogul Alfred Taubman, CBS Chief Executive Laurence Tisch and mutual-fund whiz Michael Price. 

Although Federated doesn't provide profit breakdowns, Bloomingdale's is estimated to have annual sales of $1.2 billion.
The high price Campeau paid for Federated, financed mainly with junk bonds, has been the main reason for the cash crunch. 

Mr. Traub and Mr. Peterson, a former Commerce Secretary, are old friends.
Mr. Peterson was a director of Federated from 1973 until 1988.
He joined Blackstone in 1985 after leaving his post as chairman of Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc. 

Other luminaries at Blackstone include former White House budget director David Stockman, and Stephen A. Schwarzman, president, and Roger C. Altman, vice chairman, who both previously worked in mergers and acquisitions at Lehman.
Last December, Blackstone sold a 20% stake to Nikko Securities Co. of Japan for $100 million. 

Mr. Traub was unavailable to comment.
A spokesman for Drexel Burnham declined to comment.
Mr. Peterson couldn't be reached to comment. 

It was unclear why Mr. Traub is seeking to use Drexel solely as a financial adviser rather than as a provider of junk bonds, which is one of its specialties.
It also couldn't be determined whether Blackstone's own leveraged buy-out fund would supply equity for any bid. 

Some analysts have estimated that a sale of Bloomingdale's would bring $1 billion to $1.5 billion.
Among those expected to bid for the retailer are Joseph Brooks, chairman and chief executive officer of specialty retailer Ann Taylor Inc. 

Bloomingdale's is said to be thriving in the New York metropolitan area but experiencing some problems in its stores in Texas and the Washington, D.C., area. 

"It's a complex business to manage," said James Posner, a New York-based retail consultant. "Bloomingdale's must continue to present the image of having unique merchandise, yet those goods have to be salable enough to generate big volume.
On one hand you need to provide showmanship every day; on the other, expenses have to be managed.
You can save $1 million in expenses but lose five times that amount in sales because you've destroyed the shopping experience," Mr. Posner said. 

Randall Smith contributed to this article. 

