.START 

Reinaldo Ruiz sits in a tiny room set up for interviews in the Miami Correctional Center.
The visitor's hall in this maximum-security prison is air-conditioned.
But the adjoining interview room, in which Mr. Ruiz, his lawyer and I barely fit, is not.
Still, Mr. Ruiz insists on keeping the door to the hot, airless room shut tight.
Like most convicted drug smugglers who have given state's evidence, Mr. Ruiz is afraid of reprisals. 

Considering his long association with members of Colombia's most ruthless drug cartel, his fears seem justified.
However, the man Mr. Ruiz fears most is not Colombian.
He's a man to whom Mr. Ruiz -- a Cuban-American with a large bearing and a graying beard -- bears a remarkable resemblance: Fidel Castro. 

In March, Mr. Ruiz traded testimony concerning his involvement with top-level Cuban officials-cum-drug-traffickers for a significant reduction in his sentence (to 17 years from life imprisonment).
While his testimony is considered highly reliable by federal investigators, the word of a convicted felon is always suspect.
But Mr. Ruiz's accounts were recently corroborated by an unlikely source. 

Testimony presented during this summer's dramatic drug trafficking and corruption trials in Cuba -- in which some of Mr. Castro's top military and intelligence officials were tried and imprisoned or executed -- matches almost perfectly with statements made by Mr. Ruiz on dates of shipments, amounts of payoffs, individuals involved, etc. 

Some have suggested that the Cuban trials provide hope that Mr. Castro is ready to help in the international effort to fight drug trafficking.
However, the closely related Ruiz case shows the danger of cooperating with someone whose primary goal of totalitarian control outweighs all others, including drug interdiction or even loyalty to comrades.
It also makes a strong case for the State Department to stick with its own strategy concerning Cuba, rather than be pressured into acting on behalf of those who have shown faulty judgment about Mr. Castro's commitment to fighting the drug war. 

If you look at a map of the Caribbean, you will see that there's one unavoidable obstacle in the air space between Miami, Fla., and Colombia: Cuba.
At least since the 1970s, U.S. Customs planes have been forced by Cuban MiGs to halt their pursuit of drug-laden planes from Colombia as the latter fly over Cuba on the way to the U.S.
But the evidence presented by Mr. Ruiz showed a much more extensive Cuban involvement. 

Cuba did not merely guarantee safety on overflights.
Mr. Ruiz provided U.S. prosecutors and drug-enforcement officials with extensive evidence of ground, sea and air cooperation involving Cuban officials at the highest levels.
Drugs were flown from Colombia into Varadero, Cuba, where they were repackaged and sent by ship to the U.S. mainland, all the while protected by the Cuban coast guard, air force and intelligence officers.
Mr. Ruiz and his son (a pilot who flew several of the missions) were meanwhile accorded VIP treatment on the island -- driving unescorted in Mercedes-Benzes, going to the Tropicana nightclub and, in the case of 51-year-old Reinaldo, being allowed to marry a 21-year-old Cuban and take her to the U.S. 

Could Mr. Ruiz's highly visible operation have been missed by all but a relatively small group of Cubans -- namely those prosecuted by Mr. Castro? "You try to go anywhere near the Cuban coastline without full authorization," says Mr. Ruiz, "and you'll see how many levels of authority are intertwined." In fact, the man responsible for protecting Cuba's coastline, Adm. Aldo Santamaria, was indicted in 1982 by a U.S. court for trafficking.
He was last seen as a member in good standing of the honor tribunal that condemned some of Mr. Ruiz's Cuban accomplices. 

Reinaldo Ruiz originally became associated with Cuban officials because of a chance meeting in Panama with his cousin, Miguel Ruiz Poo.
Mr. Ruiz Poo was head of operations in Panama for MC, the branch of Cuban intelligence designed to circumvent the U.S. embargo of Cuba through licit and illicit operations.
The record is hazy as to who made the first move, but Reinaldo -- who then had a Colombian girlfriend associated with drug lord Pablo Escobar -- convinced his cousin that their various connections would converge nicely in a cocaine smuggling operation. 

Mr. Ruiz Poo reported his smuggling plans to the head of MC, a highly decorated colonel named Antonio "Tony" de la Guardia.
The operation was approved, and the first of several smuggling operations took place in early 1987. 

Whether or not Col. de la Guardia informed his superiors of the Ruiz operation, Mr. Castro must have realized that the extent of detailed information obtained by U.S. authorities through the Ruiz case required some response.
A host of federal prosecutors, drug enforcement agents and even drug smugglers agree that the Cuban trials were merely an attempt to isolate Cuba's involvement in drug trafficking to the one area about which the U.S. has irrefutable evidence.
Of course, this is not to say that evidence collected before the Ruiz case was paltry.
For years, U.S. intelligence agencies, the Customs Service, the Drug Enforcement Agency, and even local law-enforcement officials have gathered volumes of less spectacular evidence about Cuban involvement in drug trafficking.
Robert Merkel, a former U.S. Attorney in Tampa who was instrumental in bringing indictments against Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega and Colombian drug lord Carlos Lehder, comments: "We've had information on Cuba's involvement dating back to Lehder's operations in the 1970s, in which Cubans were paid off for overflights. . . . And every attempt to get Castro interested in our interdiction efforts failed." 

Jerome Sanford was head of the Narcotics Conspiracy Unit out of Miami's U.S. Attorney's office from 1975 to 1980.
One of his biggest cases was against Miami's marijuana-smuggling kingpin, Jose Alvero-Cruz. "As of 1978, I was certain Cuba was deeply involved in the Cruz case," Mr. Sanford says. 

Although ultimately convicted only on tax violations, Mr. Alvero-Cruz's relations with Cuban officials came out during the trial.
After he allegedly bribed Cuban officials, boats laden with tons of marijuana from Jamaica were escorted safely along the Cuban coastline by the Cuban coast guard (the same tactics that led to the 1982 indictment of Adm. Santamaria).
In spite of being an alumnus of the anti-Castro Bay of Pigs invasion, Mr. Alvero-Cruz had free access to the island fortress and on one occasion used a passport validated in Cuba in 1976 to deposit money in one of his Madrid bank accounts.
As the cases of Mr. Ruiz and fugitive Robert Vesco also demonstrate, the Cubans have a long history of treating well-known drug smugglers like diplomats. 

Despite these and many other accounts, Mr. Castro has until quite recently steadfastly denied any Cuban involvement in drug trafficking.
As recently as February of last year, Mr. Castro bristled when asked by NBC's Maria Shriver about Cuba's role. "Look, I believe that answering that question would be debasing myself," shouted Mr. Castro. "It is miserable and absolute slander] . . . No other country has fought against drugs more systematically than Cuba." 

Few U.S. representatives were willing to take Mr. Castro at his word.
But some nonetheless advocated working more closely with him in drug-interdiction efforts.
Senate Foreign Relations Chairman Claiborne Pell (D., R.I), after returning from a fact-finding trip to Cuba last November, suggested that the Cuban coast guard work with the U.S. Coast Guard on drug interdiction (even as the Cuban coast guard was providing protection for traffickers).
On his return from a December 1988 visit with Mr. Castro in Cuba, Rep. Charles Rangel (D., N.Y.) chastised critics of cooperation with Cuba on narcotics matters, saying: "It's not Communists who are killing our kids.
It's drugs." 

State Department personnel came under increasing fire from these critics because of their natural reluctance to share sensitive information with the Cuban government.
But as Mr. Ruiz began providing officials with the most concrete evidence yet of direct Cuban involvement, the time seemed right to test Mr. Castro's sincerity once and for all.
So, according to an administration official closely involved in the international drug-interdiction effort, some information provided by Mr. Ruiz was shared with Cuban officials. 

Separately, Mr. Ruiz, with the knowledge of U.S. drug enforcement officials, sent one of his operatives to Cuba on three separate occasions to get information on other Cuban drug operations as well as arrange plans for the defection of Miguel Ruiz Poo and Col. de la Guardia.
The colonel would have been a wonderful "catch" for U.S. intelligence.
The information he and Mr. Ruiz Poo could have provided on the drug trade and Cuba in general would have been valuable.
Unfortunately, we may never know exactly how valuable. 

The fate of Mr. Ruiz's Cuban contacts already had been sealed.
Mr. Ruiz Poo was sentenced to 30 years in prison on July 7 and Col. de la Guardia was executed on July 13. 

At a time when Fidel Castro is more removed than ever from the civilized world -- even to the point of openly denouncing Mikhail Gorbachev's perestroika -- cooperation of any kind simply makes no sense.
Indeed, it may well be that the attempt to cooperate with him in the Ruiz case led directly to a cover-up in which Mr. Castro has tried to clear himself at the expense of his underlings.
In addition, an opportunity may have been missed to get two of those officials out of Cuba before they could be silenced by Mr. Castro. 

Furthermore, if the Cuban leader continues assisting drug dealers -- and the Drug Enforcement Agency has evidence of Cuban-assisted drug overflights since the drug trials -- providing him with intelligence on drug operations could be dangerous.
As former U.S. Attorney Robert Merkel says: "If the Cubans know the parameters of your knowledge, they will better know how to devise schemes to go around your knowledge." 

And back at Miami Correctional Center it becomes increasingly clear why Reinaldo Ruiz fears Fidel Castro more than he fears th Colombians. "They say I'm safe here in prison.
But you can't play with Fidel -- like some U.S. senators are trying to do -- without getting burnt." 

Mr. Asman is editor of the Journal's Americas column. 

