.START 

Along with food, credit and new technology, Poland is homing in on something else it badly wants from the West: accountants. 

On a three-day visit to Britain this week, Hubert Janizsewski, vice president of Poland's foreign-investment agency, is focusing on the accounting profession almost exclusively.
He has called on executives at Ernst & Young, Coopers & Lybrand, Price Waterhouse, Touche Ross & Co., Arthur Andersen & Co. and Peat Marwick McClintock.
Already, Moore Stephens, an international accounting firm based here, is setting up two operations in Warsaw. 

The spectacle of so many accountants rushing in where Communist apparatchiks have been shooed away is easily explained.
The number-crunchers are needed to price the entire economy, which has been long removed from the forces that normally determine what things really cost or what people would pay to own them. 

"We need a genuine mechanism of supply and demand that we don't have," Mr. Janizsewski says. "The cost element in a managed economy was neglected." 

Among other things, the accountants are sharpening their pencils to go through stacks of records of state-run ministries that the Solidarity-led government plans to sell someday as part of a sweeping privatization campaign.
Officials say such records carry much about central plans and little about actual costs or consumer desires. 

Arthur Andersen is plowing through the books for the Lenin Shipyard, already slated for privatization. "I'm convinced that at least two others {accounting firms} will get involved," Mr. Janizsewski says. 

The Polish government's asset sales may generate more foreign investment than joint ventures between Western companies and local partners, he says. "The largest opportunities aren't necessarily gaining joint ventures -- which are entirely new companies -- but enabling foreign investors to buy shares in existing business." 

Even before the accountants arrive in force, Mr. Janizsewski concedes that the job of selling shares in Polish enterprises is hampered by the absence of an exchange to trade the shares on.
An exchange will be set up next year, he adds, and in the meantime, some Polish shares could be listed on other countries' exchanges. 

While vigorously promoting investments in Poland, Mr. Janizsewski fears there may be some resistance at home when the investment bankers begin flocking in. "For 45 years, the capitalist was pictured as Uncle Sam sucking the blood of the worker," he says. "What we need is a PR campaign explaining about privatization." 

In addition to helping various state-run enterprises go private, the accounting firms will likely offer training, management consulting and general advice.
Moore Stephens, the first firm to set up an auditing operation in Warsaw, also has established a firm there called International Business Consulting.
The firm offers advice to Polish companies wanting to link up with Western operations, and to Western businesses seeking partners in Poland. 

"We decided to focus on Poland because commercial law there has changed very substantially," says Jervase Hulbert, chairman of the firm. "You can today have a 100% Western-owned company operating in Poland." Moore Stephens's two firms, however, involve minority holdings by the Association of Accountants in Poland. 

So far this year, says Mr. Janizsewski, Poland has approved about 450 joint ventures with Western companies.
He estimates that by year end, that number will rise to 800.
Of the 450 ventures approved already, 200 involve West German companies.
The next largest batch, about 40, comes from the U.S.; Britain, Sweden and Austria having gained approvals for about 35 each. 

Meanwhile, the Eastern bloc's drive for an economic transfusion from the West will figure prominently in discussions of world financial leaders gathering this weekend in Washington for the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, as well as a gathering of the Group of Seven major industrial nations. 

"The new subject on which there will certainly be a great deal of discussion is what is happening in Eastern Europe, Poland in particular," Nigel Lawson, Britain's chancellor of the exchequer, told reporters.
Mr. Lawson noted that the IMF is drawing up a sweeping package of economic changes for Poland but added that even before the IMF completes this work, Britain would be willing to reschedule part of Poland's foreign debt. 

