.START 

Procter & Gamble Co., marking its first venture in the cosmetics business, agreed to buy Noxell Corp. in a stock swap valued at about $1.3 billion. 

P&G, a Cincinnati consumer products concern, will exchange, on a tax-free basis, 0.272 share of its common for each share of Noxell's common and Class B stock.
The estimated value is $33.15 a Noxell share, based on last Thursday's closing price for P&G.
P&G will issue 11 million previously authorized shares. 

P&G shares closed Friday at $119.875, off $2, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Noxell B shares surged $10, to $31.25, in national over-the-counter trading.
Noxell common stock is closely held. 

Noxell, of Hunt Valley, Md., has been controlled by descendants of its founder, George Avery Bunting, a pharmacist who developed Noxema skin cream in 1917.
The company, which also makes best-selling Cover Girl makeup, decided to sell out to P&G because it needed outside money to improve its research and development and to expand internationally, said George L. Bunting Jr., Noxell chairman and chief executive officer. 

Completion of the transaction by year end is considered a sure thing because the Bunting family already has given P&G irrevocable proxies on about 6.5 million, or 85.6%, of the company's shares.
P&G also received options to acquire those shares. 

Noxell is considered a good catch and one that has been looked at by other consumer and health and beauty care concerns, including Unilever N.V., which has been building its cosmetics cabinet through acquisitions.
P&G's chairman and chief executive officer, John G. Smale, said the acquisition will enable P&G "to accelerate the growth of our important health and beauty care business." 

Noxell is one of P&G's largest purchases and illustrates its increasing emphasis on buying brands to complement its in-house research. "Ten or 15 years ago, P&G would've introduced a brand new line of cosmetics and gotten killed," said Hugh Zurkuhlen, analyst with Salomon Bros. "Now they're paying up to buy premium brand." 

Analysts considered the price -- 2.5 times Noxell's annual sales of $522 million -- to be hefty, but not unusual for strong brands.
For the first six months of the year, Noxell reported net income of $28.9 million, or 71 cents a share, on sales of $282 million, compared with net of $27 million, or 67 cents a share, on sales of $267.3 million for the first half of 1988. 

"It's expensive, but not out of line," said David Williams, a principal with New England Consulting Group and a former P&G manager. "The window of opportunity to buy a major factor in consumer products is narrowing, if not closing." 

Noxell has no debt and had about $100 million in cash at year end, officials said. 

The deal will be treated as a pooling of interest, which combines the income statements and balance sheets of the two companies and doesn't create any good will. 

Analysts expect the purchase to be mildly dilutive to P&G, perhaps 20 cents or 25 cents a share.
Some analysts lowered their 1990 earnings forecasts on the news.
Joseph Kozloff, an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert, lowered his estimate to $8.30 a share from $8.50, but left 1991 at $9.75. 

Along with Noxema and Cover Girl, Noxell gives P&G the line of Clarion cosmetics, Lestoil cleaner and Wick Fowler Two Alarm Chili, a seasoning for chili. 

P&G already has a strong presence in skin care products, such as Oil of Olay, Clearasil and Bain de Soleil.
But this is its first venture into the $1.5 billion mass market cosmetic business. 

Noxell's Cover Girl and Clarion lines have a combined 25.4% share, followed by Maybelline, with 17.7% and Revlon, with 13.9%.
Those shares are for the "mass market" sales, which are through drug and food stores and mass merchandisers. "They bought the Procter of the cosmetics business," says Mr. Zurkuhlen. 

In addition to the mass market brands, other brands of cosmetics are sold in department stores and door-to-door through Mary Kay and Avon brands. 

What P&G offers is greater distribution through its existing sales networks to retailers.
That will be especially helpful in building Noxell's presence in drugstores, where about 55% of mass market cosmetics are sold, said Deepak Raj, analyst with Merrill Lynch Research.
Only one-third of Noxell's sales now come from drugstore sales, he said. 

Nov. 1985 -- Richardson-Vicks Inc., maker of personal care products including Vicks cold medicines, based in Wilton, Conn.
Price: $1.24 billion. 

Dec. 1985 -- G.D. Searle & Co. 's over-the-counter drug business.
Price: $300 million. 

Dec. 1987 -- Blendax Group, a maker of personal care products, primarily toothbrushes and toothpaste in Mainz, West Germany.
Price: about $400 million. 

March 1989 -- Sundor Group Inc., a maker of fruit drinks in Darien, Conn.
Price: $300 million. 

July 1989 -- Beatrice's Fisher Nut, a Chicago company.
Price: about $150 million. 

Sept. 1989 -- Noxell Corp., a maker of skin care products including Cover Girl and Noxema, in Hunt Valley, Md.
Price: $1.3 billion in stock. 

