.START 

Uzi Ruskin, president and chief executive officer of United Merchants & Manufacturers Inc., offered to acquire about 3.5 million shares, or 38% of the total outstanding, for $4 a share, or about $14 million. 

Mr. Ruskin already owns about 1.2 million United Merchants shares.
Coupled with a 4% stake held by an associate, the transaction would give Mr. Ruskin control of about 55% of the 9.1 million shares outstanding.
United Merchants designs, makes and markets textiles, clothing and accessories. 

In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Mr. Ruskin said holders of the other 45% would receive one-half share of a new series of preferred for each common share originally held. 

United Merchants' board authorized Mr. Ruskin on Sept. 6 to develop a proposal to acquire a controlling interest and implement a reorganization of the company.
The board is free to solicit other offers. 

Mr. Ruskin proposes that after the acquisition, United Merchants assets and liabilities, including inventory, would be sold to a company controlled by him for a $36.4 million, five-year promissory note.
About $15 million of the note would be payable 18 months after the closing, with the balance due five years after the transaction is completed. 

The merged company then would create a subsidiary, and United Merchants would become an accounts receivable financing business.
A financial institution would purchase about $200 million of the subsidiary's preferred, and for a $4.4 million note, about 20% of the subsidiary's common.
The new subsidiary would use the proceeds to purchase a pool of consumer accounts receivables. 

According to the filing, profit generated by the new business and by the sales of the company's assets could be distributed to United Merchants holders.
These dividends would be subject to any limitations imposed by credit and stock purchase agreements. 

United Merchants had a loss of $14.9 million on sales of $125.5 million for its third quarter, ended March 31. 

