.START 

Chrysler Corp., saying that it wanted to cash in on an investment that had soared in value, sold about half of its interest in Mitsubishi Motors Corp., in a move that will bring the U.S. auto maker about $310 million after taxes. 

Chrysler officials said that the sale wasn't prompted by an urgent need for the money.
But the cash certainly will come in handy in funding the huge capital outlays that Chrysler plans over the next few years -- a time when auto-industry profits are expected to tumble.
Chrysler already is in the midst of a $1 billion-plus cost-cutting plan that includes reducing the white-collar work force by about 8%. 

Both Chrysler and Mitsubishi said the move won't adversely affect their many cooperative efforts.
Mitsubishi supplies cars and trucks -- about 160,000 last yearthat Chrysler sells under its Dodge, Plymouth and Eagle marques, and also such key components as engines.
In addition, the two companies have a 50-50 partnership in an assembly plant in Normal, Ill.
Chrysler and Mitsubishi have one of the oldest "alliances" between major auto makers, although it has been marked by tension from time to time. 

Last Friday, Chrysler said it sold 75 million Mitsubishi shares, or about 45% of the total 168.9 million that it owned, to 25 Japanese banks and other financial institutions for about $592 million.
Chrysler's after-tax profit of $310 million, or $1.33 a share, is to be realized in the third quarter.
The transaction reduced Chrysler's stake in Mitsubishi to 12.1% from 21.8%. 

All of the purchasing institutions are current Mitsubishi shareholders, including Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. the largest single shareholder. 

The strong market for Mitsubishi shares in Japan has made this, "a good time to reduce the size of our stake in MMC and realize some significant value for our shareholders," Chrysler Chairman Lee A. Iacocca said in a statement.
After Mitsubishi went public last December, the value of Chrysler's holdings in the company increased to about $1.4 billion, Chrysler said, from the $315 million that Chrysler has invested in Mitsubishi over the years.
Chrysler made its initial investment in Mitsubishi in 1971, taking a 15% stake.
In 1985, Chrysler boosted its stake to 24%, but that portion was diluted to 21% by Mitsubishi's initial public stock offering last December. 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Chrysler closed Friday at $25.50, up 25 cents. 

Chrysler plans to use the cash to strengthen its balance sheet and to fund some of its capital projects, especially its five-year, $14 billion automotive product development program, said R.S. Miller Jr., executive vice president and chief financial officer.
Mr. Miller also said the funds would be used to ensure the continuation of Chrysler's stock buy-back program, which authorizes the company to buy back about 33 million more of its about 234 million shares. 

"Chrysler isn't strapped for cash, but isn't throwing off loads of it either," said Wendy Beale Needham, an auto analyst with Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. Mrs. Needham said the prospect of tighter federal fuel economy standards may force Chrysler to develop and build a small car in the U.S. to replace its subcompact Dodge Omni and Plymouth Horizon.
Chrysler officials would prefer to import a replacement vehicle, but that wouldn't lower the average fuel-economy of their U.S.-built vehicles. 

Chrysler had about $448 million in working capital at the end of June, and Mr. Miller said that figure would increase by the amount that Chrysler will receive for its Mitsubishi shares.
But even without the added money, Chrysler would have been able to fund its current capital projects, Mr. Miller said. 

While Chrysler and Mitsubishi have been linked for a long time, the companies have clashed at times in recent years as their needs and ambitions have evolved.
Two years ago, Chrysler asked Mitsubishi to sell Chrysler cars through the Mitsubishi dealer network in Japan.
Mitsubishi refused, but has since agreed to sell Mercedes-Benz cars.
More recently the companies clashed over the pricing of cars built at their U.S. joint venture plant. 

Nonetheless, analysts in the U.S. and Japan believe that the companies will continue a solid working relationship.
Chrysler needs Mitsubishi's products and technology, while Mitsubishi needs U.S. sales through Chrysler's dealer network. "It is difficult for Mitsubishi to do business alone in the U.S.," said Hideaki Suzuki, an analyst at Wako Research Institute, an affilliate of Wako Securities Co. 

