.START 

Quick] Name the most protectionist president since World War II. 

Sorry, time's up.
The answer: Ronald Reagan. 

It's sad but true.
Ronald Reagan talked a good free-trade game.
But it was mostly talk. 

During Mr. Reagan's two-term presidency, the U.S. embraced or increased protection against a whole range of imports -- including steel, automobiles, sugar, semiconductors, lumber and machine tools.
Subsidies for U.S. agriculture -- which tend to give domestic produce unfair advantages over foreign farmers -- also reached new heights in the Reagan years. 

Occasionally -- but only occasionally -- Mr. Reagan's cabinet officers would take note of the administration's clandestine romance with protectionism.
President Reagan "has granted more import relief to U.S. industry than any of his predecessors in more than half a century," Treasury Secretary James A. Baker said in a little-noticed speech at the Institute for International Economics here on Sept. 14, 1987. 

Yet most of the Reagan administration's speeches on international commerce read like a free-trade manifesto. "I don't think there was ever a president where the gap between the rhetoric and the reality {on trade} was greater" than with Mr. Reagan, says Robert Hormats, chairman of Goldman Sachs & Co. 's international unit who served in both the Carter and Reagan administrations. 

Such a gap, however, makes recent U.S. attacks on foreign trade barriers look particularly hypocritical to allies in Europe and Asia.
And it helps explain why President Bush now is having to scramble to restore the nation's free-trade credentials by promising to cut back steel quotas and stressing his desire to "open markets and expand trade." 

To be sure, there are many who defend the Reagan record on trade.
Their main argument: The move toward protectionism in the U.S. could have been much worse, particularly given a vocal and protectionist Congress. "What other country would have taken such a swing in its trade account without resorting to wholesale protectionism?" asks a senior Bush administration official.
Or, as Mr. Hormats puts it: "The more charitable way of looking at it is that given the enormity of the trade deficit and the depth of the recession, we were remarkably restrained." 

Mr. Baker, for his part, justified the Reagan administration's policies in his September 1987 speech as being part of the president's commitment to "fair trade." Such protection, he said, was necessary to combat subsidized imports and trade barriers abroad. "Without fair trade," Mr. Baker said, "public support for free trade would surely collapse." 

But Reagan officials clearly deserve some of the blame as well.
Until Mr. Baker took over the Treasury in 1985, the Reagan administration refused to try to slow the soaring dollar.
That, in turn, helped stimulate a huge and continuing import boom, ravaging many of the nation's industries and increasing the clamor for trade barriers. 

"The Reagan administration talked a wonderful free-trade game, but their macroeconomic policy made it impossible to carry out a free-trade policy," says C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute for International Economics and a senior Treasury official in the Carter administration. "By avoiding government intervention on the foreign-exchange market, they forced themselves into a situation where they had to go protectionist." 

And may still have to.
Despite Mr. Bush's recent reaffirmation of the country's commitment to free trade, that pledge may only be as good as the latest trade-deficit numbers. "If the trade deficit starts up again," warns Mr. Bergsten, "the {present} approach to bringing down the trade deficit will get discredited," and there will be calls for more protectionism. 

Mr. Truell is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau. 

