.START 

The European Court of Justice upheld and clarified the European Community Commission's authority to raid corporate offices and search for evidence under its antitrust investigative powers. 

In a much-awaited decision, the Luxembourg-based court said that companies must cooperate with EC antitrust investigators by allowing them to enter buildings and by turning over corporate files.
It said the human-rights principle of the inviolability of premises doesn't apply to business offices. 

However, the EC court reminded the commission that it must respect national legal procedures when carrying out investigations. 

The court's decision stemmed from a 1987 case in which Hoechst AG refused to let EC investigators search its main office in Frankfurt because they didn't have a warrant issued by a West German court.
The EC officials gained entry two months later after West Germany's Federal Cartel Office obtained a warrant from a Frankfurt judge.
Hoechst sued the commission before the Court of Justice, alleging the inviolability of its premises. 

The court rejected Hoechst's main argument that the search was illegal.
It ruled that if a company refuses to cooperate, national authorities must help EC inspectors carry out an investigation.
In West Germany, this would entail obtaining a search warrant. 

The court said, furthermore, that if the commission anticipates that a target company will refuse to cooperate, investigators can circumvent the company and work with national authorities from the start. 

Although Hoechst lost its case, the court did limit the commission's investigative powers.
The commission had alleged that it could conduct searches without the assistance of national authorities and without respecting national procedures. 

Hoechst said in a statement that it is happy with court's decision because it underscores the company's view that the commission needed a warrant to search its office.
The Hoechst probe was part of a five-year EC-wide investigation of alleged price-fixing for two common plastics: polivinylchloride and low-density polyethylene.
The probe led the commission last December to fine 23 companies, including Hoechst. 

