.START 

Union leaders want to talk about labor grievances that this month put 250,000 government workers out on strike; environmentalists want to talk about hazardous wastes; English-speakers want to talk about the erosion of their language rights; but all Robert Bourassa wants to talk about is Quebec's economy. 

The deficit is down and foreign investment is up, Quebec's premier says.
The province is sprouting a native breed of French-speaking entrepreneur for the first time.
So, Mr. Bourassa repeats his political message: Return his Liberal Party to power in Monday's provincial elections and "guarantee essential and irreplaceable stability." 

Weary and without enthusiasm, Quebec voters are about to heed him.
But they are doing so with the knowledge that his success in building the province's economy may be making an independent Quebec more, not less, plausible. 

Mr. Bourassa denies this, of course, arguing, as he did in a recent interview, that Quebeckers know the economic success he has presided over "was achieved within Canada." But the economic acumen and self-confidence that have grown within Quebec in the past decade and that provide the undergirding for Mr. Bourassa's Liberal campaign have persuaded many Quebeckers that they could make it economically on their own -- especially at a time of free trade with the U.S. 

"I used to be afraid of having a separate country, but it doesn't scare me anymore," says Marcel Dutil, who heads Canam Manac, which manufacturers steel girders here. "I have more confidence in Quebec and in our competence.
We have proven we can run our own show." 

Indeed, Quebec's economic performance has been extraordinarily robust, and Quebeckers like to say their brightest university students are more interested in studying commerce than the classics.
Real economic growth here last year outpaced Canada's as a whole.
Quebec's economic outlook is so rosy that Clement Gignac, senior economic advisor for the National Bank of Canada, says flatly, "We expect no recession." 

More a figure from the counting house than from the bistros of Rue St. Denis, the pulsating heart of French street life in Montreal, the dour Mr. Bourassa reflects the dispassionate mood of Quebec today. 

From the time he returned to power in 1985 after being repudiated in a landslide that swept Rene Levesque and the separatist Parti Quebecois into office in 1976, Mr. Bourassa calculated he could divert attention from the province's other problems -- especially the emotional dispute over language -- by transforming Quebec from a debating society into an economic giant. 

"More and more," he says, "we are a modern economy." 

Now, Mr. Bourassa is applying his strategy again.
Though his Liberals are expected to deliver another blow to the Parti Quebequois, whose leader, Jacques Parizeau, speaks openly about removing the province from Canada, Mr. Bourassa's diversionary tactics are facing their most challenging test. 

The premier is both the man at the center of Quebec politics and the man in the middle of irresistible and, ultimately, perhaps irreconcilable, forces. 

Mr. Bourassa, 56 years old, has an unusual and uneasy informal coalition with the federal Conservatives, especially Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, on issues such as free trade with the U.S. and Canada's proposed Meech Lake constitutional accord, which would acknowledge that Quebec is a "distinct society" within the nation.
But he is squeezed by Quebec nationalists, who say he has capitulated to Ottawa, and traditional federal Liberals, who say he has taken the first steps toward breaking up the country. 

"He knows that he can't be too much the federalist or he'll lose the French vote, and he can't be too much the nationalist or he'll lose the English," says Robert Boily, a political scientist at the University of Montreal. "He knows how to live in between." 

Life in between can often be uncomfortable, however.
The other day, Mr. Bourassa, who angered English-speaking Quebeckers by reneging on a campaign promise to permit outdoor commercial signs in English, squirmed through an hourlong session designed to reassure these voters -- about a tenth of the electorate -- that he'd protect their interests. 

But some of his traditional allies won't leave the issue alone. "We can find the turnips if the sign is in English or French, but this is a symbolic issue that gets to the question: Are we true Quebeckers in their minds?" asks Peter Blaikie, chairman of Alliance Quebec, the largest English-rights lobby in the province. 

English voters customarily have sided with the Liberals, but Mr. Blaikie is asking them to look at two small parties running candidates in English-speaking districts or to "put a big 'X' across the paper, spoil the ballot and say: 'none of the above. '" 

On the other side, Mr. Parizeau, who was finance minister in the Parti Quebecois government, is trying to push the debate even further.
The irony is that his party, which watched its own efforts to achieve independence founder in a 1980 referendum, believes Mr. Bourassa's economic achievements, combined with the Free Trade Agreement Mr. Bourassa supported, may bring their goal closer. 

"Thank God at last French Canadian entrepreneurship suddenly appeared," says Mr. Parizeau, who argues that with freer trade Quebeckers can just as easily -- and perhaps more happily -- find trading partners in North Dakota as in Saskatchewan. "We feel far more at ease on the shore of Maine than in Ontario.
We have more language problems in Toronto than in Old Orchard Beach." 

But the argument of Mr. Parizeau, 59, reflects a fundamental change in Quebec nationalism as well.
The socialism that once was twinned with nationalism has itself withered away and, as Andre Bisson, the president of Maxwell Communications Canada, puts it, "this is a new brand of nationalism and it's much less leftist." 

Many analysts today say Quebec is more likely to drift away than fight its way out of Canada's confederation.
It may occur less with a bang than with a whimper, reflected more on the balance sheets of corporations than on the map. 

"The key is that people are no longer afraid of it," says Rene Pelletier, president of Sorecom, the largest public-opinion polling firm in Quebec. "They don't necessarily want it tomorrow morning, but if it comes, it won't be so terrible." 

