.START 

If any South Korean businessman knows how tough it is to make money in the Soviet Union, it is Kim Young-Jin. 

Mr. Kim is president of Jindo Corp., the only South Korean company that has invested in the Soviet Union to date -- an investment that took more than eight years to make. 

Earlier this month, Jindo -- the world's biggest furrier, with 1988 sales of $319.4 million -- received approval from Seoul to send $400,000 to Moscow to capitalize an equally owned joint fur venture.
The other partner is a private Soviet-American concern, Interlink Cooperative. 

The new venture, Jindo Rus Cooperative, plans to open its first sales outlet, a retail fur shop, in Moscow's Intourist Hotel later this month if Soviet bureaucratic obstacles can finally be overcome.
The shop's opening has been delayed twice.
The venture now awaits Moscow's approval of procedures for handling international credit-card payment for the fur purchases. 

Despite the problems, and the relatively small size of his investment, Mr. Kim has big plans for Jindo Rus.
He said he hopes to: 

-- Recoup Jindo's outlay within a year. 

-- Have at least 10 shops in Soviet cities and airports by 

-- Set up a fur-production factory as early as next year. 

-- Diversify into other lines of Soviet business, including trading in textiles, syringes and condoms. 

But for all his plans, Mr. Kim has no illusions about doing business with the Soviets.
His ambitions are tempered by the long road Jindo has trod to get as far as it has. 

For years, Jindo, a 25-year veteran of the fur business, bought its raw furs from Scandinavia, Canada, Britain and the U.S.
The company knew that many of those pelts originated in the Soviet Union and had been bought at the semiannual Leningrad fur auction.
Mr. Kim longed to buy directly from the auction, the world's oldest and most famous fur sale, but for years that was impossible.
Seoul had no diplomatic relations with Moscow, and Koreans weren't welcome at the Leningrad auction. 

Even after Korea Trade Promotion Corp., the state-owned company promoting Korean exports abroad, began quiet dealings with China and Eastern European countries in the early 1980s, there were two nuts it couldn't crack: the Soviet Union and North Korea.
That slowly began to change in the early 1980s. 

In 1981, Jindo surreptitiously began dealing with Leningrad Auction Co. behind the backs of both the Korean and Soviet governments.
At first, the fur company dealt through two U.S. agents, spending a few million dollars at the fair each year. 

But in 1984, Jindo, through its U.S. agents, began to push for a direct invitation to Leningrad, where Mr. Kim and other Jindo experts could see all the pelts on offer and make their own selection.
It was slow going, Mr. Kim said. "The Soviets already knew about Jindo and were interested in us.
But they were wary of getting involved with South Koreans." 

Later that year, Jindo got its break.
At the end of that year, Mr. Kim recalled, a hush-hush meeting was held at London's Savoy Hotel between him and the head of a Soviet fur company, Sojuzpushnina.
The meeting was secret "because at that time, according to the Korean CIA, I wasn't supposed to meet these kinds of people," Mr. Kim said, adding that he pressed the Soviet executive hard to get an invitation and visa to attend the auction. 

Mr. Kim's timing was good.
In early 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in Moscow and soon introduced his glasnost and perestroika policies.
Still, it took Mr. Kim 10 months to get the visa to go to Leningrad.
In October 1985, he made his first visit to the auction, and was the top buyer on the floor.
He spent $10 million on pelts, deliberately pushing up purchase prices "to make a good impression," but also, he said, getting a bargain for Jindo as the price he paid was 10% less than the world market price. 

Altogether, Jindo has spent $27.4 million buying pelts directly from the Soviet Union, making Jindo the country's top fur customer.
And the company has exported to the Soviets, in a barter arrangement, fur-lined raincoats valued at $814,000. 

But Jindo has much bigger plans.
As soon as his foot was in the Soviet door, Mr. Kim started pushing for a permanent Jindo presence.
What he wanted was a piece of the immense earnings potential of Soviet-finished fur exports.
That, he proposed last year, could be achieved only through a joint venture entailing direct Jindo investment in the Soviet Union, a daring suggestion at a time when Seoul-Moscow economic relations remained strained. 

Jindo's financial strength and willingness to flout taboos wasn't lost on the Soviets.
A meeting was arranged between Mr. Kim and the Soviet minister for light industries, who asked Jindo to help run a fur factory outside Moscow. 

"That one factory was producing and selling about 900 million rubles a year -- $1.2 billion at that time -- in fur hats, collars, jackets and coats," said Mr. Kim.
And that was for the Soviet domestic market alone.
But when he saw the factory, Mr. Kim said, he was shocked. "You have no idea how bad the fur garments were.
And very expensive.
About $300 average for a hat that in Europe would cost about $50." 

Mr. Kim said that the day after his factory tour, he told the Soviet minister that the factory was so inefficient and the products so bad, that any hopes of exports were doomed.
Instead of reforming the factory's operations, Jindo's president proposed building a new, smaller factory as a pilot joint-venture project. 

The Soviets agreed reluctantly, said Mr. Kim, but the deal fell through earlier this year when Jindo tired of being obstructed by bureaucrats. "We discovered that these people don't have any idea at all, no mentality, for a private company," he said. "For example, if you need a nail, you can't just buy it.
You have to complete a voucher for the nail, then wait one month or longer to have it filled.
The whole country is like that." 

But Jindo wasn't giving up on its dream of a Soviet-Korean fur partnership.
Last March, Mr. Kim signed a joint-venture agreement with Paul Schwalbe, a U.S. businessman, who already was in partnership with some Soviet entrepreneurs in Interlink, a private Moscow-based company.
The agreement, costing each side $400,000 in initial capital, established Jindo Rus.
Jindo also bought a 10% stake in Interlink for $32,500. 

