.START 

Last year, Richard Callahan crisscrossed the globe searching for the golden fleece of telecommunications. 

The U S West Inc. executive vice president didn't find it, but he and his team did unearth some gems: A cable franchise up for grabs in Hong Kong and a proposed fiber-optics cable to cross the Soviet Union, providing a direct telecommunications link between Europe and Japan. 

U S West and the six other regional Bell companies are seeking fortune in such foreign markets as West Germany, India, South Korea, Europe, Israel, Australia -- even Latin America, with all its woes.
They want to provide telephone companies overseas with state-of-the-art technology.
Some forge partnerships to provide information services, software applications and even credit-card verification systems.
Many are bidding for foreign cable-television companies, paging operations and cellular-telephone franchises. 

No one has struck paydirt yet, although the Bells have captured business that they hope will lead to bigger rewards.
Nynex Corp., for instance, has scored a few deals in Singapore.
Last year, Pacific Telesis Group got in on the action for an underwater cable system across the Pacific Ocean and acquired stakes in a couple of cable-TV companies in England. 

Bell Atlantic Corp. is helping Spain update its telephone network in time for the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona. 

Southwestern Bell Corp. is providing private pay phones in the United Kingdom and cable-TV in Israel.
BellSouth Corp. supplied Guatemala with digital network services, and formed a consortium to build and operate Argentina's first cellular network and a second one in France. 

"We're looking everywhere," says Charles B. Coe, president of BellSouth's international operations. "The global telecommunications market is growing dramatically." 

The aggressive push offshore is being fueled by more than just foreign economic prospects.
U.S. District Judge Harold Greene, who oversees enforcement of the accord that broke up the Bell System in 1984, still forbids the regional Bells from participating in such U.S. businesses as electronic-information services and cable television.
The Bells are deeply frustrated by the restrictions imposed on their domestic operations. 

C. Lee Cox, president and chief executive officer of Pacific Telesis' non-telephone operations, contends that many of Judge Greene's prohibitions "force us to look outside the U.S." Adds Robert H. Glaser, Southwestern Bell's senior vice president of strategic planning: "I'm sure we'd find good opportunities in the U.S. if we didn't have so many restrictions." 

In the meantime, the Bell companies are using foreign opportunities as a laboratory, where they can learn how to run businesses they can't operate now in the U.S. "When Judge Greene lifts the restrictions, the {Bell companies} will be ready to jump into the U.S. market to provide those services," predicts Steven Permut, a telecommunications consultant and Yale marketing professor. "There'll be virtually no learning curve." 

What's more, the Bells are using their offshore purchases as a way to gain a greater foothold in other foreign businesses.
For instance, U S West purchased an interest in a U.K. cable company that one day may be allowed to provide telephone service over the cable network.
Southwestern Bell got into the Israeli market by providing a computerized directory publishing system.
The company says the directory pact helped it win a cable-TV franchise in Israel. 

Mr. Cox and Mr. Glaser acknowledge that even if the companies didn't face domestic bans, the international markets still would be alluring.
Since the Bells have a monopoly on basic telephone service, there are few domestic companies interested in buying their telecommunications expertise.
Moreover, prohibitive prices for cellular-telephone companies and cable-television franchises at home leave the Bells with no alternative but to scout offshore. 

For the first time, such countries as England, Japan and Mexico are permitting competitors to enter their previously government-run telecommunications market, creating new opportunities for the Bells.
In addition, several overseas economies are growing faster than that of the U.S. 

One of the year's biggest bonanzas appears to be in West Germany, where the national telephone authority is opening up its cellular-telephone monopoly to competition.
The government agency is taking bids from foreign and domestic companies to build and manage a second digital, cellular network. 

All seven Bells are vying for the franchise.
It could be the world's largest, with an estimated 62 million potential customers. 

The system, which is expected to be awarded at the beginning of December, also promises to be quite lucrative, given West Germany's highly mobile society.
Arthur D. Little & Co. estimates that one million customers would generate $550 million in revenue annually.
Several Bell companies also are eager to grab a piece of a new communications system in England, which promises to be the world's first mass-market network for two-way personal communications. 

The personal communications network is similar to cellular service, but it operates on a higher frequency and with a new technology under development.
The personal telephone is expected to be significantly lighter and smaller than standard "pocket-size" models and have a rechargeable battery and internal antenna. 

The U.K. Department of Trade and Industry is expected to award two or three licenses by the end of the year and have the systems operating by at least 1993. 

To help facilitate their hunt for international treasure, the Bells have employees stationed in outposts around the world searching for opportunities.
Ameritech, which doesn't have any international offices, and a few other Bells try to gain information about future deals by participating in exchange programs.
A team of Nippon Telephone & Telegraph officials visited the company last year and some Ameritech executives spent a few weeks in Japan. 

Other companies court international opportunities by holding parties for foreign dignitaries and business executives.
BellSouth, for instance, threw a party on Lake Geneva a couple of years ago aboard a rented steamboat. 

But international opportunities hold significant risks as well.
Volatile economies or political upheavals can threaten investments overseas.
For instance, U S West's cable franchise in Hong Kong could be jeopardized after the colony returns to Chinese sovereignty in 1997.
And spiraling inflation in Argentina could pose serious problems for BellSouth's cellular-telephone system there. 

For such reasons and others, Ameritech disbanded its international unit and is concentrating on operations and opportunities in the U.S. -- although the company is bidding for the West German cellular franchise. 

Gerald I. Malik, president of the Ameritech Development unit, maintains that foreign governments, which own the telephone companies, are seldom willing to give an equity ownership to foreign companies such as the Bells and that cable TV abroad isn't in the same stage of "readiness" as it in the U.S. Furthermore, he says many deals are skewed to favor the government-owned telephone companies. 

"Our actions shouldn't be interpreted as a lack of interest in international markets," explains Mr. Malik. "We just don't see a lot of opportunities.
There're a lot of dollars chasing a few deals." 

