.START 

It's easy to get excited about Surgical Laser Technologies, a new issue slated to begin trading on the Nasdaq over-the-counter market this week. 

The Malvern, Pa.-based company, which develops laser-surgery devices, just reported its first profit, and it holds a patent on a new laser instrument.
The company is planning to issue 1.5 million shares in its initial public offering, for $9.50 to $11.50 a share, at a time when laser stocks are one of the hottest industry groups on Wall Street. 

Some think the company's timing couldn't be better. "The next 10 years will be gangbusters for laser companies," predicts Edward Mutsch, a medical technology analyst at Piper, Jaffray & Hopwood in Minneapolis. "There are lots of risks, but the potential is exciting." 

Other analysts, however, remain cool. "There's a hot new laser every year," says Kenneth Abramowitz, a medical technology stock analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. "The technology is sexy.
But I don't spend much time following the companies." 

Lasers harness the natural energy states of electrons to produce a high-intensity beam of light.
Used in surgery, according to manufacturers and doctors, they offer a number of benefits over standard procedures, such as increased precision, faster healing, shorter hospital stays and reduced bleeding, swelling, pain and infection. 

Stock prices of laser makers Summit Technology, Visx, Taunton Technologies and Coherent have jumped sharply this year.
But many analysts fret that many of the companies don't have steady, reliable streams of revenue because lasers aren't disposable and, therefore, don't generate repeat sales. 

"Selling one product to one customer that you never see again isn't much of a business," says Neal Bradsher, a medical technology analyst at Hambrecht & Quist.
Disposable products, on the other hand, tend to have good margins, provide steady revenue flow and have more predictable sales patterns, he explains. 

Furthermore, the disappointing results and inherent risks of some laser techniques lead many analysts to wonder whether the industry will live up to investors' expectations. 

Just last June, research by one cardiologist cast doubts on Trimedyne's laser therapy, citing deaths, limb amputations and other complications that occurred after some patients used the treatment.
The company said at the time that investors misinterpreted the study's findings, leading to a steep drop in the stock price.
Trimedyne finished unchanged at 9 Friday, and is down 54% for the year. 

Investor interest in Summit Technology, Visx and Taunton Technologies blossomed last month after an article in this newspaper said the three companies are racing to market a version of a highly specialized laser to correct vision defects. 

In its prospectus, Surgical Laser Technologies says it plans to focus selling its products in such areas as gynecology, general surgery and orthopedics, even though its laser system has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for various other uses. 

The company also is working with Medtronic, another medical devices maker, to develop and obtain regulatory approval of laser catheters for treating heart and limb arteries. 

Surgical Laser says it has a patented "contact laser system" that allows surgeons to use the laser instrument directly on the tissue being treated.
Doctors using non-contact lasers must hold the devices away from the tissue being treated and attempt to control the laser from a distance. 

Surgical Laser's system includes a portable unit that transmits the laser energy, as well as interchangeable probes and scalpels.
It also has disposable hand pieces and fibers that connect the probes to the energy source, according to Scott Greisler, a company spokesman.
The prospectus states that 42% of the company's revenue since its inception has come from the sale of the disposables and other accessories. 

In the year ended Jan. 1, the company's sales totaled $12.2 million.
In the six months ended July 2, sales were $10.6 million. 

Piper Jaffray's Mr. Mutsch says the projected price is roughly 2.4 times estimated 1989 revenue.
That's reasonable for an emerging-growth company, he says.
Surgical Laser "looks a lot less risky than most" medical laser companies, Mr. Mutsch says. 

But Norman Fosback, editor of a newsletter on IPOs based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., thinks Surgical Laser's shares are "richly priced." In the first six months, the company earned $464,000, or 11 cents a share.
Mr. Fosback calculates that, at the current offering-price range, investors will pay roughly 50 times 1989 earnings, based on his estimate of 20 cents a share for the year ending in January.
His advice to investors: Wait for a discount to develop after the shares start trading in the open market. 

BLUE SKIES IN THE GOLDEN STATE: The National Association of Securities Dealers said California now exempts Nasdaq's National Market System stocks from the state's securities registration requirements known as blue-sky laws.
The exemption means that companies whose issues are part of the elite NMS system won't have to meet costly and time-consuming filing requirements before selling shares in the state. 

Friday's Market Activity 

The Nasdaq Composite Index rose 1.07 to 468.07, to end the week up 0.1%.
Both indexes of larger OTC stocks were higher.
The Nasdaq 100 Index advanced 2.47 to 447.78, while the Nasdaq Financial Index improved 0.16 to 463.01.
Volume totaled 148.9 million shares. 

Noxell shares soared 47%, or 10, to 31 1/4, after Procter & Gamble's announcement of a $1.3 billion agreement to acquire the company in a stock swap.
Under the agreement, Procter & Gamble would exchange, on a tax-free basis, 0.272 shares of its stock for each Noxell common and Class B share.
P&G said that based on recent market prices, its offer values Noxell's shares at about $33.15 each. 

The American depositary receipts of Jaguar again headed the Nasdaq most-actives list, gaining 13/32 to 9 7/32 on 4.2 million shares traded.
In response to Ford Motor's announcement that it intends to take up as much as a 15% stake in the company, the British auto maker said that it would consider any bid to take control of the company "unwelcome," and vowed to take action to preserve its independence. 

Adobe Systems rose 7/8 to close at 16 1/2.
The company, whose shares sank following news of an agreement between Microsoft and Apple Computer to jointly develop certain computer technology, announced a buy-back of up to $15 million, or about 4.8%, of its common shares outstanding. 

Adaptec, a maker of computer data flow systems, rose 7/8 to 16 1/2 on nearly 300,000 shares.
Needham & Co. said it believes the company will be a major beneficiary of some news from International Business Machines this week. 

International Holding Capital gained 2 1/2 to 24.
The holding company for International Savings & Loan Association said it signed an agreement to be acquired by Maruwa Koyo for $28.50 a share. 

