.START 

In its final calculation, the government said the economy grew at an annual rate of 2.5% in the second quarter, slightly less than reported a month ago but far faster than initially calculated. 

The report on the real gross national product -- the inflation-adjusted value of all the goods and services the country produced -- kept alive the view that the economy was in fairly good shape last quarter though slowing from its swift pace of the past few years. 

But the report contained a bleak revision of the government's calculation of U.S. corporations' after-tax profits.
They plunged 7.2%, to an annual rate of $161.1 billion; originally the government reported a 5.4% decline. 

The latest growth estimate is mildly slower than the 2.7% rate the government calculated last month.
But initially the government put the second-quarter rate at 1.7%, triggering anxiety that the country was heading for a recession and probably influencing a Federal Reserve move to let interest rates fall in late July. 

The 2.5% rate, on the other hand, is at the upper edge of the Fed's growth targets.
Beginning in March 1988 and continuing until last spring, the Fed steadily pushed up interest rates to curb economic activity in order to restrain inflation. 

In the first quarter the economy grew at a 3.7% annual rate, but the government attributed 2.2 percentage points to a return to normal farm production after last year's drought. 

The biggest downward revisions in yesterday's report came in personal and government spending, although they were still higher than in the first report.
The biggest improvement came in the trade deficit. 

An inflation measure that gauges the price of a fixed basket of goods and services was revised down slightly for the second straight month.
It grew at a 5% annual rate in the second quarter; initially the government calculated the rate at 5.2%, then revised it to 5.1% last month.
It was still higher than the 4.8% rate posted in the first quarter. 

The numbers are adjusted for seasonal fluctuations. 

