.START 

Maxwell Communication Corp. PLC stepped up efforts to sell its Maxwell Graphics commercial printing business after receiving "a number of inquiries" from interested parties. 

The London-based company said it has hired New York investment banker Wertheim Schroder & Co. to advise it.
Maxwell Graphics, based in Minneapolis, was described by Maxwell Communication as the second-largest commercial printer in North America.
It was pieced together by British media mogul Robert Maxwell in 1986 with the acquisition of four U.S. printing companies.
Maxwell said the printing unit, with 15 plants in the U.S., had 1988 sales of $726 million. 

A source close to the transaction wouldn't estimate the price Maxwell Graphics might fetch, but pointed out that "Mr.
Maxwell has invested more than $500 million in building the business," including the acquisitions. 

Earlier this month, Mr. Maxwell told shareholders of Maxwell Communication at the annual meeting in London that he expected to complete the sale of U.S. printing operations by the end of March 1990. 

Maxwell Graphics prints many major magazines, including Time and Sports Illustrated, and Sunday newspaper supplements such as Parade.
It also is a major printer of newspaper retail inserts and direct-mail catalogs. 

The source close to Maxwell said: "In 1986-87, printing was interesting to {Mr.
Maxwell}.
Now he wants to cycle out of it and into other businesses" such as textbooks, general publishing, and entertainment. 

At the shareholders meeting, Mr. Maxwell also told shareholders the company was "close to completing negotiations" for the purchase of a medium-size educational publisher in North America.
Industry sources in the U.S. said the target likely was Scott, Foresman & Co., a unit of Time Warner Inc., and would cost between $400 million and $500 million. 

J. Kendrick Noble, a publishing industry analyst at PaineWebber Group, said he didn't think Mr. Maxwell "was any less enamored" of the contract printing business than when he entered it, but in light of his acquisition strategy, he "probably wants to sell the business "to finance other things." 

