.START 

The dollar edged up Friday as participants balanced their positions to ride out what may well be stormy trading following last weekend's meeting of the Group of Seven (G-7) nations in Washington. 

For most of last week, currency market activity was overshadowed by speculation that the finance ministers and central bankers of the G-7 major industrial nations would adopt a tougher stance against the U.S. currency.
Although that possibility seemed unlikely, it still restrained trading and depressed the dollar as participants postponed buying the U.S. currency until after the meeting. {The G-7 consists of the U.S., United Kingdom, Canada, Japan, West Germany, France and Italy.} 

A brief rally by the dollar Friday came to a halt when rumors of intervention by the Federal Reserve swept the market as the currency hit its peak. 

In late trading, the dollar was quoted at 1.9510 marks, up from 1.9435 marks late Thursday in New York, and at 146.00 yen, up from 145.63 yen.
Sterling was at $1.5715, down from $1.5798. 

In Tokyo Monday, the dollar was trading at mid-morning at about 142.65 yen, down sharply from 144.47 yen at the opening and from Friday's Tokyo close of 145 yen.
The Bank of Japan was intervening. 

Data on consumer income and spending in August bolstered perceptions that the Fed would be risking an upturn in inflation if it lowered interest rates.
Lower rates would depress the dollar by making interest-bearing investments denominated in the currency less attractive. 

The data showed personal income rose 0.4% in August, despite a widespread telephone workers strike.
Personal spending rose 0.9% in August. 

The dollar hit its peaks of 1.9550 marks and 146.07 yen shortly after the economic data were released, but then profit-taking and the rumors of Fed intervention reversed the gains. 

Later, comments by an unidentified senior U.S. Treasury official that if the dollar continues to strengthen "that would be a matter of concern in the future," weighed on the U.S. currency. 

But the dollar inched higher by the end of trading on last minute short-covering needs and the belief that the G-7 meeting would simply result in a reiteration of the group's previous statements warning against volatility in the foreign-exchange market. 

On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery settled at $366.20 an ounce, up 70 cents.
Estimated volume was a moderate three million ounces. 

In early trading in Hong Kong Monday, gold was quoted at $367.55 an ounce. 

