.START 

We wonder what they made of the just-revised GNP figures at the Council of the Gravely Concerned.
These are the folks whose brows are perpetually furrowed over some impending economic doom. 

On Thursday the government announced that in the second quarter the U.S. economy grew at an annual rate of 2.5%, significantly higher than the initial estimate of 1.7%.
There were other positive numbers to report.
Exports rose 13.1% (concurrent, somehow, with a strengthening dollar); business investment rose 8.6%.
We are heading toward year seven of the economic expansion.
In this context, it may be time to have a look at one of the Gravely Concerned's favorite topics -- productivity.
Recent research on the subject suggests that American productivity is simply not in a period of long-term decline. 

Earlier this month, the Bureau of Labor Statistics revised the GNP numbers for 1986, 1987 and 1988 sharply upward.
The BLS also revised the total number of hours worked downward.
With more product produced, and fewer hours spent producing it, the obvious result was a revision upward in output per hour. 

Last year, output per hour grew by 2.1%.
Improvements in output during this 28-quarter recovery have been just about on a par with improvements during previous postwar recoveries.
In other words, while there was indeed a slowdown in productivity during the 1970s, it seems to be over. 

The news gets better (or for the pessimists, worse).
Substantial growth of the labor force has a damping effect on productivity figures.
If the only people in the labor force were 10 experienced, highly trained and highly motivated individuals, then productivity rates would be awesome.
But if only 10 people in the country were working, the real-life economy wouldn't be in great shape. 

Between 1948 and 1965, the alleged golden years of productivity, the labor force grew by only 1% a year.
During this recovery, the labor force has grown at 2.5% a year.
As less experienced and less highly trained people are brought into the work force, the productivity figures should suffer.
Yet they still look pretty good. 

Last year, Martin Neil Baily of the Brookings Institution and Robert J. Gordon of Northwestern reported that due to mismeasurement, productivity figures since 1973 underestimated true productivity by as much as a third.
John W. Kendrick of George Washington University recently delivered a paper supporting the Baily and Gordon findings, and suggesting that underestimation has grown worse. 

Some of the official measurements are outdated.
The 1963 deflator for the construction industry doesn't fully account for fixtures in new households that have since become nearly standard: central air conditioning, garbage disposals, double-glazed windows.
Measurements of airline fares don't account for periodic discounting, which has become popular since deregulation. 

The most important problem with the statistics is that they don't take into account improvements in quality of goods and services.
Mr. Kendrick points out that the BLS vastly understates improvements in computer power and consumer durables.
The figures also stumble over unmeasurable improvements, such as better radio and TV reception. 

These are just the sort of productivity improvements that the Gravely Concerned have trouble absorbing into their world view.
Without question, achieving new and greater efficiencies in output is a fundamental goal of any private enterprise, and drawing attention to that fact can't hurt.
But the Cassandras ought to recognize that America's corporations and workers are participating in, indeed are creating, a modern, dynamic economy characterized by improving technologies and increasingly global transactions.
One result has been improved productivity. 

