.START 

The Transportation Department is seeking a reduction in KLM Royal Dutch Airlines' investment in Northwest Airlines, according to two people familiar with the situation. 

The action by Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner could disrupt the pending $6.79 billion takeover of United Airlines parent UAL Corp. by a labor-management group with backing from another foreign airline, British Airways PLC. 

At a breakfast meeting Friday, Mr. Skinner asked Northwest owner Alfred Checchi to reduce the dollar amount of KLM's $400 million investment in NWA, the same people said.
KLM made the investment to help Mr. Checchi, a Los Angeles investor, finance a $3.65 billion leveraged buy-out of Northwest parent NWA Inc. that closed in July. 

Mr. Skinner and other Transportation officials have voiced concerns about both the level of indebtedness and degree of foreign influence in recent airline takeovers. 

Although foreign companies are limited to 25% ownership of U.S. airlines, KLM accounted for 57% of the $700 million in equity raised by Mr. Checchi for his purchase.
Officially, KLM owns only 5% of Northwest because its investment is mostly in nonvoting preferred stock.
However, some outsiders have speculated that the dollar amount of KLM's investment might enable it to wield substantial influence over the airline. 

Rumors about possible changes in KLM's role in Northwest sparked a sell-off in UAL shares Friday.
Their price tumbled $5.125 to $281.125 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, on fears that British Air's $750 million UAL investment might have to be restructured along the same lines as KLM's. 

Mr. Checchi declined to comment.
A spokesman for the Transportation Department confirmed that Mr. Skinner reviewed the findings of his agency's study of the NWA takeover with Mr. Checchi on Friday.
An announcement of those findings is expected sometime later this week. 

One person familiar with the situation said Mr. Skinner is seeking a reduction in KLM's Northwest investment from $400 million to $175 million, an amount that would equal 25% of the $700 million in equity raised by Mr. Checchi. 

Some news reports said Mr. Skinner might also ask Mr. Checchi to drop KLM from the new Northwest board, submit financial reports monthly, instead of quarterly, and give the Transportation Department veto power over any refinancing of Northwest's $3.35 billion in bank debt. 

It didn't seem likely that any of Mr. Skinner's demands will pose any grave threat to Northwest or its financial health.
But they have serious implications for the UAL takeover because its structure mirrors that of KLM-Northwest.
While British Air will officially have only a 15% voting interest in United, its equity contribution accounts for 78% of the total equity of $965 million. 

According to the formal tender offer for UAL released Friday, the British Air investment is to be in three different securities.
In theory at least, two of them could be reassigned to other investors to meet possible Transportation Department concerns. 

The three securities British Air will receive are: a $300 million Class A preferred with an 18% dividend but no voting rights; a $200 million Class B preferred with a 13% dividend and no voting rights, and a $250 million junior preferred with no dividend, convertible into a 15% ownership stake in United. 

If the British Air investment had to be reduced to 25% of the equity cash in the UAL buy-out, the first two preferred issues, which total $500 million with a combined dividend rate of 16%, could be attractive to other investors. 

However, those outside investors might seek a voting equity stake as well, forcing changes on a fragile coalition of UAL management, the airline's pilot union, and British Air. 

During the takeover battles for both NWA and UAL, Mr. Skinner and other Transportation Department officials have repeatedly expressed concern about the questions of leverage and foreign-airline influence.
But many takeover stock traders paid little heed because, until now, the officials' actions haven't matched their rhetoric. 

The stock traders have been inclined to believe Mr. Skinner was merely trying to put on a show of investigating the issues in order to pre-empt criticism by congressional Democrats that the Bush administration was being too lenient in allowing the takeovers.
If Mr. Skinner forces changes that cut the price of the UAL takeover or cause it to unravel, their misjudgment could cost them dearly. 

