.START 

The Bundesbank, appearing to signal a further rise in West German interest rates, said previous rate-tightening steps haven't sufficiently reduced the danger of inflation. 

In its monthly report, which it often uses to indicate policy intentions, the central bank was candid about its growing inflation fears as West Germany's robust economy continues to expand. 

The Bundesbank's Central Bank Council left its discount and Lombard rates unchanged at its biweekly meeting yesterday, but many analysts expect the key rates to be raised in October or November.
Some said the Bundesbank is only delaying a rate increase until after a meeting of the Group of Seven leading industrialized countries this weekend in Washington, which precedes the meeting of the International Monetary Fund there next week.
West German officials at the meeting are expected to stress their concerns about inflation and the recently relatively weak German mark. 

"A rate hike just ahead of a G-7 meeting might have been considered inappropriate," said Jonathan Hoffman, a monetary analyst for Credit Suisse First Boston in London. "But the Bundesbank clearly is pointing out stability risks, and it is indicating that tightening moves are only weeks away." 

Hermann Rempsberger, chief economist for Berliner Handels & Frankfurter Bank, said, "For anyone who regularly reads the monthly Bundesbank reports, this one is unusually clear in its implication" that a rate increase is warranted. 

In its September report, the central bank said its policy of slowly forcing up market interest rates this summer had only "limited success" in reducing the cash circulating in the nation's economy. 

"The resulting correction appears to be giving way, shown by the fact that the pace of monetary expansion was somewhat stronger in August," the Bundesbank said.
It reported that by its calculation, M3, the Bundesbank's main liquidity indicator, expanded at an annual seasonally adjusted rate of 5.25% in August, compared with 5% in July.
The Bundesbank has raised its key lending rates three times this year. 

West Germany's annual inflation rate was only 3% last month, but Bundesbank officials are increasingly concerned over the health of the mark and an overheating economy.
The government's plan for tax cuts in January and an expected round of nationwide wage increases next spring have contributed to inflation concerns. 

The central bank's report said the mark's weakness, which fuels inflation by raising prices of imported goods, runs against West German "monetary policy necessities." It said West German interest rates are still well below the international average and that currency markets are focusing on the higher nominal interest rates offered by other currencies. 

