.START 

Just a few months ago, Cummins Engine Co. looked as if it finally was firing on all cylinders.
Truck orders were strong, helping first-half profit surge after a decade of uneven results.
The maker of diesel engines even rid itself of an unwelcome investor when descendants of its founders bought Hanson USA's 8.8% stake. 

But then came a slowdown in truck orders and Thursday's shocker: Cummins expects a "substantial" third-quarter loss.
With few signs of a quick rebound in heavy-duty trucks, the unsettling question suddenly is whether the good times are over after only two quarters of strong earnings. 

"The doggone business just keeps on deteriorating," says Larry Neihart, president of the Diesel Workers Union, which represents about 3,850 Cummins production employees. "We don't know if this is the end of it or not." 

Neither does the company.
Cummins says the fourth-quarter outlook is "uncertain," and it plans to pare costs by, among other things, laying off 200 employees as of next Sunday.
That's atop 100 job cuts in August. 

Henry B. Schacht, the company's chairman and chief executive officer, says that until recently truck makers kept building even when orders slowed. "What they were betting -- and we were hoping -- was that come fall, the order rate would pick up," he says. "And it didn't." 

Last week's news stunned investors and analysts, sending Cummins stock tumbling $5.125 to $57.50 Friday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading.
Two analysts say they were led to believe losses weren't in the cards. "I was disappointed," says Steven Colbert of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. 

So was Cummins's latest uninvited investor, Industrial Equity (Pacific) Ltd., a Hong Kong-based investment firm. "The magnitude of the layoffs and the impact on the company was somewhat of a surprise to us," says Robert G. Sutherland, Industrial Equity's president and chief executive. 

That apparently didn't stop the firm from snapping up more Cummins shares, however.
Mr. Sutherland said in an interview from the company's office in La Jolla, Calif., that Industrial Equity bought more shares Friday, boosting its stake to 14.9%. 

Mr. Sutherland reiterated Industrial Equity's previous statement to the Securities and Exchange Commission that the stake is for "investment purposes." He added: "We have no other motives at this point." He said Industrial Equity was attracted to Cummins because it believes the company's huge investment in new engines "will reap benefits in the future." 

That, indeed, was the plan when Cummins continued to sink an increasing amount of money into research and engineering even as it racked up big losses in 1986 and 1988 and a slim profit in 1987.
The goal was to continue to revamp the product line and hold the line on prices and thus market share. 

Cummins began the year with a strong 54% of the engine market for North American heavy-duty trucks and optimism that years of restructuring would pay off. "1989 should be a much improved year," Mr. Schacht wrote shareholders in March. 

For a while, it was.
With truck orders surging early in the year, Cummins ended the first half with earnings of $43.4 million, or $3.65 a share on a primary basis, on sales of $1.85 billion.
A year earlier, it earned $9.2 million, or 48 cents a share, on sales of $1.63 billion. 

But orders for heavy-duty trucks fell sharply in the second quarter as truck buyers pulled back, scared by talk of an impending recession.
When truck makers finally cut production in recent weeks, it had an almost immediate effect on Cummins. 

With August's industry orders at their lowest level since April 1983, some analysts think orders could begin to improve if the country doesn't slide into a recession.
Others aren't so sure.
Prudential-Bache's Mr. Colbert thinks year-to-year production comparisons for the industry could remain negative through next year's third quarter.
And he says that means Cummins might have a hard time earning a profit through 1990. 

Even some of Cummins's steps to diversify are misfiring.
A slowdown in the boat and recreational-vehicle markets has sent sales of generator sets tumbling 38% from the first half and 25% from year-earlier levels. 

To deal with the slowdown, Cummins says it will cut "discretionary expenses" such as travel and place "stringent restrictions" on working capital.
But just as it did through the tough years of the 1980s, it plans to keep spending on new products -- especially to develop engines to meet tougher U.S. emissions standards in 1991 and 1994. 

Mr. Schacht says Cummins is in better shape to deal with the downturn, having cut costs sharply in recent years to meet Japanese competition. "We're feeling very good about the fundamentals of the company," he says, adding: "A cyclical recession in the middle of it is very disappointing, but we can't control that." With the long-awaited turnaround in doubt, some wonder how long already restless investors will remain patient. "The company to date hasn't exhibited exceptional interest in helping shareholders," says PaineWebber Inc. analyst Eli Lustgarten. 

Despite Friday's plunge, analysts say the stock is still being propped up by the possibility of a takeover.
The July purchase of Hanson's stake by descendants of the company's founding family make that more difficult, but not impossible. 

For now, Industrial Equity is being patient, saying it sees its stake as a "long-term investment." But it seems to have a different definition of long-term than either Cummins' management or the descendants of the founders.
Asked to define "long-term," Industrial Equity's Mr. Sutherland replied: "At least six months." 

