.START 

A year after Revlon Group Inc. unveiled a controversial strategy to grab a bigger slice of the department-store cosmetics business, the program has stalled. 

Last fall, the cosmetics maker launched a marketing initiative dubbed "The Nines," designed to boost its visibility in tony department stores.
Over the years, Revlon had acquired prestige cosmetics lines such as Charles of the Ritz and Princess Marcella Borghese, but had no comprehensive marketing strategy for them.
Under the Nines program, the company gathered all nine of its upscale cosmetics lines -- encompassing some 3,000 items -- at a single cosmetics counter with a special Nines banner. 

Despite the splashy effort, "the Nines never really got off the ground," said Allan G. Mottus, a cosmetics industry consultant.
Mr. Mottus estimates that Revlon's share of the $5 billion upscale cosmetics market dipped from about 9% in 1987 to just over 8% this year. 

Competitors say Revlon's sales staff was unable to master the vast array of products they were expected to push.
And the attempt to sell customers more than one cosmetics line per visit undermined efforts to build brand loyalty. "Consumers buy different pieces from different lines," said a marketing executive at one competitor. "It confuses customers." 

Revlon concedes there have been problems. "We've slowed down the roll-out considerably," said a Revlon spokesman. "Very early on, it became clear we were going to spend much more time per store than anticipated." 

Revlon now operates Nines counters in just 109 of the 1,200 upscale department stores where it does business.
The spokesman acknowledged that this figure was considerably lower than initial projections. 

Adding to Revlon's difficulties, the company claims that 200 retailers nationwide grew impatient with the pace of the rollout and implemented their own version of the Nines.
These independent-minded retailers lumped together all of Revlon's lines, without waiting for marketing support from headquarters or proper training for their sales help.
The Revlon spokesman speculated these "less successful" Nines knock-offs tarnished the "official" Nines image. 

Nevertheless, Revlon insists the Nines strategy is working in the stores where it has been officially implemented.
The company says sales at those 109 stores jumped more than 25% after the program began -- an impressive gain at a time when the total industry is growing at only about 7% per year.
Moreover, the company says intensified sales training programs have reduced turnover among its counter sales force. 

For now, Revlon shows no signs of abandoning the effort. "It's a very successful solution to problems we've had in certain stores," the spokesman said.
He added: "This is an ongoing program." 

