.START 

Your Aug. 24 editorial "The Last to Know" demonstrates a basic misunderstanding of credit analysis and ratings in the capital markets. 

Standard & Poor's ratings reflect our opinion of credit risk -- the capacity for timely repayment of debt.
Credit ratings do not measure market risk. 

To tell your readers "To find out which bonds are safe and which ones risky, don't look at the ratings, look at the interest rate" is unsound advice.
Interest rates can fluctuate at any time for many reasons other than a change in basic credit quality.
Bond yields can vary among a wide number of issues for reasons other than their credit quality. 

As we've noted before, it is this assessment of basic credit quality that is S&P's goal.
Our ratings are based on our independent, objective assessment of the issuer's ability to repay its bondholders. 

We've gone to great lengths to make public our process, standards, criteria and rationale on each rating action.
All this information is available to investors, issuers, underwriters and the media.
To suggest our ratings were politically motivated shows a fundamental ignorance of S&P's rating system and criteria. 

Again, we will clarify the record: 

New York City's default 14 years ago was on $1.6 billion of short-term notes.
S&P never rated those notes.
The city's bonds that were rated by S&P continued to pay principal and interest and never went into default. 

Your statement "S&P didn't suspend its ratings for WHOOPS {Washington Public Power Supply System} until May, only two months before the actual default" is inaccurate.
S&P suspended ratings on Projects 1, 2 and 3 bonds, and these bonds never went into default.
S&P lowered its rating on the Project 4 and 5 bonds to B (low speculative grade) about nine months prior to default. 

You fail to point out that S&P reported on Massachusetts's budget shortage and warned creditors last March that the state's budget plan wasn't working.
Subsequently, S&P did lower the state's credit rating.
At no time has "politics" played a role in these or any other S&P rating decisions.
If politicians or editorial writers misuse or misinterpret our credit ratings that is beyond S&P's control.
Your readers undoubtedly are used to discounting what politicians say.
Let the reader beware of editorial opinions, too. 

Leo C. O'Neill 

President 

Standard & Poor's Ratings Group 

New York 

