.START 

Regarding your Aug. 28 page-one article "Mysterious Circles in British Fields Spook the Populace": This represents a phenomenon truly perplexing to orthodox science. 

Having been a research meteorologist studying turbulence for 26 years, I must reject utterly the claim made in your story by Terence Meaden that this phenomenon in the wheat fields can be explained as a new kind of whirlwind that nature has suddenly invented and unleashed over southern England.
That "explanation" fails to account for the pattern's occurrence at night when the air near the surface is most stable, for the pattern's symmetry, for the abrupt outer edges of the circles, for the absence of any standing stalks even at the center where a whirlwind's horizontal speed is zero, and for the later continued growth of the flattened grain in a horizontal direction only. 

On the other hand, very similar patterns in grass have been photographed repeatedly in the past 20 years in locations where UFOs were seen hovering beforehand. 

James W. Deardorff 

Research Professor Emeritus 

Department of Atmospheric Sciences 

Oregon State University 

Corvallis, Ore. 

Congratulations to you on a wonderful story.
As a transplanted Brit, I hooted all the way through.
With the descriptions of Edley Ware and Simon Brown, you delightfully convey the essence of English homespun agrarian philosophers, balanced by the no-bunkum approach of the technocrats -- not forgetting the concerns of good Queen Bess.
The story has been passed around among friends who have chortled as much as 

Incidentally, I believe the mystery circles must be the result of massing hordes of enraged hedgehogs wreaking vengeance for years of having been squished beneath British automobiles. 

Gloria Parkinson 

Clinton, Mass. 

Any durn fool would know what them big wheat pies is all about over there in England.
Somebody's up there in helio-copters iron minin' from the sky.
And using one of them big magnets for loadin' scrap iron into freight cars.
While he's up there hoverin' and checkin' his lap computer for iron-ore readings, that big magnet just twirls around.
If the helio-copter is real high up, the wheat pies is small, and if it's real low to the ground, they get real big.
And if he hovers a long time in one spot, the pies get twirly and bent. 

Now that the mystery's been solved by me (with plain ole Texas ingenuity), the Queen of England and loyal subjects can hit the hay without havin' to check under their beds for Alien Wheat Spinners from the Planet Cereal. 

Mac McCay 

Houston 

