.START 

Carolco Pictures Inc. said it paid about $500,000 to settle a lawsuit brought by Noel C. Bloom in connection with Carolco's purchase of a company from Mr. Bloom, who law-enforcement officials have described as a pornographer and associate of organized-crime figures. 

A Carolco spokesman said the decision to settle the case was influenced by the murder last month of Jose Menendez, chairman of Live Entertainment Inc., a video and audio distributor that is 49% owned by Carolco.
The spokesman said that Mr. Menendez's testimony would have been needed in the case.
The spokesman added that he didn't believe there was any connection between the lawsuit and Mr. Menendez's murder. 

The Beverly Hills police are continuing to investigate the murders of Mr. Menenendez and his wife, Kitty, in their Beverly Hills mansion.
No suspects or motives have surfaced in the killings. 

The legal dispute between Mr. Bloom and Carolco revolved around the acquisition of International Video Entertainment Inc., a distributor of home videos, through a series of transactions beginning in 1986.
Mr. Bloom filed suit in 1987 in Los Angeles state court claiming Carolco and International Video failed to pay him $500,000 due as part of the sale.
The companies countersued, claiming -- among other things -- that Mr. Bloom had overstated the value of International Video, which was eventually merged into Live Entertainment. 

Last year, a referee agreed upon by both sides awarded Mr. Bloom $500,000. 

Carolco and International Video initially appealed.
Settlement talks had begun before Mr. Menendez's death, the Carolco spokesman said.
By settling, he added, the companies were able to halt accumulating legal fees and interest on the judgment. 

Mr. Bloom, through a spokeswoman, declined to be interviewed.
A 1986 report on organized crime by the California Attorney General described Mr. Bloom as a "major distributor of X-rated movies" and a "former associate of the late Michael Zaffarano of the Bonanno" organized-crime family.
The report also said Mr. Bloom may have gotten financial help from another figure connected to organized crime. 

Mr. Bloom has been described by one of his attorneys as a "reputable" video distributor.
Carolco has also said that International Video hasn't any involvement with pornography. 

