.START 

THE DOLLAR'S RECENT RISE was criticized by the Group of Seven industrial nations as "inconsistent with longer run economic fundamentals." The statement, following a Saturday meeting in Washington, was the group's strongest sign yet of concern about the currency.
But it wasn't clear what steps officials might take to combat the dollar's advance. 

UAL Chairman Wolf came under fire from United Air employee groups over the $76.7 million profit he stands to gain from the proposed labor-management buy-out of the carrier.
But Wolf defended the buy-out plan. 

The U.S. is seeking a reduction in KLM's investment in Northwest Air, sources said.
The move could disrupt the pending UAL deal, in which another foreign airline, British Airways, would play a major role. 

Chrysler sold nearly half of its 21.8% stake in Mitsubishi Motors for an aftertax profit of $310 million.
Chrysler, which is planning major capital outlays, said it was cashing in on Mitsubishi's soaring value. 

Michelin Group agreed to buy Uniroyal for $690 million, making the French company the world's largest tiremaker.
The pact also marks the latest inroad by a foreign firm in the North American tire market. 

A Merrill Lynch-led group is expected to replace Citicorp Venture Capital as the buyer of RJR Nabisco's Del Monte canned foods business. 

Lomas Financial filed for bankruptcy-court protection.
The chairman predicted the company would emerge from Chapter 11 relatively quickly with a plan that will provide 100% payment for creditors. 

General Motors became the second Big Three auto maker to offer sales incentives on many 1990 models before they're even introduced.
Ford is expected to join the fray soon, reflecting worries about sluggish sales. 

Rockwell International reached an accord with the Energy Department to turn over its Rocky Flats nuclear-weapons plant to a new contractor, EG&G.
The facility has been the subject of controversy for months. 

Procter & Gamble agreed to buy Noxell in a stock swap valued at $1.3 billion.
The accord marks P&G's entry into the cosmetics business. 

OPEC ministers plan to resume talks in Geneva today on oil production ceilings and quotas after making little headway over the weekend.
But prospects are dim for any accord. 

Bloomingdale's Chairman Marvin Traub is talking with Drexel and Blackstone Group about a buy-out of the store chain, sources said. 

Jaguar vowed to fight Ford's surprise bid for a minority stake.
Analysts said the British auto maker's best defense may be an alliance with another company, possibly GM. 

A proposed merger of Arthur Andersen and Price Waterhouse could be scuttled amid differences over their retirement plans, sources said. 

PS New Hampshire's bankruptcy filing allows it to circumvent state regulation of electricity rates and other matters, a federal judge said. 

Personal income rose 0.4% in August, while personal spending jumped 0.9%, led by a surge in auto buying. 

Markets -- 

Stocks: Volume 133,350,000 shares.
Dow Jones industrials 2681.61, up 1.33; transportation 1448.26, off 17.60; utilities 216.80, up 0.50. 

Bonds: Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3301.17, off 

Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 130.24, off 0.60; spot index 129.64, off 0.03. 

Dollar: 146.00 yen, up 0.37; 1.9510 marks, up 0.0075. 

