.START 

U.S. uranium producers are being squeezed by an acute price depression in the international market, industry sources say. 

But by the mid-1990s their prospects are expected to improve because the uranium price is expected to revive. 

The free market price of uranium oxide, the mineral produced by the mines, has slumped to $9.60 a pound, the lowest level since 1974.
Present quotes are now 78% below the 1978 peak of $43 a pound, an optimistic year that precipitated overproduction around the world. 

"The uranium spot market accounts for only 10% of production," says Judy Sellers, senior research officer at the London-based Uranium Institute, an organization representing producers and consumers of the mineral. "But the price is used as an indication for contract negotiations," she says. 

Prices have slid in the past few years because mining companies were unduly optimistic in the late 1970s and early 1980s and overestimated consumption, according to the Uranium Institute.
As a result, uranium inventories in the market range between 140,000 and 180,000 tons, depending on the definition of stocks, it says. 

"Large inventories overhanging the market have been a major uncertainty in the 1980s," the institute says. 

The price decline has had such an impact on U.S. producers that their output fell to 5,190 metric tons last year from a peak of 16,800 tons in 1980, the Uranium Institute says. (A metric ton is equal to 1.1 U.S. short tons, or 2,204.6 pounds.) World output has also fallen 18% to 36,420 metric tons in the same period, but the U.S. share has shrunk to 14% from 38% at its peak, according to the institute. 

"Moreover, the state of U.S. producers is likely to worsen if prices remain depressed," says David Clark, president of Uranium Exchange Co., Danbury, Conn., brokers and analysts.
Chevron Resources Co., for example, plans to shut down its Mount Taylor uranium mine near Grants, N.M., by mid-October if it cannot find an equity partner for the property, the company said. 

The decision to close the operation by that date is based entirely on the current economics of the uranium market, the company said, even though it won the major share of U.S. supply contracts with Japanese utilities in the past year. 

Mount Taylor's reserves are 120 million pounds, but only about 45 million pounds of uranium can be extracted at a currently competitive price of about $15 to $20 a pound for long-term contracts, says Nuclear Fuel, an industry newsletter. 

Other major North American producers are also under pressure, industry sources say.
They include Homestake Mining Co. 's uranium business, which incurred a loss of $1.2 million in the second quarter of 1989, and Rio Algom Ltd. in Canada. 

A spokesman for Rio Algom, however, said the company was "making money because all its uranium production in Canada was committed under long-term contracts signed when prices were higher." He added that uranium normally accounts for only about 25% to 30% of the company's income, which also comes from copper, potash, tin, and coal, as well as metals distribution. 

At a conference of the Uranium Institute earlier this month, delegates were bitterly disappointed.
They had hoped for an improvement in market conditions in the past two years, but the price has slumped despite many predictions of improvement. 

Consumers had more than sufficient inventories and were putting pressure on producers, delegates said, so much so that it has paid some U.S. mines to buy or borrow uranium from other producers and consumers instead of mining it to fulfill contracts. 

Yet, once again, uranium experts are forecasting a marked change in market conditions in the 1990s.
Ultimately, they are likely to be correct, analysts say, but the eventual increase in price will now take place from a very low level. 

Uranium demand is ultimately dependent on nuclear generating capacity and the institute, in a study, predicts that the capacity will grow 31% to 347,000 megawatts by the year 2005.
World uranium demand in 2005 will rise to 54,000 tons from 37,000 tons this year, the institute says. 

"This forecast is considered reliable because 92% of the units were either operating, under construction or firmly planned at the end of 1988," the institute says. 

"A further upturn in orders for new nuclear plants could occur at any time due to the necessary replacement and expansion of electricity generating systems," the institute says. 

Moreover, there are signs that the greenhouse effect will encourage nations to switch from coal-fired power stations to nuclear energy, Peter Fischer, chairman of the Uranium Institute, says. 

"Ultimately, the nuclear industry should experience renewed growth in all its sectors, particularly after the turn of the century," the Uranium Institute says.
Looking ahead to commodity markets this week: 

Copper 

Production problems appear around the world almost as soon as previous ones are either solved or become so prolonged that they lose their influence on prices. 

The latest is a rock fall at Chile's El Teniente mine, which produces 360,000 tons of refined copper a year.
Production is expected to be delayed as long as 15 days.
The news came just as the market was adjusting to the realization that the Highland Valley strike in Canada would drag on indefinitely. 

This year has seen a succession of production disruptions: the Bougainville mine, which was shut down before Highland Valley and is still inoperative; the bankruptcy of the Cananea mine in Mexico; threatened or real strikes in Peru, Chile and the U.S.; never-ending difficulties in Zambia and Zaire; and various other problems. 

Demand for copper continues to be robust because the economy hasn't fallen on its face, as many expected.
The price of copper for immediate shipment is commanding a widening premium over latermaturing futures.
The September contract, which ceases trading Wednesday, last Tuesday rose to a life-of-contract high of $1.4050 after edging below $1 in early July. 

The supply tightness has been more pronounced in New York's Commodity Exchange warehouses than in London Metal Exchange inventories.
The latter, in fact, are expected to rise about 10,000 tons in today's regular announcement and the premium on the London exchange of the spot contract over the three-month position is expected to continue narrowing. 

Coffee 

The focus this week will be on the start of the two-week meeting in London of the full 74-member Council of the International Coffee Organization.
Colombia, the world's second largest producer, will be in the spotlight as it tries to fulfill its usual role as the great mediator. 

Colombia has indicated it will propose the reinstatement of global export quotas of green coffee that were suspended in July.
Virgilio Barco, Colombia's president, is scheduled to meet with President Bush Friday to discuss the coffee and drug crises, which have become interrelated because of their economic impact on Colombia. 

The principal obstacle to the reinstatement of coffee export quotas is the so-far unyielding attitudes of the U.S. and Brazil, the major importing and exporting nations.
The U.S. wants more flexible quotas that will increase the flow to market of more favorable mild coffees, and it also wants sales stopped of coffee at cheaper prices to nations that aren't in the agreement. 

Any changes in quotas in favor of one group have to be at the expense of another, and Brazil, which is always a huge target for such a move, is adamant in not giving up any of its 30% market share.
In fact, it professes to be happy without export quotas.
Neither are African and other Robusta-producing countries willing to surrender part of their markets to Central American nations, which would most benefit from flexible quotas. 

There is less chance for agreement on a new pact than six months ago, because Brazil is taking a harder line than ever, one analyst observed. 

Grains and Soybeans 

Whether, and to what extent, an early frost spread across portions of the Midwest over the weekend will be the determining factor weighing on futures prices this week. 

Soybean, corn and wheat futures prices dropped in Friday's trading on the Chicago Board of Trade partly in response to the lessening of frost predictions by some forecasters.
But others are sticking with calls for frost as far south as Tennessee, analysts said. 

"This could end the growing season for all intents and purposes," said one analyst.
Added another, "Whatever happens, you can be sure we won't open unchanged" in today's trading.
Heavy spring rain delayed planting in parts of Indiana and Ohio, and as a result a killing frost could reduce the yield from less than fully mature crops. 

