.START 

Finance ministers and central bankers from the world's seven leading industrial nations said the rise of the dollar in recent months is "inconsistent with longer run economic fundamentals." 

The statement, released Saturday evening, was the strongest sign yet of concern about the dollar from the so-called Group of Seven finance officials.
But it wasn't clear what actions the officials might take to combat the dollar's rise. 

Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady termed the daylong meeting "productive," but refused to elaborate on the language about the dollar. "All the governors and ministers have agreed not to comment beyond the communique," he said.
The group meeting preceded the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. 

In Tokyo Monday, the dollar was trading at mid-morning at about 142.65 yen, down sharply from 144.47 yen at the opening and from Friday's Tokyo close of 145 yen.
The Bank of Japan was intervening. 

Many analysts believe the dollar's recent strength could choke off U.S. exports and increase the trade deficit.
In a separate economic report released over the weekend, the International Monetary Fund predicted that the U.S. current account deficit, the broadest measure of trade, would worsen to $138.7 billion in 1990 from a projected $125.1 billion this year.
The IMF also forecast that Japan and West Germany's trade surpluses would soon resume growing again. 

Nevertheless, the IMF economic report was sanguine about U.S. and world growth prospects. "There are few indications that a recession is likely in the near term," it concluded. 

The U.S. Treasury and the Japanese have recently been urging the U.S. Federal Reserve to cut interest rates to reduce upward pressure on the dollar.
Lower rates make U.S. investments less attractive and, thus, reduce the demand for dollars.
But so far, the Fed has resisted pressure for further easing. 

In the absence of interest rate changes, the Group of Seven will have to rely on intervention in exchange markets to influence the dollar.
The officials agreed in their statement to "cooperate closely in exchange markets." But it was unclear whether they would act more forcefully than they have in recent months, when they have poured billions of dollars into the markets in an unsuccessful attempt to prevent the dollar's rise. 

The finance officials also spent much of Saturday discussing Eastern Europe. "The whole meeting became electric when we started talking about the changes going on in the Soviet Union and Poland," said Secretary Brady. 

In its statement, the group urged the Polish government to reach an early agreement with the IMF on a "strong and sustainable" economic reform program.
And the ministers said they "stand ready to support such a program through bilateral and multilateral actions," including rescheduling the nation's $40 billion in debt. 

The IMF's world economic report, released yesterday, said inflation-adjusted economic growth in the U.S. is expected to fall to about 2.1% in 1990 from 2.9% in 1989.
Meantime, the IMF projects economic growth in Japan of 5% for 1989 and 4.75% in 1990.
In the European Community, growth also will slow somewhat, the IMF said, projecting a rate of 3.5% in 1989 and 3% in 1990. 

The IMF stressed the need for reducing the budget deficit in the U.S., but questioned whether that would occur.
It projected the deficit would be $145 billion in fiscal 1990 and $158 billion in fiscal 1991, well above the budget law's targets of $100 billion and $64 billion. 

The world monetary organization also criticized "a worrisome trend" in the U.S. to rely on trade policy to solve its economic problems.
The IMF emphasized that "the external deficit of the U.S. reflects fundamentally macroeconomic imbalances," and said any effort to solve it through trade policy would be "ineffective." 

The Group of Seven includes finance ministers and central bank governors of the U.S., West Germany, Japan, France, Britain, Canada and Italy.
The managing director of the IMF also participated in the discussions. 

The section of the communique dealing with the dollar read: 

"The ministers and governors considered the rise in recent months of the dollar inconsistent with longer run economic fundamentals.
They agreed that a rise of the dollar above current levels or an excessive decline could adversely affect prospects for the world economy.
In this context, they agreed to cooperate closely in exchange markets." 

Separately, the G-7 ministers don't seem concerned about recent heavy additions to loan-loss provisions against Third World loans by some of the largest U.S. banks. "The increased provisioning, we understand, doesn't preclude new lending," Japan's finance minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said.
Some analysts argue that such provisioning makes it more unlikely that banks will provide the funds necessary to back the revised international debt strategy.
That strategy, championed by Mr. Brady, stresses debt and debt-service reduction over continued lending. 

Yesterday, Mr. Brady discussed his debt strategy in a speech to the IMF's interim committee.
In a short time, "we have been able to turn the broad outline of the strengthened strategy into clear progress in individual countries," he said, adding that Mexico and the Philippines recently reached proposed agreements with their leading commercial bank creditors. "We look forward to the early completion of these understandings," he said. 

But Mr. Brady acknowledged more progress is needed.
He questioned the current method of negotiating bank debt agreements. "Perhaps it will require improvements in the process presently followed in negotiations, including in the efficacy of the current bank advisory committee," he said.
Troubled debtors now negotiate settlements with these bank advisory committees, which typically include about 15 creditor banks. 

The Treasury secretary also stated the U.S. position on the IMF's current campaign to increase its resources.
The U.S. strongly supports the IMF, he said, and will "work cooperatively in the hope of reaching a decision on the quota issue by the end of the year." IMF member countries place reserves at the IMF to fulfill quotas that provide the agency's resources.
The IMF is seeking a 100% increase in members' quotas, meaning an additional $120 billion. 

Mr. Brady said the IMF currently has sufficient funds, however, and "a fully persuasive case" hasn't been made that there is a pressing need for more funds. "We must remember it is our taxpayers who are being asked to provide these resources," he said. 

