.START 

Another financier is getting into the French luxury-goods business. 

The head of the Paris subsidiary of Britain's Midland Bank, Leon Bressler, says he is stepping down to become full-time chairman of the financially troubled Lanvin fashion and perfume house.
He will be succeeded at the Paris banking unit by Claude-Eric Paquin, his deputy. 

Although he hasn't any prior experience in the business, Mr. Bressler says he was "seduced" by the fashion world after arranging last March for Midland to take a 40% stake in the prestigious old house. 

Financiers already have heavy investments in French fashion.
Bernard Arnault controls the Dior, Christian Lacroix, Celine and LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton luxury groups.
Carlo De Benedetti has a substantial minority stake in Yves Saint Laurent.
Alain Chevalier, deposed chairman of Moet Vuitton, is negotiating the purchase of the Pierre Balmain house. 

Unlike them, Mr. Bressler isn't putting any of his own money into Lanvin.
It remains controlled by the bank and by the Lanvin family, which retains a 60% stake.
Mr. Bressler says Midland's share could rise if Lanvin boosts its capital later. 

Mr. Bressler, a 42-year-old French citizen, wouldn't rule out an eventual buy-out of Lanvin, permitting Midland to take a profit and leaving him or another investor as owner.
For now, however, he says the priority is to return the maker of Arpege perfume and classic French clothing to profitability.
He forecast a loss of 60 million French francs ($9.1 million) for this year, following last year's loss of more than 100 million francs on revenue of 250 million francs.
About half of the two losses are from restructuring costs, he says. 

Turning the company around won't be easy, he acknowledges.
Lanvin was shopped around and rejected by just about every other fashion house and luxury investor available before Midland became interested late last year, he says.
Midland didn't have any loans to Lanvin, Mr. Bressler says, but saw an investment opportunity. "Most of the others looked at Lanvin as a luxury company.
We looked at them for their breakup value," he says. "They had a great series of real estate holdings." 

He won't say what Midland paid for its 40% stake, but the bank persuaded the Lanvin family to let it run the business. 

After the investment became final, Mr. Bressler sold the choicest real estate, a historic building near the Arc de Triomphe, for 260 million francs to Japan's Mitsukoshi group.
That wiped out Lanvin's 200 million franc debt and should cover this year's loss, says Mr. Bressler.
He hopes to break even next year and post profits after that. 

He is reorganizing management -- including moving family members out of key management slots -- and cutting staff by 80, to 400.
Sources say he is negotiating with such designers as Giorgio Armani to take over and pep up the women's high fashion collection.
He also is planning Arpege's first big publicity campaign in a decade. 

Lanvin makes 150 million francs a year on fashion, mostly from license fees from ready-to-wear houses that use the Lanvin name on their clothing.
Sources say Mr. Bressler hopes to boost Lanvin's own sales of both perfume and fashions.
He is expected to create new lines of luxury goods, such as bags, which Lanvin will make itself rather than license.
Sources say he will expand the franchised and Lanvin-owned boutiques to 50 world-wide over the next five years, from about 20. 

At Midland, Mr. Bressler remains a member of the Paris unit's board and an adviser to the parent. 

