.START 

In your Sept. 5 article "Firms Cut Drug-Treatment Benefits" you miss a major point: Outpatient treatment is more than a low-cost alternative.
It can be just as thorough and structured as the best inpatient programs. 

Inpatient treatment is traditionally based on the Minnesota Model, which includes five main elements: Total abstinence, education, group treatment, Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous, and a family component.
Since the early 1980s, it has been clear that these principles can just as well be applied to an outpatient setting. 

Some of the clinical benefits: People need time to change; inpatient treatment helps remove the drug, but gives only a sampler on how to build a drug-free life.
Outpatient treatment offers a more appropriate time course, usually about one year, in which to establish new patterns of relationships and coping skills. 

Also, the patient stays in contact with the normal work and home environment.
The cues and triggers that lead to relapse are encountered every day, while treatment sessions provide a place to learn and practice how to deal with them. 

Part of the value of inpatient treatment is the "pink cloud" of good feeling and confidence.
When the 28 days are up and the patient must re-enter a world full of problems and stresses, the shock itself can trigger relapse. 

Outpatient treatment is not for everyone.
But where there is a choice, we feel a structured outpatient program offers more effective treatment at less cost. 

Jeffery Smith M.D. 

Assistant Clinical Professor of Psychiatry 

New York Medical College 

President 

Cortland Medical Outpatient Rehabilitation Center 

Hawthorne, N.Y. 

A big hurrah to employers and health-care providers.
It's about time for those of us who choose not to consume alcoholic beverages or use drugs to stop having to pay higher health-care costs for "illnesses" others bring upon themselves.
It's likewise time we stop having to pay increased health-care costs for those who continue using tobacco in spite of and in defiance of all medical evidence and warnings about its potential dangers.
While I sympathize with those who may develop cancer, emphysema, heart and/or respiratory diseases, etc., I find little justification for my health-care costs skyrocketing annually because of others' actions. 

Kenneth L. Bloeser 

Nashville, Tenn. 

The critical aspect of any treatment that involves inpatient care comes when the patient returns to his day-to-day life.
There, he alone is responsible again for all that he does, or doesn't do.
Both the availability of substances and the underlying internal causes are present and can be managed only by the previous user.
Hospitalization, the primary focus of the article, is an artificial environment that can only help detoxify a person safely. 

Treating the latent reason for the use of mind-altering substances is necessary for the treatment to be curative.
All too often, the patient stops using drugs, the psychological pain that fomented the numbing use of drugs remains, and treatment is deemed finished.
Similar to a low-grade infection, it goes untreated and will later stimulate recurrent drug use or other selfdamaging behavior. 

The answer for such an "enigmatic condition" as addiction is the same for the proliferation of mediocre psychotherapy.
In general, employer-offered benefit programs that cover all costs should be eliminated.
Some financial participation by the patient is crucial to the success of treatment. 

Many well-meaning employers and insurance companies haven't known well the therapeutic value of patients paying directly for treatment.
Money changing hands in such a manner is a quick, powerful and real way to cement a helping relationship, the basis for psychotherapy. 

James R. Stanislaw 

Psychotherapist 

Southfield, Mich. 

