.START 

Indicted junk-bond king Michael Milken may be entitled to the best legal defense money can buy.
But his former employer, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., has decided he isn't entitled to all the legal defense its money can buy. 

Drexel, which is footing the bill, is putting Mr. Milken's lawyers on a strict budget: $1,250,000 a month. 

For Arthur Liman and the rest of the Milken criminal-defense team, the budget is a style-cramper.
Until now, they have coasted along with bills as high as $2 million a month. 

The crackdown -- which covers the defense of Mr. Milken and his brother Lowell Milken -- prohibits the attorneys from flying first-class or staying in deluxe hotel suites.
Drexel says it will keep close tabs on consultants the lawyers hire, documents they copy and overtime they pay to secretaries and paralegals. 

Mr. Liman, who reportedly has been billing $450 an hour for his services, is irate. 

"The quality of Michael Milken's representation will not be affected by Drexel's nickeling and diming their lawyers," says Mr. Liman, former counsel to the congressional Iran-Contra committee.
If Drexel wants "us to take the train to California and we want to go by plane, Michael will pay," he insists. 

Until recently, the former $550 million-a-year head of Drexel's junk-bond department, had a common purpose with Drexel.
They were fighting charges they had engaged in insider trading and other securities-law violations. 

But in December, Drexel agreed to plead guilty to six felony counts rather than face racketeering charges.
Drexel promised to continue paying the legal bills for the Milkens, who decided to fight.
In March, the brothers were charged in a 98-count indictment alleging racketeering, securities, mail and tax fraud.
They have declared their innocence. 

Relations between Drexel and the Milken attorneys have been chilly since Drexel's plea agreement, which involved a promise that it would cooperate in a continuing investigation of the Milkens.
The cool relations gave way to a Cold War after Drexel first sought in late August to crack down on mounting legal fees. 

To the Milken attorneys, the crackdown smacked of hypocrisy.
After all, Drexel's attorneys spared no expense when it was battling the government, racking up as much as $100 million in legal fees. 

But that was under the old regime.
With a cleaned-up Drexel operating with a new chairman, John Shad, and a new general counsel, Saul Cohen, cost-consciousness has taken hold. 

Mr. Cohen emphasizes that Drexel isn't singling out the Milkens.
He says Mr. Liman's law firm was one of more than 50 firms to which he wrote in late August to inform them of the investment bank's attempt to cut legal costs. 

Moreover, Mr. Cohen asserts that Drexel isn't seeking to "second-guess counsel" for any of its current or former employees.
He says the cost-cutting measure was "a specific response to the need to make this place as profitable as possible." 

In the Milken defense effort, cost-cutters have a tempting target.
In addition to traveling in style, the Milken attorneys have left no stone unturned in their defense efforts. 

They are understood to have spent more than $500,000 on a team of economists to study the market impact of stock parking, a practice at the core of some of the charges against Mr. Milken.
The study yielded results considered to be "predictable," according to lawyers who learned of the conclusions.
The Milken attorneys have hired dozens of other academics as consultants on a variety of matters. 

And when defendants in the government's related case against Princeton/Newport Limited Partnership went on trial earlier this year, as many as six attorneys connected with the Milken defense showed up in court many days to view the proceedings while the meter ticked. 

Mr. Liman's law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison has staffed the case liberally.
In addition to two $450-an-hour partners working full-time on the matter, Mr. Liman and Martin Flumenbaum, it has more than a dozen associates and paralegals assigned to the case. 

Meanwhile, in Washington, D.C., a second premium-priced law firm, Williams & Connolly, assists in the defense planning.
In Beverly Hills, Michael Milken's longtime friend Richard Sandler works on the case.
And now Mr. Milken is searching for another top criminal lawyer to assist Mr. Liman at trial, which won't begin before late next year. 

Despite Drexel's cost crusade, Mr. Liman says he and his client are committed to waging the most effective war against the government's charges as possible.
From now on, he says, "Michael is paying the lion's share of his own legal fees and expenses." 

Defense attorneys say they are particularly upset about Drexel's demand that outside counsel include in all bills a detailed description of work done.
They say they fear the government will subpoena those bills in an attempt to discern what the defense is up to.
Some note that with Drexel cooperating with the government, a subpoena may not even be necessary. 

Mr. Cohen, the new Drexel general counsel, says several attorneys have told him they wouldn't submit detailed bills because of a concern the bills would later be viewed by the government. "We understand that concern and we've asked them to tell us what they can," he says. 

