.START 

Ann Voegtli doesn't have the usual fears of things that go bump in the night.
Most of the time, she figures it must be her husband. 

On some snowy nights Ronald Voegtli has ventured as far as two blocks barefoot and pajama-clad before awakening.
Eight lamps have met their end in his path.
The 43-year-old maintenance man from St. Louis once trapped himself and his wife in their bedroom by blocking the door with a dresser he couldn't budge when awake. 

Noting that he typically slept on his back before such episodes, Mrs. Voegtli sewed a soccer ball behind his pajama top to keep him on his stomach. "But later he shot out of bed anyway, with that stupid ball bobbing behind him all over the house," she says. 

Modern medicine has few remedies to offer sufferers.
Despite a burgeoning number of sleep-disorder clinics in the U.S. -- 200 today compared with a dozen in 1980 -- sleepwalking, or somnambulism, remains a mystery.
Researchers are putting to rest such problems as snoring, narcolepsy (uncontrollable snoozing) and breathing lapses while asleep. "But sleepwalkers have the most exotic sleep problem.
They may head for the hotel lobby in their skivvies, the refrigerator for a sandwich or to their gun case, and we don't know why," says Carlos Schenk, a psychiatrist in Minneapolis who researches sleep illnesses. 

More sleepwalkers are undergoing treatment.
Rush-Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Medical Center in Chicago reports up to six cases a week, compared with one a month five years ago.
Career people nearing middle age "are a sleep-deprived generation -- overworked, overexercised and overmedicated -- especially vulnerable to sleepwalk," says Rosalind Cartwright, psychologist in charge of Rush's sleep clinic. 

Sleepwalking may be triggered by job stress, jet lag, late hours or simply sleeping in new surroundings.
Jeff Nolen, anxious over a new job, crashed through a first-floor window in his parents' home in Houston three years ago.
He wasn't cut.
But he walked through another window last spring -- and needed 24 stitches. 

Mr. Nolen's nocturnal wandering doesn't make him a weirdo.
Studies show that up to 5% of the adult U.S. population, roughly 10 million people, sleepwalk occasionally.
Most indulge in harmless, if embarrassing, deeds. "A lot of men may just walk a few steps to the closet and relieve themselves," says Ismet Karacan, a Houston psychiatrist who counsels sleepwalkers. 

But others are more adventurous.
One of Dr. Karacan's patients, an obese Houston physician, recently complained of putting on weight despite dieting, and of feeling stuffed in the morning. "We found he was sleepwalking to make pastrami and cheese sandwiches.
So we had him lock the fridge and hide the key before bed.
He can't find the key while sleepwalking, and his weight is down," he says. 

Skeptics abound; few insurance companies will pay for sleepwalking therapy.
Even some sleepwalkers don't believe at first they have a serious problem.
Michelle Doronfeld, a registered nurse in Lonsdale, Minn., initially dismissed an incident in 1986 during which she carried her infant daughter around the house, finally placing her under the Christmas tree among the packages.
She didn't see a doctor until months later, when she strayed to the rifle cabinet in her bedroom and pulled it over -- crowning her husband with the 10-pound plaster duck perched on top. "He sat up all bloody and said, 'You need help, '" she recalls. 

Thanks to an anti-seizure drug, clonazepam, Mrs. Doronfeld has stopped sleepwalking for now.
But the drug doesn't work for everyone, and some patients suffer from daytime grogginess.
Hypnosis works on a few, but others can't be hypnotized or don't like the idea. "We're learning that sleepwalking usually isn't a psychological problem.
It may be neurological, but we don't seem to be close to the answer," says Dr. Schenk, the psychiatrist. 

Sleep-disorder clinics charge $1,000 or more to monitor a sleepwalker's brain overnight.
But about the only thing they learn is what time of night the sleepwalker is most likely to arise.
They pinpoint when the brain shifts from deep to lighter sleep, or vice versa.
Uneven shifting often sparks a saunter. 

Knowing that pattern helps patients like Richard Kutz.
The Minneapolis foundry worker once sleepwalked to the middle of the road outside his home at 1 a.m. "I was lucky enough to wake up before I got run over," he says.
Tests show he somnambulates within an hour of dozing off.
So he takes clonazepam two hours before bed, which has helped. 

Sleepwalking has been put forward as a legal defense for violence.
In a landmark case last year in Ottawa, a jury acquitted sleepwalker Kenneth Parks of stabbing to death his mother-in-law.
Prosecutors, who are appealing the verdict, call his defense ludicrous. "I was a skeptic, but after studying him for 200 hours I believe it," says Roger Broughten, a neurologist at Ottawa General Hospital who testified at Mr. Parks's trial. 

Dr. Broughten says Mr. Parks went to bed the night of the crime worried over gambling debts, but lacked a motive to kill his mother-in-law, whom he stabbed four times after driving 14 miles, asleep, to her home.
Marlys Edwardh, his attorney, says he isn't to blame because he killed the woman without "will or conscious mind." 

In Alexandria, La., a 17-year-old who said he was sleepwalking when he shot his mother to death in 1986 was allowed to plead guilty to manslaughter last year.
Gary M. Willis, who originally was charged with second-degree murder, was placed on probation for five years and ordered to receive psychiatric treatment. 

Such bizarre incidents have helped inspire many myths, including these: 

Sleepwalkers extend their arms and drift along in a ghostly trance.
In fact, too many sleepwalkers lead with their faces.
Mel Abel, of Minneapolis, knocked a hole in his bedroom wall with his forehead while sleepwalking.
Others tell of jumping over beds and couches they can't imagine clearing while awake -- and receiving ugly bruises when they crash. 

They're really only half asleep and they'll wake up at any moment.
Although their eyes are usually wide open and glassy, brain monitoring shows they're snoozing.
They see things, but not everything registers.
Some are bent on acting out a dream.
Episodes can last an hour or more. 

Don't awaken sleepwalkers; you'll frighten them into a mishap.
Wake them up before they hurt themselves.
Some psychiatrists speculate that certain suicides may have taken place during sleepwalking.
So grab a sleepwalker by the shoulders and talk gently.
But beware: Many jerk to wakefulness with a kick or a punch. 

They won't do anything sleepwalking they wouldn't do while awake.
Regrettably, many leave their inhibitions behind.
A Charleston, S.C., man recently picked up his dozing dog and threw it across the living room.
An 11-year-old boy in Danville, Ill., hopped a freight train and was found wandering near the tracks 100 miles away. 

They're easy to spot in their jammies.
Wrong.
Sleepwalkers can get dressed -- even knot a tie -- when the occasion seems to demand formal attire.
It doesn't always.
A woman in Hartford, Conn., sleepwalked to her front yard recently and stripped naked.
Her psychiatrist's recommendation: wear two nightgowns to bed.
For good measure, she also dons an exercise suit. 

Commercial banks are gradually, and very cautiously, beginning to consider new loans to China.
Such loans were suspended after the bloody clash in Beijing on June 4. 

So far, only a few loans have been announced, although some others are believed to have been quietly negotiated.
Of those made public, one was to finance the purchase of a passenger jet and one was for the construction of a power station. 

Most bankers are waiting for the World Bank to provide an international vote of confidence by resuming its funding.
The World Bank's president, Barber Conable, recently said that although he hoped the bank would be able to resume lending to China soon, any decision would be delayed until after this month's Communist Party Central Committee meeting. 

Bankers are drawn to China by the view that the country's cheap and abundant labor gives it significant potential.
But in light of last June's events, they probably will be choosier about the projects they consider, and borrowing costs are likely to rise. 

Japan's Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu, cheered by a landslide by-election victory for his party, said his government would review, but wouldn't abolish, an unpopular 3% sales tax. "Seen from the standpoint of the fairness of the tax burden and our country's future outlook, the sales tax is indispensable," he said in his first policy speech to Parliament since taking power in August.
The tax was the main cause of a crushing defeat for Mr. Kaifu last July, when his ruling Liberal Democratic Party lost its upper-house majority. 

Unilever said it acquired the privately owned French cheese maker Boursin.
The Anglo-Dutch food and health-products concern didn't say how much it paid for the acquisition.
Boursin, whose brands include Boursin and Boursault, had sales of 30 million pounds ($48.6 million) and an after-tax profit of 3.4 million pounds in 1988.
Boursin says it holds a 30% share of France's specialty-cheese market. 

A new takeover code took effect in France.
The new code's main provision requires anyone who buys more than one-third of a company to bid for at least two-thirds of the shares.
That assures small holders of a chance to sell at a fair price if control of a company changes.
Also under the new code, groups acting together are treated just like individual acquirers.
That makes it hard for an investor to "park" shares with allies in order to avoid hitting the 33.3% threshold. 

Toshiba Denshi Device Inc., a subsidiary of Toshiba Corp., and Nippon Motorola, the Japan subsidiary of Illinois-based Motorola Inc. set up a new firm to sell the American company's computer chips in Japan.
An official of the Japanese company said the new Nippon Motorola Micro Electronics will be owned equally by the two units.
Access to the Japanese market by foreign semiconductor makers has been a contentious trade issue between Japan and the U.S. 

Lufthansa is holding talks with Austrian Airlines about acquiring a stake in the Austrian air carrier.
Austrian Airlines said the West German national airline would buy up to 10% of Austrian Airlines in the course of a share offering planned for 1990; the Austrian government would reduce its stake in Austrian Airlines to 51% from the current 61%.
All Nippon Airways holds 3.5% of Austrian Airlines.
Swissair owns 8% and is planning to raise its interest to 10%, and Air France is also interested in raising its holding from the current 1.5%, according to Austrian Airlines. 

A Swedish hospital said it would become the first in the world to begin testing a controversial French abortion pill as a contraceptive. 

A spokesman of Stockholm's Karolinska Hospital said the pill, called Mifepristone or RU-486, would be tested on 30 women for six months to establish whether a single monthly dose could prevent pregnancy.
The drug, made by Rousell Uclaf Co., is available in France and China, where it is used for non-surgical abortions. 

Marc Bygdeman, head of the project, told Sweden's daily Dagens Nyheter that the drug appeared to force the womb to reject the egg, making a pregnancy impossible. "We think that if the pill is taken around 24 hours after ovulation it can prevent pregnancy," he said. 

Under French law, the drug can be used to induce an abortion up to about five weeks after fertilization has occurred.
It has fewer side effects and is cheaper than surgery. 

Land prices in Tokyo's residential areas have fallen for the first time since the National Land Agency began compiling local prices in 1975, but real-estate costs have been rising elsewhere in Japan, the agency said. . . . Cross-Purposes: The Voice of America's Portuguese-language broadcasts to Angola were disturbed last summer by signals from "The Voice of Resistance of the Black Cockerel," a station experts say was set up by the CIA. 

