.START 

Pearl Group PLC, a large British insurer, rejected a takeover offer from Australian Mutual Provident Society that values the company at #1.1 billion ($1.78 billion), calling the bid "unacceptable and totally inadequate." 

AMP, which already holds 18% of the British insurance group, wants to expand beyond Australia and New Zealand, where it is the largest life insurer.
The company already owns London Life Association Ltd., which is far smaller than Pearl, and has said it wants to expand into other parts of Europe as the European Community moves ahead with its 1992 single-market program. 

Economists think European life insurance and pension businesses will expand in coming years.
They contend that as European populations grow older, individuals will seek to supplement state pension programs with private pension and insurance arrangements. 

AMP's bid of 605 pence ($9.80) a share sent Pearl's stock price soaring far above that level.
In late London trading yesterday, Pearl shares jumped to 639 pence, up 87 pence from late Friday.
Shares of other British life insurers, including London & Manchester Group PLC and Legal & General Group PLC, also rose in active trading yesterday. 

The takeover attempt by AMP will be "a marathon, not a sprint," predicted Gavin Simonds, a Pearl adviser with Kleinwort Benson Ltd. Mr. Simonds called AMP's bid price "unrealistic for a group that's got a vital command of the personal financial services market." 

But AMP criticized Pearl for sluggish growth in recent years, stating that the company's performance "raises the question of whether it will be able, if left to itself, to meet the challenges ahead." 

Pearl recently put through a series of changes aimed at cutting costs and improving profits.
It's in the process of moving its main offices from central London to nearby Peterborough, and has reorganized its sales force of 6,500.
Although the company has regularly increased its dividend, Pearl shares had languished. 

"The benefits aren't coming through yet," said one adviser. "AMP wants to strike before they do." 

The next step in the battle will come with the Australian company's formal offer document and Pearl's official response.
The proposed takeover could be a complicated one, since AMP is arranged as a mutual company, or one that is owned by policy holders, while Pearl is a stockholder-owned concern. 

Beyond its insurance activities, AMP is the biggest private landowner in Australia and its largest beef producer.
It acquired about 13% of Pearl last June from FAI Insurances Ltd., another Australian insurance company. 

