.START 

The Texas Supreme Court, noting "glaring disparities" between rich and poor school districts, said the state's system of financing the education of public-school children is unconstitutional. 

The court didn't specify exactly how to change the Texas system, which, like most states, gets its money through a combination of state funding and local property taxes.
But it told the Texas Legislature to come up with a solution by May 

"Children who live in poor districts and children who live in rich districts must be afforded a substantially equal opportunity to have access to educational funds," the court declared in a 9-0 decision. 

Texas has about three million public-school children, the second largest public-school system in the country after California.
About 50% of the funding for public schools comes from local property taxes, 42% from state sales, severance and excise taxes, and the remainder from various other sources, including federal funds. 

But the court said the system isn't fulfilling a Texas constitutional provision requiring the Legislature to establish an "efficient" system that provides a "general diffusion of knowledge," the court ruled.
Because the property-tax base varies so widely between school districts, schools in property-rich districts are able to provide better equipment and teachers and broader educational experiences. 

In property-poor districts, the educational programs are "typically inferior," the court said.
It cited one school district that offers no foreign languages, no pre-kindergarten program, no chemistry, no physics, no calculus and no college preparatory or honors program. "We conclude that, in mandating 'efficiency, ' the constitutional framers and ratifiers did not intend a system with such vast disparities as now exist," the court said.
The decision noted that courts in nine other states with similar school-financing systems have held those systems to be unconstitutional for varying reasons. 

The case was brought in 1984 by a group of 67 property-poor school districts.
A state district judge held the system unconstitutional in 1987, but that ruling was overturned last December by a state appeals court.
The Texas Supreme Court opinion essentially upholds the district judge's decision. 

JUDGE APPROVES $78 million settlement in suit against contractor at defense plant. 

The settlement ends more than four years of litigation on behalf of 14,000 residents living near the Fernald, Ohio, plant, where uranium-waste products seeped into surrounding soil, atmosphere and water. 

The residents originally sought $300 million from NLO Inc. and its parent, NL Industries Inc., Houston, the private contractor that operated the plant until 1986.
The government provides indemnity for its weapons-plant contractors, so NLO won't pay any of the settlement. 

The U.S. Energy Department will provide $73 million to compensate claimants and to pay for long-term medical tests and epidemiological studies.
In addition, the government will put up $5 million to cover damage claims by industrial-property and commercial-property owners. 

Federal Judge S. Arthur Spiegel of Cincinnati earmarked 20% of the fund, or as much as $15.6 million, for legal fees for plaintiffs' attorneys.
He also awarded the attorneys $974,720 as reimbursement for their out-of-pocket expenses. 

In his opinion, Judge Spiegel wrote that the lawyers earned the hefty fees in light of the obstacles they faced in bringing the suit, including the fact that no one has ever obtained a verdict against a contractor at a government-owned plant. 

An advisory jury in federal court, which heard the case in June, reached a non-binding verdict of $136 million for the plaintiffs.
The settlement was tentatively reached June 30. 

Stanley M. Chesley, lead counsel for the plaintiffs, said the case could prompt other lawsuits against contractors at the 16 other federally owned nuclear-power plants. 

JIM AND TAMMY BAKKER can be sued under RICO law, court rules. 

In a decision that could open the door for more civil suits by disgruntled followers, a federal appeals court determined that the Bakkers are subject to suits for alleged racketeering under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law. 

The appeals court in Richmond, Va., reinstated a suit filed by a West Virginia couple.
They contend that Mr. Bakker, his wife and former top aide Richard Dortch engaged in racketeering when Mr. Bakker's PTL ministry sold more than 55,000 life-time memberships to Heritage Park USA, the television ministry's Christian resort. 

The suit was filed in 1987 by David and Sarah Combs, a disabled West Virginia couple who bought Mr. Bakker's package in 1984.
In exchange for a $1,000 donation to the ministry, they were promised an annual four-day, three-night stay at Heritage Park for life.
The Combses never got their promised vacations. 

Nevertheless, their suit was dismissed in July 1988 by federal Judge Robert D. Potter, who is currently presiding over Mr. Bakker's criminal trial on fraud and conspiracy charges in Charlotte, N.C.
He ruled that RICO claims could only be based on a pattern of criminal activity involving separate types of activity.
Repeating the same act, Judge Potter ruled, is insufficient to support a RICO claim. 

But the appeals court threw out the distinction last week, saying the RICO statute requires only that the underlying criminal acts show a pattern of "relatedness and . . . continuity." 

The Combses are seeking $10,000 in damages, which would be tripled under the RICO statute.
Lawyers for Mr. Bakker in Hendersonville, N.C., couldn't be reached for comment. 

HENRY KISSINGER backs former Indian prime minister in libel suit. 

Mr. Kissinger, the former secretary of state, testified in federal court in Chicago on behalf of Morarji Desai in his $100 million libel suit against journalist Seymour Hersh. 

Mr. Kissinger said he had "no reason to believe" Mr. Desai had been a paid informant of the Central Intelligence Agency, as charged by Mr. Hersh in his book "The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White House." 

Mr. Kissinger recorded a videotaped deposition several years ago in exchange for a promise that he wouldn't be called to testify at the trial.
However, after much of his videotaped testimony was suppressed by the court last month, Mr. Kissinger was served with a subpoena by Mr. Desai's attorneys. 

Under questioning by Mr. Hersh's attorney, Bernard J. Nussbaum, Mr. Kissinger held to his position that he intentionally remained unaware of the names of CIA intelligence sources during his years as national security adviser and secretary of state in the Nixon and Ford administrations. 

Mr. Nussbaum quizzed him about a meeting he had with former CIA chief Richard Helms while preparing his initial deposition in the case.
Mr. Kissinger admitted he asked Mr. Helms if Mr. Desai had indeed been the U.S. government's source for intelligence reports that Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi planned to attack Pakistan in the winter of 

Mr. Kissinger testified that Mr. Helms didn't answer the question directly but rather agreed with Mr. Kissinger that Mr. Kissinger wouldn't have known Mr. Desai's status at the time. "He gave me the answer that I was on perfectly safe ground in making the statements that I was going to make," Mr. Kissinger said. 

After his testimony, Mr. Kissinger said he, too, contemplated a libel action against Mr. Hersh after the book was published in 1983. 

D.C. DEFECTOR: Michael J. Horowitz, Myerson & Kuhn's managing partner in Washington, D.C., has left the law firm to join the Washington office of Windels, Marx, Davies & Ives.
Both Myerson & Kuhn and Windels Marx are based in New York.
Mr. Horowitz, 51, is the former general counsel of the Office of Management and Budget. 

