.START 

HIRING THE HANDICAPPED gets new emphasis in bid to staff hard-to-fill jobs. 

Holiday Inns -- prompted by a growing labor shortage and a "recognition of increasing cultural diversity" -- makes hiring the handicapped a "major focus." At one recently opened unit in New York City, one in 10 employees is hearing impaired or has a learning difficulty.
For another hotel, Holiday Inns interviews 150 handicapped workers.
Lighted phones, vibrating beepers and sign-language training for supervisors help the hearing-impaired do their jobs. 

Wyse Technology Corp. signals its interest in handicapped workers in every ad.
Each month it also lists itself with a California agency that helps handicapped workers.
Equifax Inc. works with the Epilepsy Foundation and other groups.
Domino's Pizza Inc. recruits emotionally and physically handicapped workers through community health organizations.
Weyerhaeuser Co. tries to make its headquarters more accessible to the handicapped. 

"Our experience is that they're good workers and we want to do what we can," a Weyerhaeuser official says. 

OUR BOSSES aren't very responsive, most workers believe. 

Fully 95% of 22,000 manufacturing employees surveyed by consultant Rath & Strong think managers dodge decisions more than half the time by pushing them upstairs; 63% think a problem has to become a crisis before anything is done.
Only one in three workers feels encouraged to find new and better ways for doing things.
Fewer than one in five says his or her job is reviewed regularly to see if it can be made "more satisfying and productive." 

A separate survey by Wyatt Co., another consultant, finds that 52% of a sampling of workers in all industries and job levels think their bosses do a good job handling problems related to work tasks.
But a bare 39% think their managers know how to deal with people.
And there might be good reason.
Only 40% of the supervisors in the study say their companies' top executives reward them for being effective people managers. 

PARENTAL LEAVE runs into roadblock in Illinois.
The national drive continues. 

Gov. James Thompson vetoes a bill to require Illinois employers with 50 or more workers to provide up to eight weeks' unpaid leave to workers with a new child or an ill dependent.
Such benefits, he declares, "should not be mandated by government" but negotiated by labor and management.
State Sen. Dawn Netsch doubts she has the votes to override the veto but she vows to reintroduce the measure next year. 

Separate tallies by the Society for Human Resource Management and the Women's Legal Defense Fund show a score of states require some form of maternity or paternity leave.
Only a handful, though, cover much beyond disability leave for pregnancies.
On the national level, House and Senate committees have approved somewhat different measures mandating unpaid family leave.
But the bills have yet to be scheduled for consideration in either chamber. 

The Bush administration, threatening a veto, argues mandatory leaves would reduce overall employee benefits. 

DEMAND for guaranteed investment contracts from employee savings plans will rise 25% this year, to $40 billion.
But the insurance industry's capacity to issue the contracts will increase only 14%, to $36.5 billion, consultant A. Foster Higgins & Co. says.
Banks, it adds, will pick up the slack. 

GO TO SCHOOL] Nearly one in four major companies -- double the number of 1982 -- requires upper-middle and senior executives to participate in continuing-education programs, a Penn State study finds. 

BRING ON THE PLODDERS.
Two of three companies seeking bosses for foreign units want proven satisfactory track records, Canny, Bowen Inc., a search firm, says.
They'll pass on untested leaders who could be outstanding. 

FOREIGN STUDENTS account for 11% to 35% of M.B.A. candidates at 10 major graduate business schools, NYU's Stern School says.
A quarter of the foreigners are Japanese. 

BEING A GOOD CITIZEN for corporations means more than the United Way. 

Procter & Gamble Co. starts with the essentials: A successful company brings jobs and tax revenue to a community.
At Long Island Lighting Co., good corporate citizenship primarily means doing its job right.
Mayors surveyed by Sirota, Alper & Pfau, an opinion research firm, also emphasize basics: ethical corporate behavior, environmental protection and good treatment for customers.
Far down on their lists are charitable contributions, education and support for civic, social or cultural causes. 

Many companies, though, insist that what the mayors demand is part of their way of doing business.
They want to do more.
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. accents campus support.
Dayton Hudson Corp. backs programs for mothers.
Second National Federal Savings Bank helps clean up beaches.
Cargill Inc. supports education. 

"A lot of it is driven by the need to have a future work force," a Cargill spokesman explains. 

THE CHECKOFF: Companies spend $6,076 to hire an executive and $1,668 for office help but only $887 to add a production worker, the Employment Management Association says. . . . I'm happy] No, you're not] Half the sales people questioned for Learning International are satisfied with their companies' pay policies.
Their bosses, however, think only a third are content. 

