.START 

Yosemite is the epitome of the American wilderness.
Its central cluster of smooth granite walls awes the eye of any visitor looking at the deep magic of the Merced River's flat bed from above through a vista framed by El Capitan and Half Dome -- the most obviously beautiful place in the country.
Some people might disagree with this estimation, but they could hardly dispute that Yosemite is the most famous and familiar natural wonder we have, even though the vast majority of Americans have never taken the trip to the national park in eastern central California.
Words and pictures have put Yosemite on everybody's map. 

The words that first crystallized the fabulous valley's image in the public mind came from the exhilarated pen of John Muir, the athletic, self-willed naturalist.
He walked all over the place, fast, in all weather, and got the message out.
He also founded the Sierra Club in 1892 to keep Yosemite and places like it safe for the future in an encroaching civilization. 

In the next generation, Ansel Adams preserved Yosemite in black-and-white photographs that have set a standard for outdoor photography. 

But in the meantime, another photographer, with modern equipment, versatile color film and a world-class climber's ability to explore Yosemite, has been capturing the crags and plants and water and snow and animals in a new way.
Anyone familiar with Galen Rowell's pictures of Yosemite and other dramatic places around the world will know how right it is that Sierra Club Books decided to commemorate Yosemite's centennial as a park by reprinting John Muir's "The Yosemite" with Galen Rowell's photographs (222 pages, $40). 

Muir's prose, overwrought by today's standards, is still inspiring, because of the firsthand excitement, the sense of risk and of being somewhere or doing something first in a fabulous setting.
Having ventured to the "shining brow of {Yosemite Fall} and listening to its sublime psalm," Muir writes, "I concluded not to attempt to go nearer, but, nevertheless, against reasonable judgment, I did.
Noticing some tufts of artemisia in a cleft of rock, I filled my mouth with the leaves, hoping their bitter taste might help to keep caution keen and prevent giddiness.
In spite of myself I reached the little ledge, got my heels well set, and worked sidewise 20 or 30 feet to a point close to the out-plunging current.
Here the view is perfectly free down into the heart of the bright irised throng of comet-like streamers into which the whole ponderous volume of the fall separates, two or three hundred feet below the brow.
So glorious a display of pure wildness, acting at close range while cut off from all the world beside, is terribly impressive." 

So are Mr. Rowell's pictures of the fall.
He and Muir share a preoccupation with light and with gaining access, physical and visual, to Yosemite's great places from spectacular angles of vision at unusually luminous moments.
And so there are smashing photographs of El Capitan seen through a clearing storm, alpenglow, sunsets, fiery red ribbon waterfalls. 

Like Muir, too, Mr. Rowell is after the whole mountain experience.
Some of his best work was done with the camera pointed downward, at his feet, at leaves floating in a spring, at Half Dome reflected abstractly, like a color-field painter's smear of earth-tone in the blue of the Merced's water. 

This seems to be Mr. Rowell's year.
He is also publishing an anthology of pictures he's taken from Tibet to Yosemite (with virtually no overlap with the Muir book). "The Art of Adventure" (Collins, 166 pages, $45) is more of a mountaineering book, with breathtaking shots taken in the middle of very hard ascents of sheer walls and remote eminences such as the headwall of Mount Fitz Roy in Patagonia.
It has skimpy text and no index and only informal data on the circumstances and history of the photographs.
The Muir book is also scanty in this area, but these are both lavish souvenirs. 

Mr. Rowell has also associated himself with a third, much more original book out this fall.
He has generously written the foreword to "Alakshak, the Great Country" (Sierra Club, 179 pages, $75), a survey of wilderness Alaska with photographs by Art Wolfe and text by Art Davidson.
Mr. Wolfe is a master at "composing" nature into art, recognizing what his lens can do with a single aspen leaf frozen on the surface of a lake, or how the alternating white and steel-gray swirls of the Kahiltna Glacier make a rhythmic pattern.
No national-treasure Japanese screen is more splendid in its colorful repose than his study of magenta fireweed "vibrating" against the green of alders in the Susitna Valley.
He is also a persistent and bold photographer of animals, filling the frame with 3,000-pound bull walruses lolling flank by tusk on Round Island in summer.
He will wait 48 hours in a moss-covered blind in remote mountains west of Tok Junction to photograph wolf cubs at play in their den.
He gets almost nose to nose with a porcupine and sneaks up on musk oxen butting each other.
He takes pictures from planes and boats. 

Art Davidson is even more adventuresome.
As a younger outdoorsman/writer, he made the first winter ascent of Denali (then called Mount McKinley).
More recently, he repeated the climb, with his son, after trimming away 30 pounds in an aerobics class.
He writes well about this return in middle age to a savage place, and he is also a distinguished authority on Alaskan ecology whose learning sits lightly in this personal survey of our largest and still wildest state. 

