.START 

It can pay to listen to the pros. 

That, at least, is what's suggested by the first full year's results in this column's stock-picking contest. 

Someone who invested $100,000 a year ago in the four stocks recommended by the column's first group of investment professionals, then switched each month into the four stocks picked by the next group of pros, would have accumulated $166,537 by the end of September.
That doesn't take into account dividends, taxes and commissions. 

Someone who invested the same way, but picked stocks selected by Journal reporters and editors tossing darts at the stock pages, would have $112,383.
A person whose investments tracked the Dow Jones Industrial average would be sitting on $127,446. 

For many academics, the results are a kick where it hurts -- right in their pet theory.
Academics often contend that the stock market so quickly reflects information that success in beating the market averages is almost entirely a matter of luck.
This notion is called the "efficient market theory" or the "random walk theory." 

The dartboard results don't actually disprove the theory.
Stocks endorsed by the pros may benefit from a temporary publicity effect.
And the contest hasn't generated enough data to prove a case. 

Still, the results certainly don't give much ammunition to the random-walk theorists.
But neither can the pros crow too loudly.
After all, in four of the 12 months, they were bested by the darts. 

As the contest enters its second year, the latest group of stock pickers includes James H. Morgan, president of Morgan Investments Inc. in Greenville, S.C. Mr. Morgan joined the contest in December 1988, and it's been a Jim Morgan stock-picking festival for most of the time since then. 

Mr. Morgan picked the contest's best one-month performer six out of eight tries, and its best longer-term performer seven times out of a possible 10.
Stringing together his one-month results as described earlier, an investor who bought his eight picks would have turned $100,000 into $328,446. 

The stocks Mr. Morgan favors tend to be smaller and somewhat riskier than those chosen by many of his competitors.
And not everything he touches turns to gold.
For example, MDT Corp. dropped 33.3% in five months after Mr. Morgan recommended it in May.
Some of his picks have continued to gather steam, however.
Thermo Electron, which he selected in April at $20.75 a share, had gained 77.7% by the end of September. 

This month, Mr. Morgan recommends Dynascan Corp., a Chicago-based maker of consumer electronics equipment best known for its Cobra cordless telephones.
It closed yesterday at $8.625 a share; Mr. Morgan thinks long-term investors can buy it at prices as high as $11 or $12. 

"This fits in with the aging of the baby boomers and their attachment to consumer electronics," says Mr. Morgan. "They are going to stay at home more, but in so doing they're going to spoil themselves more." 

Dynascan has acquired two companies that were losing money -- Marantz, a maker of higher-priced sound systems, in 1987, and Lloyd's Electronics, a maker of lower-priced equipment, in 1988. "Now they have three well-known consumer brand names that sort of cover the spectrum," says Mr. Morgan.
He thinks a turnaround is in progress at Marantz and Lloyd's. 

Mr. Morgan urges investors not to buy stocks aggressively now, figuring that the market needs time to digest its gains. "You need an awfully good reason for buying stocks" at the moment, he says. 

Neil T. Eigen, portfolio manager for Integrated Resources Aggressive Growth Fund, won the September contest with a gain of 20% in Wolohan Lumber Co.
His next pick: Bank of New York Co., which he calls "just too cheap" to resist. 

Bank of New York, which acquired Irving Trust Co. late last year, closed yesterday at $49, or less than seven times the earnings ($7.30 a share) Mr. Eigen expects it to post in 1990.
He would buy the stock for as much as $55. 

Many big bank stocks are cheap, but Mr. Eigen particularly likes Bank of New York.
The consolidation with Irving Trust is "creating a lot of cost savings as they get rid of departments and divisions that overlap," he says. 

Joining the contest this month is Sy Harding, editor of Sy Harding Investor Forecasts in Palm Coast, Fla.
He plumps for Nature's Sunshine Products Inc., an over-the-counter stock with estimated 1989 sales of about $55 million. 

Based in Spanish Fork, Utah, Nature's Sunshine Products sells herbs in capsules, vitamin and mineral supplements, seasonings, beverages and water purifiers.
The products are sold door-to-door by some 50,000 part-time employees in the U.S., Canada, Australia and Japan.
The company has been growing fast, and Mr. Harding thinks that will continue as more people "are concerned about healthy diets and natural food products." He would buy the stock for as much as $14; it was at $12.75 yesterday. 

The other new contestant is Victor H. Sperandeo, a veteran trader and president of Rand Management Corp. in New York.
He recommends selling short the shares of Travelers Corp.
In a short sale, an investor borrows shares and immediately sells them, hoping to profit from a price decline.
Eventually the short-seller must buy shares to replace the borrowed ones.
But if the price drops enough meanwhile, the short-seller profits. 

Mr. Sperandeo expects stocks to decline over the next few months because, he says, the Federal Reserve Board seems to have given up on pushing interest rates down, and is trying to drive down the value of the dollar. 

He singles out Travelers because it has large real estate holdings. "Real estate all over the country has got major problems," he says.
The insolvency of many savings and loan institutions has thrown lots of properties on the market, aggravating downward pressure on prices. 

Travelers also has a huge bond portfolio.
Mr. Sperandeo expects interest rates to rise, which would hurt the value of existing bonds.
In addition, he thinks a new nationwide survey may show the AIDS virus to be more prevalent than previously thought, and he figures Hurricane Hugo will generate lots of big claims. 

Travelers shares closed yesterday at $41.375; Mr. Sperandeo would short them at prices of $40 or above. 

India Growth Fund, up 2.3%; Texas Instruments Inc., down 3.8%; Helmerich & Payne Inc., down 5.3% 

