.START 

Bernard "Bunny" Lasker, a former New York Stock Exchange chairman who played a cameo role in the Goldman, Sachs & Co. insider trading case, is retiring from his Wall Street securities firm founded in 1947. 

Mr. Lasker, 79 years old, is one of the Big Board's best-known traders.
His firm, Lasker, Stone & Stern, is the Big Board specialist firm with responsibility for the trading of such stocks as Johnson & Johnson and Coca-Cola Co. 

Mr. Lasker wasn't accused of any wrongdoing in the Goldman Sachs case.
But the phrase "your bunny has a good nose," one investment banker's way of confirming to Goldman partner Robert M. Freeman certain market speculation passed on by Mr. Lasker, played an important role in the Freeman investigation and in Mr. Freeman's decision to plead guilty to a felony. 

With Mr. Lasker's scheduled departure in January, the Lasker, Stone & Stern firm will give up risk arbitrage, or takeover stock speculation, according to Lasker Stone officials.
Mr. Lasker couldn't be reached for comment.
His retirement was first reported in Securities Week, an industry publication. 

Mr. Lasker was Big Board chairman from 1969 to 1971 and a director from 1972 to 1974. 

Despite his decades of Wall Street experience, Mr. Lasker may be best known these days for his mention in the prosecution of Mr. Freeman.
Mr. Freeman pleaded guilty last month to mail fraud to settle one of the insider-trading cases stemming from the Ivan F. Boesky scandal.
In his unusual, step-by-step explanation of the circumstances leading to his plea, Mr. Freeman committed Mr. Lasker's nickname to Wall Street lore. 

Mr. Freeman described how he received a call from "Bunny" Lasker on Jan. 8, 1986, saying that he had heard from another takeover speculator that there was a problem with the Beatrice Cos. leveraged buy-out.
After that call, Mr. Freeman said, he phoned Martin Siegel, the Kidder, Peabody & Co. takeover strategist involved in the Beatrice buy-out.
Mr. Freeman said that when he told Mr. Siegel of the Beatrice information passed on by Mr. Lasker, Mr. Siegel said, "Your bunny has a good nose." 

Mr. Freeman then capitalized on Mr. Siegel's inside information by trading in Beatrice securities. (Mr.
Siegel was later implicated in insider trading by Mr. Boesky and pleaded guilty.) 

Although the events sketched out by Mr. Freeman were insider trading as defined by the government, the fact that it turned on the phrase "your bunny has a good nose" led some on Wall Street to criticize the prosecution of Mr. Freeman. 

