.START 

Your Sept. 28 editorial dealing with the congressional investigation of HUD was factually inaccurate and deliberately misleading.
I would like to set the record straight. 

Former HUD Secretary Samuel Pierce and three of his top assistants, including Lance Wilson, have chosen to take the Fifth Amendment to avoid testifying before my subcommittee.
My comments concerning their taking this action, as they appear in the transcript of the hearing and were repeated on several occasions, are clear and unequivocal: 

"The Bill of Rights is one of our most precious possessions as a nation, and the privileges it provides are in fact a shield to the innocent, and no inference whatsoever should be drawn from a witness taking the Fifth Amendment.
None will be drawn by the Chairman and, I am sure, members of this Subcommittee." 

It takes a truly distorted reading of these very clear and direct statements, repeated on several occasions, to conclude that Messrs.
Pierce and Wilson "are currently being held up to scorn for taking the Fifth Amendment." 

These clear and strong statements of mine concerning the right of a witness to take the Fifth Amendment obviously have nothing to do with my right to criticize the performance of Messrs.
Pierce and Wilson and others during the time they held high positions at HUD.
Any public official -- elected or appointed -- is subject to public scrutiny and public judgment of his or her performance in office.
The Wall Street Journal has never hesitated to criticize a cabinet officer or a member of Congress who has had a much shorter tenure in office than Mr. Pierce's eight years at HUD. 

The clear consensus is that Mr. Pierce was a poor HUD secretary.
Jack Kemp -- the energetic and vigorous HUD secretary who replaced Mr. Pierce and who shares with me a profound commitment to honest and efficient government -- has called HUD under Mr. Pierce "a swamp." 

Our 17 comprehensive hearings with 43 witnesses, an avalanche of internal HUD inspector-general reports, literally thousands of investigative articles in newspapers all across the country (many of the best of which have been published in the pages of The Wall Street Journal) should be sufficient for intelligent adults to make some judgments about the stewardship of Mr. Pierce and his associates at 

Your editorial displays a surprising lack of understanding of the function and responsibility of congressional committees.
Our committee does not deal with any possible criminal activity at HUD.
My colleagues and I fully realize we are not a court to determine guilt or innocence with regard to the violation of our nation's laws.
We do, however, have the responsibility to examine and review the conduct of public officials and the execution of federal programs.
Our purpose is to determine what legislative changes should be made in these programs, and in making that determination we need to have information from those individuals who have held positions of leadership in federal agencies. 

It is intriguing to speculate why you appear to favor the selective enforcement of the rules of the House of Representatives.
You apparently support my meticulous enforcement of the House rule allowing subpoenaed witnesses to bar radio, television and photographic coverage of their appearance at a hearing, but you are critical of my enforcement of the House rule that specifies that the purpose of counsel is to advise witnesses concerning their constitutional rights.
Counsel for witnesses do not have a right to present argument, make motions, or make demands upon the committee. 

You are correct that I oppose the spending of public-housing funds to enrich influence-peddling "consultants" like James Watt.
I am equally opposed to having such funds flow to my colleagues in Congress, contrary to the statement made by your editorial writer.
This sleazy notion can have emanated only from the mind of your writer, since I have never made such a statement. 

You are certainly entitled to defend the sleaze, fraud, waste, embezzlement, influence-peddling and abuse of the public trust that took place while Mr. Pierce was secretary of HUD and while Mr. Wilson was his executive assistant, but it is strikingly inconsistent with the excellent investigative reporting on HUD that has been done by Wall Street Journal reporters Ed Pound, Jill Abramson, Joe Davidson and others who have contributed to the public understanding of what went wrong at HUD. 

Rep. Tom Lantos (D., Calif.) 

Chairman 

Employment and Housing Subcommittee 

Washington 

