.START 

A therapy that uses a combination of two well-known drugs after surgery significantly increases the survival rate of patients with advanced colon cancer, according to the National Cancer Institute. 

Institute Director Samuel Broder called the finding a "major advance" in the treatment of a type of colon cancer known as stage Dukes' C, which has spread to adjacent lymph nodes.
Colon cancer is the second-leading cancer killer, following only lung cancer.
An estimated 107,000 cases of colon cancer will be diagnosed this year, and 53,500 people will die from it.
Of the people diagnosed with colon cancer, 21,000 with have stage Dukes' C. 

The new therapy involves the use of two drugs for a year following the surgical removal of the cancer and nearby lymph nodes.
The drugs are levamisole, which is made by Janssen Pharmacuetica N.V., a Belgian unit of Johnson & Johnson, and 5-fluorouracil, an anti-cancer drug known as 5-FU that was patented by F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. and is currently made by several companies.
Both drugs have been around for more than 20 years.
Levamisole is used primarily to kill worms in the intestinal tracts of people and animals. 

Based on clinical trials, the cancer institute reported that 49% of the Dukes' C patients who used the combination of the two drugs were alive five years after surgery.
This survival rate was one-third higher than the 37% who lived for five years after surgery without the drugs. 

"This combination is something that every physician and surgeon should be aware of," Dr. Broder said.
Yesterday, the cancer institute mailed information on the findings to 35,000 doctors.
In addition, the Journal of Clinical Oncology published a report on an institute-sponsored study conducted by the North Central Cancer Treatment Group under the leadership of Charles Moertel, a professor of oncology at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. 

"Any patient with high-risk colon cancer is really getting short shrift if he's not getting this therapy" after surgery to remove the cancer, Dr. Moertel said at a news conference. 

Levamisole is only used to deworm animals in the U.S. and hasn't been certified by the Food and Drug Administration for sale to humans, although the drug is used to treat parasites in humans in other countries.
However, the FDA and the cancer institute said the drug will be made available free to Dukes' C patients who wish to undertake the new therapy on an experimental basis or in new clinical trials. 

To be eligible for the two-drug treatment, a patient must have had surgery at least seven days and not more than 30 days before. 

The FDA is making levamisole available under a program designed to speed potentially effective drugs to desperately ill patients before enough information on the drug's effectiveness and safety are available to qualify for commercial distribution.
Side effects from the two-drug treatment include nausea, occasional vomiting, headaches, diarrhea and sores in the mouth.
In two clinical tests involving 1,700 people, one person died from the drug therapy, Dr. Moertel reported. 

A spokeswoman for Janssen Pharmacuetica said the company has been providing levamisole free to the cancer institute for the tests and will continue to do so until the FDA clears the drug for commercial sale.
If it is cleared for sale, she said, the drug will be "reasonably priced." The other drug, 5-FU, already sells at a low price, Dr. Moertel said. 

Researchers said they don't know how the drug combination works, nor do they know if it will work on other cancers.
However, Dr. Moertel said, the combination might work on other cancers of the gastrointestinal tract, including the rectum, stomach and pancreas.
In addition, he suggested it might help contain breast cancer, but stressed that the two-drug combination must be tested in clinical trials to see if it works on other cancers. 

