.START 

When Mikhail Gorbachev visits East Germany later this week to attend celebrations marking the 40th anniversary of the state's founding, he will be flying into a tough foreign-policy dilemma. 

The East German leader, Erich Honecker, is old and sick, and his inflexible, hard-line stance runs counter to Moscow's reformist course.
If Mr. Honecker ruled one of the 15 Soviet republics rather than a Soviet ally, the chances are that Mr. Gorbachev would have pushed the 77-year-old into retirement by now. 

But according to the new Soviet policy of noninterference, East Germany, like Hungary and Poland, is supposed to be a sovereign state that can choose its own style of socialism, independent of Moscow.
Any overt signs of disapproval with Mr. Honecker's methods would undermine Mr. Gorbachev's own nondoctrinaire approach to relations with Soviet allies in Eastern Europe.
It could also potentially encourage the sort of mass popular dissent that disrupted his visit to China earlier this year. 

Consequently, Western diplomats in Moscow expect the Soviet leader to adopt an extremely cautious approach as he attempts a difficult balancing act, quietly encouraging liberalization behind the scenes without being seen to undermine the East German leadership. 

That Mr. Gorbachev is personally attending the anniversary celebrations at all, rather than sending a high-level colleague, demonstrates how much importance Moscow attaches to political stability in East Germany.
Soviet officials, most recently conservative Politburo member Yegor Ligachev, have praised East Germany's "stable and dynamic development." But in recent weeks, as more than 25,000 East Germans have fled their system to the West via Hungary and elsewhere, Moscow has had plenty of reason to worry. 

"The situation is explosive," said one East German currently residing in Moscow, who asked not to be named. "Society is being torn between people who look to the West and people who look East to Gorbachev's reforms.
Honecker just sits on top and does nothing, like a cork in a bottle, waiting to be blown off." 

Soviet officials and the media here have on the whole sought to avoid commenting on the East German exodus and its causes.
Foreign policy in general, and policy toward socialist neighbors in particular, are areas still largely untouched by glasnost, the greater openness to criticize.
But the few commentaries that have been published serve to highlight Moscow's awkward position. 

The hard-line attitude of the East German leadership, which has breathlessly blamed the exodus on West German "provocation," has been echoed by recent articles in Pravda, the Soviet Communist Party daily, and in a dispatch from the official Tass news agency.
Tass referred to a "propaganda hullabaloo" that was part of "a tendentious campaign against the German Democratic Republic." 

Pravda went much further.
It sniped at the exodus, calling it "a pan-European picnic" and "a major provocation" organized by Western neo-fascist and anti-communist emigre groups.
One article last week entitled "The Wrong Path" bitterly attacked West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl for supposedly seeking to change the European status quo and "swallow up the German Democratic Republic." 

The reports in both media have studiously avoided any mention of Hungary, a Soviet ally and Warsaw Pact member that allowed thousands of East Germans out to the West through its border with Austria.
But they seem to put back Soviet relations with West Germany, which reached a high point during Mr. Gorbachev's triumphant visit there last June. 

At the same time Izvestia, the newspaper of the Soviet government which is now much less harsh and ideological in tone than Pravda, last week published an interview with an East German writer who cautiously suggested that some domestic reforms were overdue. 

"Every person strives to reach the highest possible material level, but our society gives few chances for that.
I think politicians should take into consideration these natural demands of the people," Hermann Kant told Izvestia. "I can't say our life is a bed of roses." 

While the Soviet media are now filled with similar critical remarks about their own society, East Germany officially continues to pretend that nothing is amiss at home.
East Berlin even has banned some Soviet publications that are deemed too critical, and East German journalists in Moscow complain that they can write little about the tumultuous changes in Soviet society. 

Nonetheless, the domestic calls for change are now growing louder in East Germany.
An unofficial reform group called New Forum, whose aims appear similar to "Popular Front" grass-roots movements that are tolerated in the Soviet Union, has sprung up in East Germany in recent weeks.
New Forum was outlawed last week as being subversive and anti-socialist. 

