.START 

Longshoremen overwhelmingly ratified a local contract for the port of New York and New Jersey, assuring labor peace for at least 14 months. 

A spokesman for the International Longshoremen's Association said the union's membership at the port voted by a 10-to-1 ratio to approve a 14-month extension of the previous three-year contract to Nov. 30, 1990.
The contract includes new financial incentives designed to induce surplus longshoremen in the port of New York and New Jersey to seek early retirement. 

Last August, dockworkers from Maine to Texas approved a 14-month extension of the master contract freezing wages at $18 an hour for workers handling containers.
Since then, longshoremen have reached local agreements in the majority of ports. "You have stability in virtually the entire port jurisdiction of the ILA for the next 14 months," said an ILA spokesman. 

However, locals in Baltimore, New Orleans and Mobile, Ala., still hadn't reached agreements when their previous local contracts expired Sept. 30.
Except for picketing by an ILA warehouse local in Mobile yesterday, dockworkers continued on the job at the three ports pending further negotiations. 

John Bowers, president of the ILA, said the contract extensions will "give us time to look at some of the problems" faced by port labor and management.
Among the concerns: stiff competition among ports for cargo and proliferation of nonunion dockworkers, particularly along the Gulf Coast. 

Mr. Bowers said New York's port management had backed off its demands for immediate and complete elimination of guaranteed annual income, which pays longshoremen $34,000 a year even when there isn't any work for them.
The program this year is costing the port's employers about $53 million, putting the port of New York and New Jersey at a disadvantage compared with its rivals. 

In addition, Mr. Bowers said management at various ports had wanted a sharp reduction in the size of container loading and unloading gangs but decided to take up the matter during the negotiations for the next master contract. 

"They wanted solutions right away, but I couldn't give them solutions right away," Mr. Bowers said. "I'm very happy (port managements) went along with my recommendations" for a 14-month extension of the previous contracts. "Otherwise, there would have been a strike," Mr. Bowers said. 

The New York Shipping Association, which represents port employers, said the new local contract sweetens pension benefits to eligible dockworkers who agree to retire between Oct. 1 and Dec. 31.
The group estimates that 35% to 40% of 5,800 dockworkers at the port don't have any work but receive guaranteed annual income payments on any given workday. 

"We'd like to make a major dent in the labor surplus," said a New York Shipping Association spokesman. "If we can attract enough people to retire, our guaranteed annual income costs will decline substantially." 

