.START 

Yields on certificates of deposit rose across the board for the second week in a row, following similar increases in Treasury bills. 

The average yield on a six-month CD of less than $50,000, for example, a popular investment among individuals, rose almost one-tenth percentage point to 8.13%, according to Banxquote Money Markets.
On a one-year deposit of less than $50,000, the average yield at major banks in the week ended yesterday rose to 8.15% from 8.03%. 

"Rates are still moving in a very narrow range in either direction, as they did all summer," said Norberto Mehl, chairman of Banxquote, an information service based here. 

CDs sold by major brokerage firms offer yields that are about a half percentage point higher than at banks.
The average yield on a one-year broker-sold CD, for example, was 8.64% in the latest week, up from 8.50%.
For a two-year deposit, brokers were offering an average 8.59% compared with 8.08% at banks.
Last week, the averages were 8.46% and 8.01%, respectively. 

Average yields on CDs sold by brokers and small-denomination deposits at banks now peak at one year, with six-month yields only slightly behind.
In some parts of the country, and at some institutions, six-month yields are higher than one year.
Those are the two most popular maturities among individuals. 

"This is a critical rollover period," said Robert J. Hutchinson, senior vice president for retail marketing of Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. in New York, referring to the large volume of CDs that mature in October. "You watch what the competition is doing and what's happening to interest rates in general very carefully." 

Yields on Treasury bills sold at Monday's auction rose to 8.36% from 8.22% for six-month issues, and to 8.10% from 7.98% for three-month bills. 

On jumbo CDs, generally those in denominations of $90,000 and up, the highest average yields are still in the shortest maturities.
Two-month and three-month jumbo CDs both had an average yield of 8.32%.
The average six-month yield was 8.31%. 

Longer-term yields are only slightly lower, however, with the five-year CD yielding an average 8.26%. 

