.START 

On a hot summer day, in a neighborhood on this city's east side, the smell of burning straw fills the air. 

The smoke is drifting from a fenced-in yard, where a group of potters is practicing a centuries-old firing technique called raku.
The artists seem out of place: A back-alley basketball game beats its rhythm nearby and the debris of the inner city lies all around.
The potters, however, don't notice.
Here, at the large, two-story residence of Pewabic Pottery, they are preoccupied with their kiln -- and the rebirth of one of the nation's foremost centers of ceramic art. 

The group has quick-fired a series of clay bowls, pulled them from the kiln with iron tongs and rolled them into a bed of sawdust and straw.
The effect is dramatic: The straw explodes in flame, coating the bowls in carbon and ash.
When the conflagration dies, and the bowls are washed, the result is a rich cream glaze, lined with intricate, carbon-impregnated cracks -- as good as what the Japanese potters of the 16th century might have achieved. 

"Since 1982, we've made enormous strides in bringing Pewabic back," says Thomas Brunk, a trustee of the Pewabic Society, the nonprofit group that rescued the turn-of-the-century center.
After years of neglect and a brush with death, Pewabic, once a nationally known production pottery, is again turning out handmade bowls, plates and its signature tiles, filling orders for new installations and for the restoration of old ones. 

"It's a backlash against high-tech and minimalism," contends Michele Oka Doner, a New York artist. "We're coming into a renaissance of what the hand can do, where the eye can follow something natural.
That's what Pewabic is about." 

In her loft studio in Manhattan's SoHo district, Ms. Doner spreads out a diagram of New York's Herald Square subway station.
Next year, under a major commission from the city, she will begin installing a 165-foot-long mural in the station, one of the busiest public-transit points in the world.
The mural will be made of Pewabic tile coated in a gold glaze. "The word that comes to mind is intimacy," she says. "There's an intimacy to the tile because of the fingerprints in the clay and the irregularity of the glaze.
You're not dealing with a machine." 

In fact, you're dealing with a foot press, and an antiquated one at that.
The press, which turns out tiles one at a time, is part of Pewabic's split identity.
The center -- still located in its original building, despite the decline of the surrounding neighborhood -- is something of a living museum, largely because of tight budgets that crippled it for years.
Operating still, for example, is the same stone-age filter press, powered by overhead belts, that the potter Mary Stratton first used to mix clay in 1912, nine years after she founded Pewabic. 

And yet, modern electric and gas kilns -- blasting heat day and night -- bespeak a new era at the center.
So too does Anat Shiftan's chemistry shop located off the main floor.
Here Ms. Shiftan, the production manager, mixes metals and silica in an attempt to reproduce the "iridescent" glazes -- colors noted for their deep metallic sheen -- that made Mrs. Stratton famous, and that were Pewabic's chief contribution to the Arts and Crafts Movement of the early 20th century. 

Local lore has it that, when she died in 1961, Mrs. Stratton took her glaze recipes to her grave to force new generations at Pewabic to create their own innovations, and not just trade on hers.
Whether this was a teacher's good intentions, or merely an artist's ego, the recipes did disappear for years.
All along, however, they'd been in the hands of a former Stratton colleague, who shared them with Mr. Brunk.
But Mr. Brunk has declined sharing the recipes with the pottery, insisting that Mrs. Stratton wouldn't have wanted them brought back into production without her.
Others at Pewabic take the opposite view, but, so far, to little avail. 

So Pewabic is mixing its own.
Ms. Shiftan has already devised red, blue and green iridescent glazes that some say rival those of old. "We're constantly testing," she says. "We're really just an atelier, not a factory.
That's why we're famous: People want that handmade look." 

The place does seem more workshop than factory.
It employs only about two dozen people.
A young production worker, monitoring a brick kiln, doesn't watch dials and gauges; instead, she puts on a pair of oversized asbestos gloves, pulls a movable brick out of the side of the kiln and peers hopefully into the flames.
A small ceramic cone inside, set to melt at a certain temperature, will tell her whether the kiln is hot enough.
Nearby, buckets of glaze are stacked haphazardly.
Racks of tiles crowd one corner.
And everywhere, there is a light, white layer of clay dust. 

Pewabic (an Ojibwa Indian word that means copper) has managed to become many things, without being dominated by any one.
It is a production facility, but has one of the most active contemporary ceramics galleries in the Midwest, as well as a small museum.
It has a craftsman-in-residence program and regularly attracts nationally known potters to teach seminars (John Glick, Toshiko Takaezu, Karen Karnes), but it also caters to the uninitiated and the hobbyist.
Scott Wilcher, a nurse at Henry Ford Hospital, for example, has been taking classes in the upstairs studio here for years. 

"It's focused in a multi-disciplinary way," says Mary Roehm, the pottery's director. "I'm interested in this being a ceramics center intellectually and for people who do clay work." 

Mrs. Stratton would approve.
Most of all, she would be glad to see Pewabic reborn as an active factory.
When she died, the place lost its focus and went to seed.
Many of the molds and pots from the Stratton era -- collector's items now -- were thrown away.
There was even some talk of closing the facility for good.
Then, after 18 years of neglect, the Pewabic Society, a group of local patrons of the arts, formed in 1979, and took on the center as a charitable cause.
Many false starts and setbacks notwithstanding, it has returned Pewabic to an active production and art pottery, now one of the oldest in the country. 

A big chunk of Pewabic's new work is restoration of old projects.
People regularly walk into the pottery searching for a tile to repair a broken fireplace or sink built in the 1920s and 1930s.
Over the years, colorful Pewabic tile has been installed in, among other places, the Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington, D.C.; the physics building at Rice University in Houston, Texas; the floor of the capitol building in Lincoln, Neb.; and several structures around Detroit. 

One of the most extraordinary examples is in the old Stratton home, built by Mrs. Stratton and her architect husband, William, in the Detroit suburb of Grosse Pointe Park.
Here, bathrooms, hearths, stairs, floors and basins are made of the individually crafted tiles. 

"This is total simplicity," says Ayres Morison, who now lives in the home, pointing to a wall of blue-glazed tiles. "There's a certain elegance about it." 

To pay the bills, Pewabic these days takes on projects of all sizes, not just huge ones like the Herald Square installation.
It fabricated special tiles for the local office of Touche Ross and threw a series of pots for General Motors and Ford.
It also designed a dinnerware set it hopes to sell nationally. 

Ms. Roehm likes to talk about these projects as evidence that Pewabic is back.
Much of the artistic community had forgotten the pottery over the years.
The center, she says, wants to change that.
For, while it may be an atelier in spirit, the place clearly aspires to much more. "Look," says Ms. Roehm, brandishing a pamphlet in the air, "we have a new marketing brochure." 

Mr. Bussey is a page-one editor for the Journal in New York. 

