.START 

It's a sign of the times that when Defense Secretary Dick Cheney released the Pentagon's annual report on Soviet Military Power last week, he was the one on the defensive. "There is no effort here to inflate the threat," he said under questioning from skeptical reporters. 

It may not be polite to say so in the Gorbachev era, but Mr. Cheney's report makes it clear that the Soviet Union remains an empire -- troubled, to be sure, but still the world's largest military power.
In a time when Soviet military chiefs are invited to testify before a House committee, it's also a good time to remind ourselves of the reasons the U.S. has considered Soviet power a "threat." 

Mr. Gorbachev has promised to cut back defense spending by some 14% this year.
He can probably afford to, however, because Soviet military outlays since 1985 have grown at a rate of 3% a year in real terms, faster than in the pre-Gorbachev early 1980s.
Even by the most conservative estimates, the Soviets spend between 15% and 17% of their GNP on the military, while the U.S. spends less than 6% (and falling).
As Mr. Cheney put it, Soviet intentions appear to have changed, at least for now, but its military capabilities keep growing. 

In the pre-Gorbachev era, Soviet production lines rolled out about 2,800 tanks a year; from 1985-88, they've rolled out 3,400 a year.
Perestroika?
Naval production hasn't fallen much at all in the Gorbachev years: "Surface warships completed during 1988 included the third Kirov guided-missile cruiser, three destroyers . . . a frigate, and four Grisha-class corvettes," with two aircraft carriers in various stages of production, says Soviet Military Power.
Such production suggests that the Soviets could fulfill Mr. Gorbachev's promise of unilateral cuts in Europe, yet still deploy a newer, more advanced force. 

The most curious continuing Soviet buildup is in strategic nuclear weapons. "The United States faces a more formidable Soviet offensive strategic arsenal today than we did four years ago when Mr. Gorbachev came to power," said Mr. Cheney.
The Soviets continue to modernize the following systems: their force of SS-18s, each of which contains 10 warheads, an "optimal" first-strike weapon; SS-24s and SS-25s, a pair of mobile nukes, though the U.S. has none; ever-quieter nuclear-armed submarines, though the Soviets already have the world's largest submarine force; advanced Blackjack bombers, and long-range cruise missiles (whose production has tripled).
Yet in the face of all this, many in Congress somehow think this is the time to gut spending for SDI, the U.S.'s effort to defend itself against nuclear missiles. 

Mr. Gorbachev has also been less pacific than advertised beyond Soviet borders.
Though he seems to have repudiated the Brezhnev Doctrine by withdrawing troops from Afghanistan, he continues to pour in advanced weapons and military aid to Kabul.
Aid is also pouring into Cambodia as proxy Vietnam withdraws.
Perhaps this is a new Gorbachev Doctrine: Don't take the heat for doing yourself what others can do with your help. 

The Soviets aren't explicitly propping up Nicaragua any more, but that doesn't matter when Fidel Castro and the East bloc do it for them, to the tune of $800 million last year.
Castro runs what amounts to a laundering operation, since the Soviets prop him up with some $1.5 billion in military, and $4 billion in economic, aid a year.
Libya's Col. Gadhafi, meanwhile, has received long-range Soviet bombers, while Syria is as well supplied as ever, even as it butchers Christians in Lebanon. 

Which brings us back to Mr. Cheney and the American response.
Mr. Gorbachev's spending on the empire, despite his obvious need for cash for consumer investment, suggests the limits of U.S. pleading for arms control.
The better strategy is to out-compete him.
A chart near the end of Soviet Military Power compares new technologies used by the military.
The Soviets are on a par with the U.S. in only five of 22, and ahead in none.
We suspect this is the real worry at the heart of perestroika. 

Ronald Reagan unleashed a military and economic competition, especially with the Strategic Defense Initiative, that the current Soviet system couldn't possibly win.
The U.S. interest lies in continuing that competition until Mr. Gorbachev has no choice but to withdraw from his global and military commitments.
That withdrawal would provide concrete evidence of his sincerity, since the restructuring of the Soviet economy simply can't succeed if the Soviets concurrently spend at current levels on the empire's maintenance.
Until then, it doesn't hurt if Mr. Cheney and others contribute to an American form of glasnost by reminding us that the Soviet empire still exists. 

