.START 

Hewlett-Packard Co., continuing to cut prices aggressively on its computers and related products, slashed prices of two minicomputers by as much as 29%. 

The reductions are another sign that Hewlett-Packard is "clearly going to play hardball on price" in its battle against Digital Equipment Corp. for minicomputer customers, said Peter Rogers, an analyst at Robertson Stephens & Co. in San Francisco.
Slowing demand for such computers has heightened competition between minicomputer makers. 

Earlier this month, Hewlett-Packard introduced a laser printer expected to be widely available from retailers for under $1,000 -- a new low for such devices.
The company also unveiled a computer workstation priced at less than $4,000.
And in July, it cut prices on some personal computers by as much as 10%, or $1,300. 

The price cuts generally reflect reductions in HP's manufacturing costs and its increasing attention to tailoring products to specific markets, said Richard Alberding, the company's executive vice president, marketing and international.
As a result, HP generally has been able to maintain profit margins on the products on which it has cut prices, he said. 

The latest price cuts cover two minicomputers that run software written in the Unix computer language.
The machines, which can be used to run large computer networks, are the 9000 series model 850S, whose price was cut 20% to $176,000, and the 855S, whose price dropped 29% to $241,000.
Prices for nine related products were also cut, some by as much as 50%. 

The 855S was introduced less than a year ago, so "the size of the cut is surprising," said David Wu, an analyst at S.G. Warburg & Co. in New York.
Mr. Wu also said the company may be preparing to introduce a more powerful Unix minicomputer in the near future. 

In August, HP reported softening demand for its minicomputers, citing the trend as a major reason for a 3% drop in net income despite a 23% gain in revenue in its fiscal third quarter ended July 31.
But Bill Murphy, the company's director of marketing for network systems, said the price cuts were aimed at increasing market share rather than lifting demand. 

