.START 

The European Coproduction Association has been laboring for four years to produce a new generation of shows that will help make European airwaves a little less American. 

The first fruit of this grouping of state-owned or controlled stations, a police show called "Eurocops" (it's called "Euroflics" in Francophone countries), features seven Eurocops, one from each of the participating producing countries, pursuing Eurocrooks in picturesque settings.
Despite enormous production problems, starting from scripts that had to be translated into five different languages, the somewhat formulaic show shocked its producers one evening last summer by beating its competition on a German network.
The competitor: "Miami Vice." 

"Eurocops," although hardly the finest flower of European culture, could be the first sprouting of a pan-European television industry that is finally able to compete at home, and maybe even abroad, with Hollywood.
That industry will enjoy generous political and financial backing from governments; Jacques Delors, president of the European Community Commission, yesterday proposed more than $275 million over five years in EC seed money for audiovisual projects.
EC foreign ministers are expected today to greatly ease the rules for exchanging their programs. 

The drive for more EuroTV is quickly building into a political crusade.
French President Francois Mitterrand says "it is through the audiovisual industry that Europe can save its cultural identity." Mr. Delors says that because European children spend three hours a day watching TV and only half an hour talking to their parents, what they watch is "a social problem." He adds, "We cannot treat culture as we treat refrigerators or cars." 

But judging from the babble of languages and ideas at the first-ever pan-European audiovisual conference that ended here yesterday, the European TV industry has a long, hard way to go.
The industry is starting from far behind.
Most European prime-time schedules still favor "Miami Vice" over "Eurocops," and add in generous dollops of "Dallas," "Dynasty" and U.S. movies.
While Europe bought some $700 million worth of American TV programs last year, nearly 80% of movies made in Europe never leave their home countries, and only eight in 100 European-made TV shows make it across borders. 

Mr. Mitterrand, in a speech to the audiovisual summit, said that of the estimated 125,000 hours of television programs required in Western Europe annually, European producers provide only 20,000 hours.
Most of the rest comes from the U.S., with lesser amounts from Australia and Japan. 

It's not surprising, then, that any talk of subsidies and quotas sends shivers through Hollywood and Washington.
U.S. Special Trade Representative Carla Hills and other officials say they'll protest even the EC's proposed non-binding quotas that are designed to discourage imports. 

Despite American unease, it is clear that the bulk of Europe's efforts -- and a big chunk of government money -- is being concentrated not necessarily on keeping "Dallas" and "Dynasty" out, but developing European shows. 

This is partly in response to growing concern here about an overdose of American-made serials on an increasing number of regular and cable television channels.
Some Europeans fear that as satellite technology further increases the number of those channels, and the EC removes as part of its 1992 program many of the existing barriers on intra-EC broadcasting, the highly profitable U.S. presence will become even larger in Europe. 

That fear may be justified.
European producers say that despite good intentions, they are often stymied by too few good writers producing too few scripts.
And even if an idea and script can be found, coproductions present enormous obstacles.
For example, when the German television station ZDF worked with Britain's Channel Four on a co-produced television drama "The Bum," the legal and financial differences between the two countries were costly and time-consuming.
In Germany, financing comes from the banks, while in Britain, private sources of finance have to be found.
The legal documents necessary to conclude the contract were 2.5 pages long in Germany and 49 pages long in Britain. "We needed a half a year extra time just to combine our two operations," says Christoph Holch, a ZDF official who worked on the production. 

Despite these problems, the ECA, the producers of "Eurocops," say they've got a bunch of other hybrid productions in the hopper.
These include "Mission Eureka," a science-fiction series where "scientists working on launching a space station fight off intrigues and schemes devised by the superpowers to get hold of their secrets," a show about a woman soccer manager, and a 12-hour series on the life of Johann Strauss. 

Other European broadcasters say coproductions aren't the only answer.
David Webster, a former BBC executive who is now at the Annenberg Washington Program, a think tank, says "it's usually better to produce a strong program in one country, but one that has cross-border appeal." This isn't easy.
Given the choice between a British show and an American Western, he adds, the French will choose the Western. 

To combat this, Pascal Fleury and Jorge Dana of France's state-owned Antenne 2 have compiled "five keys" to the success of American shows that European producers might copy.
These are: emphasize "how not why"; put normal people in extraordinary situations, rather than vice versa; show lots of chase scenes, not long dramatic stories; use strong and simple characters, not complicated ones; and complete a story in each show rather than carry the story over several episodes.
French shows, the authors conclude, do all these things wrong. 

The Paris conference was short on specific ways to produce shows with cross-border appeal, but did offer some general guidelines.
Constraints to cross-border cooperation could be removed, trade and mergers among companies could be encouraged.
The experts also urged more action to help develop struggling "secondary" broadcasters offering specialized or syndicated material. 

