.START 

In historic Old Sturbridge Village, Mass., hotels that usually are jammed had vacancies all summer.
The crowds at the majestic national monuments in Washington, D.C., were noticeably down.
And tour operators say sales of vacation packages to Hawaii are 10% off expectations. 

After four years of strong growth, domestic leisure travel has run into a surprising slump.
Many sectors of the travel industry -- including airlines, hotels and trains -- say their leisure business began dropping off slightly in the summer and has remained slow this fall. "If we hadn't done two special promotions we'd be floundering," says Kathy Redmond, senior vice president of marketing at Ramada Inc. in Phoenix, Ariz. 

The problem isn't occurring everywhere; Florida is still strong, for example.
And it's too early to know how long the downturn will continue.
But many travel industry officials say they're beginning to worry.
Airlines, hotels and other travel companies have spent heavily on expansion plans, made on the assumption that vacation travel would keep booming. 

Airlines, for example, are committed to spend $32.5 billion on new planes over the next three years.
The hotel industry -- even though occupancy rates for the year through August stood at only 65% -- is in the midst of a building binge.
And some analysts say last week's bankruptcy-court filing by Braniff Inc. was probably hastened by the slump; the airline, based in Orlando, Fla., was heavily leveraged with debt and had been hoping to have a strong summer season. 

Along with being worried, industry officials are also a bit puzzled.
Some suspect that the combination of long-term concerns about the economy and steady air fare increases may finally be scaring off travelers.
Fares have been going up for some time, but the increases have become sharply higher on certain popular routes.
Ticket prices already are up 10% from a year ago, and the airlines have announced more increases for this fall.
That's led to a 1% drop in domestic air travel through August, after years of double-digit gains. 

"Any time air fares go up . . . you lose a certain segment of that leisure traveler," says Fredrick Miller, a vice president at Stouffer Hotels Resorts in Solon, Ohio.
For most of the '80s, leisure travel has been one the fastest growing industries in America.
Since 1985, the industry has been expanding at an average annual rate of 9%.
Last year, leisure travel revenues totaled $313 billion -- or 6.5% of the gross national product. 

From January to June, the number of U.S. pleasure trips taken by Americans was up 8% -- but that number suddenly fell 2% in July, according to the U.S. Travel Data Center in Washington.
August figures aren't expected to be much better.
The center, which surveys 2,000 travelers a month, defines pleasure trips as any overnight trip at least 100 miles away from home that isn't business related. 

The slump affected such popular tourism spots as Hawaii and New England.
Along the beaches of Cape Cod in Massachusetts, hotels reported a 10% to 15% drop in business this summer.
The National Park Service said visits to its parks in Washington were off 9% and down 10% in the Pacific Northwest region in the first eight months of this year.
Amtrak said traffic on its overnight routes, which are the most popular with vacationers, dropped 6% in July from July 

Many resorts owners don't need numbers to tell that business is down. "This whole area fell dead this summer," says Mary Helen Lindner, owner of the Island Motel Resort in Eureka Springs, Ark., in the Ozarks.
September was also down considerably, she says. 

In response to the slump, some hotels and resorts have been forced to roll out more amenities or drop prices.
Guests who stayed four nights at the Royal Waikoloa resort in Hawaii got $110 in freebies, including free hotel merchandise and a free car rental, on rooms costing $135 a night.
Ramada Inc., meanwhile, sold rooms for as low as $37 a night this summer. 

The industry may have to take even more steps.
In particular, many analysts think airlines will change pricing tactics, because profits are starting to be hurt by the drop in traffic. 

Says Michael Derchin, an analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert, "I think we'll see a lot more fare promotions over the next six months." 

