.START 

The first item on Mary Calvin's itinerary when she came for a two-week visit recently wasn't Harvard Square in Cambridge, Faneuil Hall or the Bunker Hill Monument. 

Instead, Ms. Calvin, a Seattle resident, timed her visit so she could tour a recent addition to the list of Boston attractions: the city's polluted harbor. 

"I've heard so much about the harbor," says Ms. Calvin, sitting in a windy seat on the top deck of the Edward Rowe Snow, a 60-foot vessel. "I arrived last night so I could make" one of the thrice-monthly harbor tours. 

The Boston Harbor Sewer Tour, as it is listed in local newspapers, was started by Save The Harbor/Save The Bay, an environmental group.
For $10, visitors spend two hours taking in polluted sites. 

The tour, which started in 1987, got a boost last fall when George Bush, running for president, perched on a rented boat and condemned the bay, blaming Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis for its state.
Though the tour guides issue olfactory warnings, patronage this summer doubled to about 50 passengers a trip. 

Many are vacationing tourists.
But not all.
Vincent J. MacLean, leader of the Liberal Party in Nova Scotia, recently stopped off in Boston on route to Washington.
Why? "To see sludge up close," he says. 

He got his wish.
About a half-hour into the cruise, the tour guide, peering into the water, shouts, "Brown spot." Passengers scurry to starboard. "I don't need to show you where it is," hollers the guide, sporting a white "Save the Harbor" baseball cap. "You can smell it." A thick dark patch stains greenish waters. 

Beneath is the end of a dumping pipe, passengers are told.
Twice a day, solid waste, treated with chlorine, is expelled to be carried by ebb tide out to sea. 

Other sights include some of the 87 Boston-area sewer overflows that empty into the bay, petroleum hydrocarbon sediments, and road salt and other industrial materials stacked by harborside.
The guide also points out the Old North Church steeple, from which Paul Revere got the signal that started him on his ride.
In the middle of the cruise, the tour vessel comes upon a boat harvesting lobsters in the harbor.
Says Ron Spilman, a graduate student in environmental science at Harvard: "I'm glad I don't eat lobster." 

