.START 

The Supreme Court left the states free to prosecute corporate officials for workplace hazards that are also regulated by a federal job safety law. 

The high court declined to hear an appeal raising the question of whether the federal occupational safety and health law was intended to pre-empt state criminal enforcement of job safety. 

While the high court may still review this issue in a future case, its refusal to hear an appeal by Chicago Magnet Wire Corp. and five of its executives means that states are likely to step up safety-related prosecutions. 

Federal enforcement most often takes the form of civil administrative action by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, carried out through a combination of safety standards and fines.
But under state laws, executives face prison sentences as well as criminal fines. 

"This is a very significant issue," said Stephen Bokat of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce National Litigation Center. "You're going to hear a lot of corporate officers start to scream if they're prosecuted for things they thought were part of OSHA's regulatory scheme." 

Chicago Magnet and its executives were indicted by a Chicago grand jury on charges of "knowingly and recklessly" failing to protect workers from hazardous chemicals, allowing injuries to 42 employees. 

A state court judge dismissed the charges in 1985, ruling that federal law regulates job safety standards for exposure to toxic chemicals to the exclusion of state enforcement through criminal prosecutions.
An Illinois appeals court upheld the dismissal. 

But in February, the Illinois Supreme Court reversed the decision, ruling that the federal job safety law doesn't preclude states from prosecuting employers who maintain hazardous workplaces in which workers are injured or killed. 

The high court's dismissal of the appeal leaves the Illinois Supreme Court's ruling intact and clears the way for a trial on the state charges. 

Relatively few employers have been criminally prosecuted for workplace hazards in Illinois or elsewhere.
The Michigan Supreme Court recently took a position similar to the Illinois court's, and the same issue is pending in Texas. 

Federal law allows for criminal action, including fines and jail sentences, in egregious cases, but the Justice Department has filed only 17 such cases in the 18-year history of OSHA.
In December, the Justice Department lent its weight to the view that state prosecutions aren't pre-empted by the federal law. (Asta vs.
Illinois) 

Merger Challenges 

The high court let stand a federal court ruling that a competitor may challenge a proposed merger on the ground that the newly merged company will control too much of the market for a product.
The justices refused to hear an appeal by Thomas J. Lipton Inc., owned by Dutch-based Unilever N.V., and by Kraft Inc., a unit of Philip Morris Cos. 

The lawsuit was filed last year by R.C. Bigelow Inc., a small privately held tea company, to challenge Kraft's proposed sale of its herbal tea unit, Celestial Seasonings Inc., to Lipton.
Meanwhile, Kraft called off the sale to Lipton and instead sold Celestial Seasonings to a management group. 

In June 1988, a federal judge in New Haven, Conn., dismissed Bigelow's lawsuit before trial.
But last January, a federal appeals court in New York ruled that a competitor, Bigelow, may challenge a proposed merger if the new company's market share would be so large that it could put other firms out of business. 

The New York appeals court's ruling apparently conflicted with a 1988 ruling in a similar case by a federal appeals court in New Orleans.
Both courts took different views of a 1986 Supreme Court decision that narrowly restricted antitrust lawsuits by competitors seeking to block mergers.
The New York court's ruling will remain the law for that court, which includes the states of New York, Connecticut and Vermont. 

Paul Windels, attorney for Bigelow at Windels, Marx, Davies & Ives in New York, said the high court's action "must be taken as strong support" of the appeals court's ruling.
Mr. Windels said Bigelow is seeking a court order enjoining Lipton from acquiring Celestial Seasonings in the future.
David St. Clair, vice president and general counsel for Lipton, an Englewood Cliffs, N.J., unit of Unilever, said, "There's no matter to decide.
There's been no finding by anybody of any substantive violation of any antitrust law.
We have no present intention of acquiring Celestial, and have no relationship whatsoever with the people who did buy the business." (Thomas Lipton Inc. vs.
R.C. Bigelow Inc.) 

Offshore Leasing 

The justices refused to hear an appeal by the governor of Alaska, supported by nine other coastal states, over how much weight federal officials must give state requests to omit particular areas from offshore oil and gas leasing. 

The appeal by Alaska involved a lease sale that has already been completed for areas of Bristol Bay.
Alaska officials objected to leasing offshore tracts within 25 miles of the Alaskan peninsula.
They argued that under federal law, the Interior secretary is required to give deference to objections by state officials. 

Attorneys for Amoco Corp. and other major oil companies said the Interior Department opened the lease bids last October after a federal appeals court in San Francisco rejected Alaska's complaints.
The high bids, the industry lawyers said, totaled $100 million, and leases have been awarded. (Cowper vs.
Secretary of Interior) 

Court in Brief 

In other action, as the high court started its new term after a three-month summer recess, the justices: 

-- Ordered a federal appeals court in Philadelphia to reconsider its ruling that Westinghouse Electric Corp. discriminated against older workers by refusing severance pay to laid-off or fired workers who were eligible to retire. (Westinghouse Electric Corp. vs.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission) 

-- Agreed to decide whether hospitals have a right to sue under federal civil rights law to challenge state Medicaid reimbursement procedures. (Baliles vs.
Virginia Hospital Association) 

-- Agreed to decide whether a state may require an injured farm worker to seek workers' compensation instead of suing the employer for damages under the federal Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act. (Adams Fruit Co. vs.
Barrett) 

-- Let stand a federal appeals court decision throwing out a $1,160,000 award that the parents of a girl born with limb defects had won against a Dow Chemical Co. division in a suit over the drug Bendectin. (Richardson vs.
Richardson-Merrell Inc.) 

-- Let stand a federal appeals court ruling reinstating a government antitrust lawsuit intended to stop Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. from leasing two RJR Nabisco Inc. plants for producing high fructose corn syrup. (Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. vs.
U.S.) 

-- Let stand the price-fixing conviction of Morton Lapides, the former chairman of Allegheny Bottling Co., a onetime distributor of Pepsi-Cola in Maryland and Virginia. (Lapides vs.
U.S.) 

