.START 

The Senate Finance Committee moved toward approval of legislation to raise about $5.4 billion in fiscal 1990 and expand the deduction for individual retirement accounts, while avoiding a change in the capital-gains tax. 

The capital-gains issue, however, probably will come to a showdown soon on the Senate floor.
Prospects for some sort of capital-gains tax cut, which is a priority of President Bush, remain strong in the full Senate. 

The Finance Committee's bill, a huge measure containing changes in both spending and taxes, is the vehicle to which capital-gains proponents hope to attach their provision. 

The bill would result in a roughly $5.4 billion net increase in taxes in the fiscal year that began Sunday.
Taxes would be raised through a laundry list of mostly obscure revenue-law changes, many of which are contained in a bill approved earlier this year by the House Ways and Means Committee.
The measure also provides tax reductions, including the repeal of a law called Section 89.
The law compels companies to provide comparable health benefits to both highly paid executives and rank-and-file workers.
The House already has voted for repeal. 

On IRAs, the finance panel's bill would provide a 50% deduction for IRA contributions by individuals who aren't already eligible and permit penalty-free withdrawals for purchases of a first home and spending for higher education.
It also would extend several expiring tax breaks. 

In addition, the bill would reduce Medicare spending in fiscal 1990 by some $3.6 billion, in part by curbing reimbursements to physicians.
The plan also would impose a nationwide limit on Medicare payments to doctors, but in a way that is far more acceptable to the doctors' lobby than a tough plan approved by the Ways and Means Committee. 

The Ways and Means bill would eventually cut back payments to physicians if the national target is exceeded.
The Finance Committee measure would require the government to hold increased discussions about the problem if the target is exceeded. 

The Finance Committee bill also would raise spending in several areas, particularly for senior citizens.
The measure would increase the income threshold beyond which senior citizens have their Social Security benefits reduced. 

The threshold next year is $9,360 for retirees aged 65 to 69.
The panel would increase that level to $11,700 in 1990 and $14,520 in 1991, compared with the current law's level of $9,840 for the latter year.
The panel also would cut the amount by which the benefits are taken away above those thresholds.
The cost of these changes is about $1 billion a year. 

Tax Increases 

The wide-ranging bill contains provisions that would: 

-- Prevent companies that have made leveraged buy-outs from getting federal tax refunds resulting from losses caused by interest payments on debt issued to finance the buy-outs, effective Aug. 2, 1989. 

-- Require mutual funds to include in their taxable income dividends paid to them on the date that the dividends are declared rather than received, effective the day after the tax bill is enacted. 

-- Close a loophole regarding employee stock ownership plans, effective June 6, 1989, that has been exploited by investment bankers in corporate takeovers.
The measure repeals a 50% exclusion given to banks on the interest from loans used to acquire securities for an ESOP, if the ESOP owns less than 30% of the employer's stock. 

-- Curb junk bonds by ending tax benefits for certain securities, such as zero-coupon bonds, that postpone cash interest payments. 

-- Raise $851 million by repealing an automatic reduction in airport and airway taxes. 

-- Speed up the collection of the payroll tax from large companies, effective August 1990. -- Impose a tax on ozone-depleting chemicals, such as those used in air conditioners and in Styrofoam, beginning at $1.10 a pound starting next year. 

-- Repeal special tax breaks created for financial institutions that will be getting direct aid from the savings-and-loan bailout legislation. 

-- Withhold income taxes from the paychecks of certain farm workers currently exempt from withholding. 

-- Repeal what remains of the completed-contract method of accounting, which is used by military contractors to reduce their tax burden. 

-- Permit corporations to use excess pension funds to pay health benefits for current retirees.
Using the pension excess would increase a company's taxable income.
Currently, companies deduct as business expenses the money they use to pay for retirees' health benefits. 

-- Change the collection of gasoline excise taxes to weekly from semimonthly, effective next year. 

-- Restrict the ability of real estate owners to escape taxes by swapping one piece of property for another instead of selling it for cash. 

-- Impose a tax of three cents a barrel on domestic crude oil, effective next year, to pay for a fund that finances oil-spill cleanups. 

-- Increase to $6 a person from $3 the international air-passenger departure tax, and impose a $3-a-person tax on international departures by commercial ships. 

-- Make permanent a 3% excise tax on long-distance telephoning that is due to expire at the end of next year. 

Tax Reductions 

Under current law, individuals who don't have employer-provided pension plans can make fully deductible contributions into IRAs of as much as $2,000 a year.
Also, married couples with less than $40,000 in adjusted gross income and single people with incomes of less than $25,000 may make deductible IRA contributions. 

Under the committee plan proposed by Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas), those who are currently eligible for fully deductible IRAs would continue to get the same tax treatment.
Those who don't currently qualify would get a deduction of 50% of their IRA contribution of as much as $2,000 annually.
Thus, an individual making an IRA contribution of $2,000 would get a $1,000 deduction. 

The Finance Committee plan would allow penalty-free withdrawals of IRA funds if the money is used for higher-education expenses, first-home purchases and, as in current law, retirement. 

Another provision would increase tax credits for child care and for low-income families. 

The bill also would extend several popular tax credits that are scheduled to expire at year's end.
It would extend for two years, through Dec. 31, 1991, the credit that helps employers hire low-income workers, and the credits that encourage solar, geothermal and oceanthermal energy projects by businesses.
It also would restore for two years the exclusion from income of as much as $5,250 in educational assistance provided by employers to their workers. 

Permanent extensions would be granted credits that assist the construction of lowincome housing and provide incentives for corporate research and development spending.
These two tax breaks also were extended permanently by the House Ways and Means Committee. 

