.START 

Mail-Order Scams Make 

Credit-Card Firms Wary 

PUBLICITY about mail-order scams claims another victim.
Small businesses trying to start mail-order operations say it is turning much tougher to get a Visa or MasterCard merchant agreement. 

Unable to offer customers the convenience of plastic, they say they're losing huge sales.
But banks fear they will end up holding the bag for fraud losses. 

Suburban Safari Inc., a new picnic gear mail-order concern in Fair Lawn, N.J., has tried a half dozen banks and still hasn't gotten a merchant account. "You don't even get past the phone call if you say 'direct mail, ' " says Douglas Sietsma, president.
Unable to let customers charge mail and phone orders, he says he has "scaled back" the whole business. "I had expected 90% of the orders to be on credit cards," he says. 

Prescience Corp., a five-year-old San Francisco software concern, decided it needed to offer credit-card convenience to expand its small mail-order volume.
Its local bank of two years standing refused its application for a merchant account, as did four other banks.
Prescience finally got its deal -- with a Connecticut bank. 

"Banks are increasingly concerned about mail-order fraud," says an official of MasterCard International Inc., New York, whose member financial institutions issue MasterCards.
If a credit-card holder charges an item and never receives it from a fraudulent company, the bank frequently gets stuck with the charge. 

Credit Flow Corp., Phoenix, Ariz., says it developed a system that provides credit-card services for about 25 previously frustrated mail-order firms yearning to offer credit.
It screens bad-risk customers and handles the banking.
The hitch, it says, is that its own bank got cold feet and won't handle new merchant accounts.
Thus, the company's growth is on hold while it seeks a willing bank. "We could have signed up 500 companies in six months," laments vice president Jeff Groves. 

Small Stocks Continue 

To Trail the S&P 500 

SMALL-COMPANY stocks are lagging.
For the first eight months of 1989, these stocks posted a total return -- appreciation plus dividends -- of 19.5%, well behind the 29.4% for the Standard & Poor's 500, calculates Ibbotson Associates Inc., a Chicago research concern.
The small companies have market capitalizations between $10 million and $85 million. 

For the 1970s and early 1980s, small-company stocks greatly outperformed the big stocks.
But for the five-year period from 1984 to 1988, small stocks produced a compound annual return of only 6.7%, compared with 15.4% for the S&P 500, says Arthur Andersen & Co., an accounting firm. 

Among other factors, the stock-market crash of 1987 prompted more investors to stick to blue chips.
Moreover, "we continue to have a market driven by restructurings and leveraged buyouts" -- mostly a big-stock phenomenon -- says Mary Farrell, a PaineWebber Inc. market strategist in New York. 

But the tide might soon turn, Ms. Farrell says.
Small stocks are undervalued, an oversupply is abating and investors may be souring on LBOs, she contends. 

Biotech Companies Ally 

With Big Drug Makers 

BIOTECHNOLOGY firms in creasingly are forming strategic partnerships with big drug and pharmaceutical companies. 

Small biotech companies are acting partly because capital from public investors and venture capitalists is growing scarcer.
Many also need more money to develop and test new products. 

California Biotechnology Inc., Mountain View, Calif., last year created a subsidiary to work with New York-based Pfizer Inc. developing cures for diabetes and obesity.
Cambridge BioScience Corp., Worcester, Mass., is cooperating with France's Institute Merieux on leukemia vaccines for cats.
And Molecular Biosystems Inc., San Diego, is working with Shionogi Pharmaceuticals of Japan on an imaging agent for cardiovascular diseases. 

Most of the smaller companies are looking to a big brother for help with capital and marketing, says Steven Burrill of Ernst & Young, an accounting firm.
But some small companies also are licensing their technology to bigger companies more capable of developing the fruits of their research, Mr. Burrill notes. 

Overseas corporations, eager to acquire U.S. biotechnology, have been particularly aggressive in forming alliances, entrepreneurs say. "It is so much easier to get money and help from foreign sources than domestic investors," says Carl Rausch, chief executive officer of Biopure Corp., a Boston concern involved in developing a human blood substitute. 

Two years ago, Biopure initiated a partnership with B. Braun Melsungen of West Germany to manufacture and market the blood substitute in Europe. "They are giving us a free hand with development," Mr. Rausch says. "Most U.S. companies want to appropriate the technology for themselves." 

Odds and Ends 

BELEAGUERED financier Michael Milken last week briefed 150 venture capitalists who invest in minority-owned businesses.
The subject: looking for deals.
Mr. Milken, indicted last March on 98 counts of racketeering and other crimes, is "looking for opportunities," says JoAnn Price, who organized the conference at Hilton Head, S.C. . . . A Small Business Service Bureau poll found 79% of small-business owners want government regulation of health insurance, up from 68% four years ago. . . . Quality of labor is the "issue of greatest concern" to California small-business owners surveyed by the Small Business Alliance. 

