.START 

International Business Machines Corp. has the inside track in the bidding for Lockheed Corp. 's Cadam division and may purchase it for about $100 million, industry executives said. 

They said some Japanese companies -- notably CSK, Japan's biggest software company -- are also participating in the bidding that Lockheed solicited in April, when it announced that it hoped to sell its information-systems operations.
But the executives said IBM is the front-runner to acquire Cadam, which makes software for computer-aided design and manufacturing.
The winner is expected to be announced within two or three weeks. 

IBM, Armonk, N.Y., and Lockheed, Calabasas, Calif., declined to comment.
CSK officials couldn't be reached. 

The industry executives said Cadam had revenue of just $84 million in 1988 and has been losing money.
But they said its software has a loyal following and has strategic value.
While such software initially began as a computerized drafting tool, its capability has expanded to include modeling and analysis of design. 

The software also seems likely to play an increasingly larger role in computer-integrated manufacturing, an area on which many computer companies are focusing.
Although companies have succeeded in computerizing offices, efforts in the factory have faltered, and many companies think there will be major opportunities there in coming years. 

IBM is especially interested in Cadam, the industry executives said, because about two-thirds of the IBM customers who use powerful computer-aided-design tools use Cadam software.
And IBM has been very active lately in making alliances with companies that develop software that it considers strategic. 

Cadam software runs primarily on IBM minicomputers and mainframes.
The company recently branched out, however, by designing its software to run on machines of IBM competitors, a reason for IBM to want to ensure that Cadam stays loyal to IBM hardware in the future. 

Lockheed had said in April that it wanted to sell its information-systems operations so it could focus on its military and commercial aerospace and electronics businesses.
Securities analysts said at the time that the units -- Cadam, CalComp, Metier and Lockheed DataPlan -- accounted for some $600 million of Lockheed's $10.59 billion of annual revenue and could be sold for roughly the amount of their sales. 

The Cadam negotiations, however, have apparently been a disappointment.
The industry executives said Lockheed's investment bankers tried to stir up a bidding war by pitting IBM against the Japanese companies, in hopes of getting a price as high as $200 million.
But when various overhead costs were split up and assigned to the different units, Cadam's losses turned out to be steeper than expected, and the anticipated price fell. 

Separately, IBM said it has begun shipping circuit boards that contain an Intel Corp. 80486 central processor, becoming the first personal-computer maker to offer products using the powerful processor. 

IBM made hay this summer by being the first manufacturer to announce a 486-based product, and delivering it now, a quarter ahead of schedule, lets IBM keep those bragging rights.
IBM has developed a reputation as a technological laggard in the personal-computer arena and is doing everything it can to change that image. 

At the same time, the announcement is likely to have little immediate effect on the market.
IBM's product is just a circuit board that can be used to upgrade an existing machine, and customers interested in a hot new processor typically want a machine that has been tuned to take advantage of all its capabilities.
In addition, 486 chips have been in short supply because of manufacturing problems at Intel, so it will be several weeks before the IBM board will be generally available. 

