.START 

Virgin Atlantic Group agreed to sell a 25.1% stake in its Virgin Music Group to Fujisankei Communications Group of Japan for about #96 million ($155.5 million). 

The partnership gives the British record company a hefty capital infusion at a time when the record industry is undergoing consolidation world-wide.
According to Virgin Chairman Richard Branson, the arrangement also opens the opportunity for substantial record sales in the Far East, where "the market is growing and expanding at an extremely rapid rate." 

Fujisankei is Japan's largest communications concern, with over $5 billion in annual revenue.
Pony Canyon Inc., Fujisankei's music and video subsidiary, which will make the investment in Virgin Music, posted the highest record sales in Japan.
In addition, the parent company has operations in television, newspapers and film. 

Virgin Music is the world's sixth-biggest record company.
Virgin Records' musicians include Paula Abdul, whose debut album, "Forever Your Girl," has posted bumper sales in the U.S. in recent months.
Other Virgin Records musicians include Phil Collins and Boy George. 

Mr. Branson said he had held preliminary talks with several other potential partners before reaching the accord. "We couldn't have created a better partner," he said. "They're the biggest communications group in Japan; they have the most-influential television stations and the most-influential radio stations." 

In making the move, Mr. Branson said he was keenly aware of the trend for independent recording companies to be swept up in industry mergers.
Mr. Branson staged a #99 million buy-out of Virgin last year, taking the group private again after two tumultuous years as a publicly traded concern.
He said yesterday that following the 1987 stock-market crash, Virgin's stock price was depressed relative to its profit-making capacity. "Rather than waiting for a predator to buy it up," Mr. Branson said, "we bought it back." He added that the Japanese link gives Virgin greater assurance of staying independent and provides access to a set of deep corporate pockets. 

