.START 

Allianz AG agreed to acquire 50% of the insurance interests of Cie. de Navigation Mixte for about 6.5 billion French francs ($1.02 billion). 

Marc Fournier, president of Navigation Mixte, of Paris, said the move is aimed at boosting Allianz's presence in France while giving the French company's insurance holdings access to other markets. 

As the European Community proceeds with efforts to lower barriers in financial services, insurance companies across the Continent are attempting to gain footholds in other EC markets.
Italian and French insurance companies have forged several alliances.
Most recently in France, Groupe Victoire acquired Colonia Versicherung AG of West Germany before being acquired itself by France's Suez Group. 

Many French competitors feared the giant Allianz Group would make a splashy, perhaps unfriendly, takeover move in France.
Instead, the West German company seems to be entering the market as a friendly partner for Navigation Mixte, which had feared an unfriendly investment from a French competitor. 

Mr. Fournier said Allianz will boost its stake in Navigation Mixte to more than 5% and will take a seat on the company's board.
He said Allianz currently holds a small stake in Navigation Mixte, but declined to specify the amount.
The 5% holding has an indicated market value of 720 million francs based on Wednesday's share price of 1,364 francs, the latest figure available. 

The agreement will help Navigation Mixte fend off potential raiders and end speculative interest that has led to flurries of interest in its stock during the past year.
Not only will it put half the group's much-coveted insurance interests in the hands of a powerful ally, but Mr. Fournier also noted that the accord will boost Navigation Mixte's cash hoard to about 11 billion francs by year end. 

On Wednesday, Navigation Mixte obtained a suspension of its stock on the Paris Bourse after it shot up to 1,364 francs a share, apparently on speculative demand.
Cie.
Financiere de Paribas, an ally, later announced it boosted its stake in the group to 7% from 2%, after a similar move by the state-owned insurer Assurances Generales de France.
Mr. Fournier stopped short of saying AGF's move was unwelcome, but said at a news conference yesterday that he hadn't been informed of the decision and suggested that such communication would be part of a truly friendly gesture. 

Under the accord, Navigation Mixte will establish a holding company to control its Via Assurances and Rhin & Moselle units, which are expected to have revenue of about eight billion francs in 1989.
Allianz Europe Ltd. will take a 50% stake in the new holding company and will set its general strategy for the insurance sector.
Financial decisions will be made by a joint committee; the new holding company's presidency will alternate between its two shareholders every three years.
Navigation Mixte will install the first president. 

Mr. Fournier said both groups have first-refusal rights if the other decides to leave the venture.
He also said Allianz doesn't currently plan to transfer its existing French interests to the new holding company.
But he added that such a move could be made in the future. 

Allianz is Europe's biggest insurer, with annual premium income of about 100 billion francs, the companies said.
For 1988, it posted world-wide group pretax profit of 1.24 billion marks ($671.4 million). 

Navigation Mixte, which also controls a portfolio of transport, travel, industrial and food-sector holdings, had consolidated net profit of 989 million francs in 1988 on revenue of 18.13 billion francs.
About 38% of its consolidated revenue is generated by insurance operations, Mr. Fournier said. 

