.START 

During the go-go years of real estate, few people marketed tax shelters quite the way Barry Trupin did. 

He conjured up a kingdom selling limited partnerships, dressing his operation in the trappings of old-world wealth.
Brochures for his company -- to which he gave the gilt-edged name of Rothschild Reserve Group -- were embossed with a golden coat of arms and adorned with pictures of medieval armor. 

Along the way, the one-time nuclear-industry executive and failed nightclub operator amassed a fleet of seven Rolls-Royces.
He also acquired a mansion on Long Island's fashionable South Fork and spent millions trying to convert the place, a waterfront pile he called Dragon's Head, into his vision of an 18th-century castle. 

Alas, like other fairy tales, Mr. Trupin's story was too good to be true: Rothschild went out of business in 1987, leaving its investors with millions of dollars in losses. 

Now the Federal Bureau of Investigation is probing Mr. Trupin's activities to see whether he might have violated securities laws or misused a savings-and-loan association he purchased in California, according to people close to the inquiry. 

Mr. Trupin, along with many of his former associates, accountants and lawyers, is also the target of a civil lawsuit brought by Simeon Morin, a Connecticut businessman who invested in Rothschild partnerships, and by 46 other investors.
The suit, which alleges fraud and racketeering and was filed in August 1988 in federal district court here, asserts that from 1983 to 1987 Rothschild raised $72 million from 600 investors and that $42 million was lost in foreclosure proceedings "or otherwise disappeared." 

The suit alleges that Rothschild, acting as a general partner in limited partnerships, used investor money to pay top dollar for real estate and -- after assessing exorbitant fees -- allowed investor properties to go into default.
It says that Rothschild repeatedly misled investors and grossly marked up properties sold to them.
And it claims that Mr. Trupin pocketed partnership money and bribed accountants to recommend Rothschild to clients. 

Mr. Trupin dismisses the allegations against him as "an absurdity," adding that "everything was done with professionals, with the best lawyers and accountants." 

Mr. Trupin and his attorney, John L. Amabile, decline to answer specific questions.
However, Mr. Trupin says, "Anything they {plaintiffs} say is false and a lie, and eventually I will have an opportunity to prevail and then sue them for malicious prosecution, and prevail then also." 

Mr. Amabile has asked for a dismissal of the Morin suit on numerous procedural grounds.
The suit, he argues, amounts to "a confusing run-on of assorted claimed bad acts." In a court filing, Mr. Amabile says the "repetitive and meandering" complaint fails to discriminate as to which wrongful acts were allegedly committed by which defendants. 

Mr. Trupin's failed partnerships are but a part of the recent debacle in the limited-partnership industry.
Brokerage executives estimate that as much as $10 billion of the $100 billion in limited partnerships marketed to the public in recent years are in trouble.
Some of the money was lost because of collapses in real estate and energy markets and because of tax-law changes.
But as the lawsuits swirling around the Rothschild case suggests, some of it may have been lost through fraud. 

Beneath its glossy surface, the Morin suit claims, Rothschild was a maze of subsidiaries with branches in every state, controlled at the pinnacle by trusts in the name of Mr. Trupin's daughter.
The maze was so complex, and so often revised, that Rothschild staffers maintained a loose-leaf book, referred to as "the bible," to help them understand it. 

In a court deposition for a creditor lawsuit, Diane Rose, a former Rothschild attorney, said that most of her time "was taken up going through the books of various Rothschild entities and compiling a summary for Mr. Barry Trupin" of where each company was, who its officers were and how it was related to the others. 

Though the 53-year-old Mr. Trupin says he has been hit by more than a score of lawsuits from investors and creditors, he has been hard to pin down.
Such creditors as Maurice Grunfeld, who designed his brochures, and Comdisco Inc., which supplied him with computers, have won judgments against Rothschild affiliates, but each has wound up trying to collect from empty shells. "Nothing was in Trupin's name," says Joel Zeiger, a former Rothschild salesman. "He made himself judgment-proof." 

Mr. Trupin has, in a fashion, taken credit for this.
In a generally laudatory cover profile of him in New York magazine in 1984, he said he had founded 200 separate entities and added, "I am the master of the corporate veil." Mr. Trupin, who had a middle-class upbringing as the son of a silversmith, also told the magazine that he was "a poor boy from Brooklyn" who had reached the heights of "the other Rothschilds." 

After receiving a degree in applied physics from Hofstra University in 1960, Burton Howard Trupin went to work for United Nuclear Corp. There, one Rothschild brochure says, "he designed and marketed special-purpose computers for the nuclear industry." In 1966, he opened an East Side nightclub, the Charlie Bates Saloon.
When that failed, he tried his hand at mortgage brokering.
According to a story that Mr. Trupin frequently told, he was down to his last $38 when he hatched the idea that would make him rich. 

A 1976 tax law had made it more beneficial for companies to lease computers than to buy them.
Mr. Trupin latched on to the idea of purchasing mainframe computers and leasing them to big corporations. 

The critical next step was carving up the leases and packaging them in limited partnerships that would throw off tax losses generated by heavy interest payments and depreciation.
This done, an investor could put down $3,000 in cash on Dec. 31 and immediately file for $18,000 in tax deductions.
Money rolled in. 

Rothschild promoted and sold dozens of equipment tax shelters, harvesting a steady stream of fees.
Estimating his personal worth at "more or less $300 million" (the claim can't be verified), Mr. Trupin told New York magazine that he had invented "a money machine." 

But the money machine, by the early 1980s, was looking suspect to the Internal Revenue Service.
John Elias, a former IRS attorney, says the IRS found that Trupin partnerships were overstating the value of computers by selling them at inflated prices from one Trupin-related company to another.
This would enable the partnerships to borrow heavily and claim big deductions. "We turned up a pattern in which the price of {equipment} increased with every step," he says.
A current IRS official confirms Mr. Elias's account. 

The IRS audited scores of Mr. Trupin's equipment-leasing investors and ultimately disallowed most of their deductions.
But in advance of the rulings, Mr. Trupin switched gears and started selling real-estate shelters.
In a variety of offering statements for these, examined by The Wall Street Journal, Rothschild said nothing about the tax problems of its previous shelters. 

The company's first properties were shopping centers.
Then, just as that real-estate market was becoming saturated, it turned to office buildings.
As competition in the syndication business heated up, the quality of Rothschild's properties declined, former staffers assert.
And, they add, its fees escalated. 

A 1985 partnership that raised $5.25 million spent only $3.4 million, or about twothirds, on real estate.
The rest, according to a Rothschild offering memorandum, was spent on nine categories of fees, commissions and costs. 

Investors were lured by the promise of tax breaks.
Harry Simon, a Chicago businessman who invested in four Rothschild partnerships and lost $500,000, says that a Rothschild salesman, accompanied by Mr. Simon's accountant, would visit once a year. "They came to my house, always around Dec. 30," he says, "and they would want the check right there and then." 

Some investors believed, too, that Rothschild was related to its European namesake.
Louis Linker, a retired postal worker in Raleigh, N.C., who has lost $46,000, says he bought in partly because he thought that Rothschild was "a well-known family in the investment field.
I was influenced by the name Rothschild." 

Investors were unaware that, at least in some cases, accountants and financial planners recommending Rothschild were getting money for doing so.
In an affidavit filed in federal district court in New York regarding an investor lawsuit, New York accountant Lawrence Friedman said that Rothschild had paid him $110,000 in connection with putting a client into the company's partnerships.
Mr. Friedman said further that Rothschild had helped him to conceal the payments through billing for accounting work not done. 

Rothschild's partnerships were relatively easy to sell, in part because only a small down payment was required.
Typically, investors paid $2,500 in cash for a $175,000 investment and signed promissory notes to pay the balance over time.
Rothschild immediately converted many of its notes to cash by selling them to unaffiliated banks -- meaning that Mr. Trupin cashed out long before the ultimate fate of the partnerships was known. 

And even if, as happened, investors later alleged fraud, they were out of luck.
Roger Kirk, a Kentucky coal-mining executive, says his notes were sold by Rothschild to First Commercial Bank in Chicago.
After Rothschild collapsed, Mr. Kirk tried to stop paying -- to no avail. "They {First Commercial} said they have a note with my signature on it, and I have to pay," Mr. Kirk says, adding that he has lost $100,000 and is still making payments on his notes. 

But back when the partnerships were being marketed, in the mid-1980s, real estate looked as if it would be an even bigger winner for Rothschild than computer leasing.
The company rented a huge penthouse overlooking Manhattan's Central Park with a pool table and a fireplace.
Although the business was partly staffed with friends and relatives from Brooklyn, Mr. Trupin and his wife, Renee, a former administrative assistant at the company, assumed the air of jet-setters, former employees say. 

Gary Rogers, a former Trupin associate, says Mr. Trupin used the New York magazine cover story about him as "his calling card." 

The couple bought a collection of fine art and a townhouse in Manhattan.
Mr. Trupin would absent himself for long vacations on a 150-foot yacht, former employees say, and at times he would fly by helicopter to a spare estate on Long Island, which he bought so that the Trupins would have somewhere to stay while overseeing the work on Dragon's Head. 

Mr. Trupin spent $12 million making Dragon's Head into a French Gothic Xanadu, with towers and turrets and an indoor waterfall.
But the village of Southampton, with its quiet streets and quiet money, objected and refused to let him finish, claiming he didn't have a proper permit. (Although Mr. Trupin sued and won a $1.9 million jury award, he lost on appeal; he has now asked the U.S. Supreme Court to hear his appeal and has put Dragon's Head on the market for $8 million.) 

Mr. Trupin was a stickler for expensive details in his business, too.
On one occasion, he was debating what color to use for the front cover of a brochure. "All of a sudden, he went to his front desk and pulled out a six-inch-square burgundy piece of metal -- from one of his Rolls-Royces -- and dropped it on the coffee table," says Mr. Grunfeld, the brochure designer. "He said, 'That's the color I want. ' Barry was looking for an upper-class image." 

Rothschild's literature portrayed the company as an all-purpose investment house whose expertise ranged from "finance" to "fine arts." Its 1986 brochure says, "We are gratified by the faith and confidence placed in us . . . and we will always be worthy of that trust." 

An in-house memo, dated July 19, 1985, reads a little differently.
The memo, on the subject of "letters to limited partners," says, "Just add the usual 'BS' paragraphs on how great the places are . . . and how about buying our next deal." 

Keeping investors in the dark apparently wasn't a new approach.
A year earlier, a Rothschild affiliate known as Whitehall Associates had acquired an 11-story office building in Sarasota, Fla., from a local thrift.
Barnett Banks Inc., which later acquired the thrift, says in an interview that the price paid by Whitehall was $15.2 million. 

Later in 1984, another Rothschild affiliate sold the building to a Rothschild investor partnership for $22.8 million.
However, Rothschild's offering memorandum didn't mention Whitehall; it said it had acquired the building from an "unrelated" party for $22.5 million.
Thus, the Morin suit alleges, Rothschild realized the benefit of an undisclosed $7.3 million markup.
The investor partnership subsequently sought protection from creditors under bankruptcy laws. 

In 1985 in Dallas, Rothschild acquired the seven-story Spring Valley Center for $22 million and resold it to investors in five syndicated partnerships for $25.2 million.
According to Rothschild's offering statement, the building was "a modern, glass and steel high-rise office building," 88% leased and appraised by the Philadelphia-based real-estate firm of Jackson-Cross Co. at $25.5 million -- just a shade more than what investors paid. 

The offering statement didn't disclose that, judging by prices paid for other buildings in the area, the property might be worth much less.
Rothschild's investors paid about $210 a square foot for Spring Valley; according to a Jackson-Cross report to Rothschild, four nearby office buildings had all fetched less than that, the most recent sale bringing only $131 a square foot. 

On March 16, 1986, Rothschild wrote to its limited-partner investors that "field reports" from Dallas "have been gratifying." It added that the Dallas real-estate market "in general has strengthened considerably." Actually, Dallas was in the midst of a severe real-estate depression.
Further, Rothschild didn't disclose that it had sued Spring Valley's previous owner and that, according to papers filed in the suit, occupancy in the building had sunk to about 70%.
The building was later foreclosed on by bank lenders. 

Investors in AT&T Building Investors, organized in 1987 to buy the AT&T Building in Denver, fared no better.
They invested $1 million, according to Mr. Rogers, the former Trupin associate, who was general partner.
Rothschild collected a $400,000 brokering fee, according to copies of checks and bank wire transfers.
But the building wasn't acquired, and thus far money hasn't been returned, Mr. Rogers says. 

As Mr. Trupin's personal holdings expanded, Rothschild's partnerships worsened.
According to an affidavit for the Morin suit by Norman Leben, an accountant and former Rothschild manager, Mr. Trupin's "tremendous personal and business expenses" were largely to blame for Rothschild's deteriorating finances. 

A Rothschild partnership that owned a bank building in Grand Rapids, Mich., failed to make timely mortgage payments even though the property was leased and producing cash flow, according to Kenneth Hoexum, vice president of Prime Bank in Grand Rapids, which held a mortgage on it. "I don't know where the money went," he says. 

To make matters worse, Congress in 1986 had changed the tax laws, dealing a death blow to the tax-shelter business.
While existing partnerships were allowed to continue, Rothschild's prospects for new business were bleak. 

But Mr. Trupin was already diversifying.
In 1986, a Rothshchild affiliate bought 63% of the stock of Constitution Federal Savings & Loan, a Monterey Park, Calif., thrift, for $2.6 million, mostly in debt. 

A former associate says Mr. Trupin had ideas of starting a banking empire and spoke of himself as "Barry Trupin, the banker." But Mr. Leben, the accountant, says Mr. Trupin intended to use the bank to finance investments in Rothschild.
He also asked Rothschild employees to take their salaries from Constitution, Mr. Leben says, but the employees refused. 

A month after the Rothschild affiliate bought the thrift, a Rothschild salesman and a loan officer from Constitution met Stewart Blaikie, a Rothschild investor, for lunch at a Los Angeles restaurant.
Mr. Blaikie says Constitution offered to finance investments in Rothschild shelters. "You know how banks usually scrutinize you," he says. "They didn't do that.
It was like, 'No problem -- how much do you need? '" 

But federal regulators were unhappy with Mr. Trupin's control -- and with his failure to increase the thrift's capital.
In March 1987, Federal Home Loan Bank Board officials appeared at a Constitution board meeting.
They announced that Mr. Trupin was barred from participating in any thrift operations or management, and the "banker" walked out. (Constitution is currently under new management.) 

Mr. Trupin's company unraveled.
John Cameron, an attorney for Prime Bank, says he dropped in on Rothschild's penthouse office unannounced, hoping to collect on the Grand Rapids loan. "The furniture was moved into corners," he recalls. "Records were strewn about.
It looked like someone had left in a hurry." 

Rothschild sold its interest as general partner to Mr. Rogers, the former Trupin associate -- effectively walking out on its limited-partner investors despite a pledge in its offering memorandums not to sell out without investor approval.
But even after Rothschild had cut loose from its investors, it continued to pressure them to pay on notes that Mr. Trupin retained.
In October 1987, with six real-estate properties belonging to Rothschild partnerships lost or in foreclosure proceedings, a Rothschild affiliate filed suit in New York State Supreme Court against Mr. Morin, who after losing more than $1 million on various Rothschild deals had decided to stop paying. 

Mr. Morin hired an attorney, Farrell Glasser, who launched a countersuit on behalf of Mr. Morin and other disgruntled Rothschild investors.
Mr. Glasser says most of them were unaware that partnership assets had been lost. 

"They never notified us," says Charles Pratt, an investor and plaintiff from Cherry Hill, N.J. "They didn't even give us a chance to put up more money and keep our equity." 

Mr. Trupin says: "Frankly, these people {Mr.
Morin and others} didn't pay their notes.
If they had paid their notes, it probably would have turned out exactly as promised." 

In a telephone conversation, Mr. Trupin asserts that he had "very little to do" with the deals being questioned.
At another point, noting that he has been the target of 30 to 40 investor lawsuits, most of which haven't gotten anywhere, he says, "You can hire a lawyer to do anything." 

He also maintains that everything had been disclosed to investors and that "no one was promised a rose garden." He stresses that investors out for tax breaks should have known they were taking risks. (Mr.
Glasser, Mr. Morin's lawyer, says he expects that investors' real-estate tax deductions will ultimately be disallowed by the IRS.) 

After Rothschild collapsed, Mr. Trupin bought a bed-and-breakfast inn and a playhouse in Bucks County, Pa.
But he and the former owner of the playhouse sparred in court over the deal, and that property has been returned as part of a settlement between them. 

Although Mr. Trupin reportedly has been spending time in the Caribbean, his exact whereabouts are a mystery to people trying to sue him.
Mr. Morin's lawyers have delivered summonses to three Trupin residences, but Mr. Trupin's lawyers claim he hasn't been served.
United Corporate Services, a New York firm that once helped Rothschild establish out-of-state addresses, says it has been "deluged" by attorneys trying to track Mr. Trupin down. 

United has forwarded numerous summonses to Mr. Trupin, and each has been returned, notes Robert Gilhooley, a United vice president. "As far as I'm concerned," he says, "he's the man who never was." 

