.START 

Baseball fans endured unnecessary agonies of suspense last weekend when the Toronto Blue Jays battled the Baltimore Orioles for the American League Eastern division championship.
Any respectable bird watcher could have told them that the Toronto victory was a foregone conclusion: the Blue Jay ("Cyanocitta cristata") is a far more aggressive bird than the "Baltimore" Oriole ("Icterus galbula").
Indeed, if fans had only taken a bird's-eye view of this rare conjunction of ornithology and baseball, they might have come to understand that far more was at stake in the Toronto contest than the Eastern division championship. 

The "Baltimore" Oriole's very name proves that its baseball namesake was out on a limb in Toronto.
Those quotation marks are not a solecism in the manner of "Merry" Christmas on plebeian greeting cards but an indication of serious waffling about the bird's real name.
It was originally called the Baltimore Oriole in the 18th century after Sir George Calvert, the first Lord Baltimore, whose coat of arms bore the same colors as the bird's plumage.
But in 1983 when the sixth edition of that ornithological bible, the American Ornithological Union Check-List of North American Birds, was published, this striking member of the blackbird family underwent a name change and officially became the Northern Oriole.
Why?
Taxonomists define species as distinctly different organisms that are incapable of interbreeding with individuals of other species.
When evidence of considerable hanky-panky between two formerly separate species of Orioles, the Baltimore and the Bullock's, began to accumulate, the experts concluded that these were not separate species after all, and united them under a single new name.
The "Baltimore" Oriole's traumatic loss of name could not fail to undermine its team's confidence in the face of a contender whose nomenclatural status has never been challenged.
You can be sure that last weekend's series would have had a different outcome if Toronto's bird had been forced to live with the wishywashy name of "Blue" Jay. 

But as things stand, the avian Blue Jay is a fitting model for a champion baseball team.
As ornithologist Arthur Cleveland Bent, author of a remarkable 20-volume series on the life histories of American birds, wrote in 1946: "The blue jay is a strong, healthy-looking bird, noisy and boisterous.
He gives us the impression of being independent, lawless, haughty, even impudent, with a disregard for his neighbors' rights and wishes . . ." -- in short, a bird destined to prevail over a competitor who is described by Mr. Bent quite differently: "{The Baltimore Oriole} arrives at the high tide of the season's beauty when he is at the peak of his magnificent spirits.
But how soon his spirits fade] A month, and he begins to step back from the footlights. . . ." Though magnificent in its rise from last year's cellar position, the Baltimore team simply did not have the staying power to reach the top.
Like its bird counterpart it stepped back from the footlights last Saturday and lost the championship. 

The Toronto Blue Jays proudly sport the likeness of "C. cristata" on their uniforms.
They are known as an "expansion" team, having joined the major leagues as recently as 1977.
Nature's Blue Jays might also be called an expansion team since their range has been expanding westward in urban and suburban areas for the past 100 years.
Meanwhile "I. galbula", like other birds that migrate each year to tropical rain forests, appears on lists of endangered songbirds. 

The Blue Jay's ecological success has been facilitated by one bad habit: As John James Audubon wrote in 1844: "The Blue Jay robs every nest it can find, sucks eggs like the crow, or tears to pieces and devours the young birds." His illustration of the species in "Birds of America" showed three jays "in flagrante delicto", stolen egg in beak.
Yet the handsome crested bird is not without defenders.
In 1897 F.E.L. Beal made an exhaustive study of Blue Jay eating habits by examining "292 stomachs collected in every month of the year from 22 states, the District of Columbia and Canada," and declared that "the most striking point in this study of the food of the blue jay is the discrepancy between the testimony of field observers concerning the bird's nest robbing proclivities and the results of stomach examinations.
The accusations of eating eggs and young birds are certainly not sustained." In any event there is little question that the Toronto Blue Jays cheerfully robbed the Baltimore Orioles of a considerable nest egg in prize money when they won the contest for division championship. 

Yet in the world of birds there is one sphere where the "Baltimore" Oriole undeniably triumphs over the Blue Jay: nestbuilding.
The Oriole nest is a work of art, a graceful hanging pouch skillfully woven out of plant fiber strips and lined with fine grass, plant down and hair.
This amazing construction is attached at the rim or sides to a drooping branch of a tree, some 15 to 30 feet above the ground.
The Oriole is "perhaps the most skillful artisan of any North American bird," writes Mr. Bent.
The Blue Jay's nest, on the other hand, is a mess, an artless collection of twigs, bark, moss, lichen, paper, twine, grass, occasionally plastered with a thin layer of sloppily applied mud.
Thus the Blue Jay victory in a Toronto baseball game takes on a darker significance.
It is another sign that the Philistines are gaining over the Artists in today's human world as well as in the world of birds. 

Ms. Winn watches birds and baseball in New York County, 

