.START 

Nomura Securities Co. is naming Max C. Chapman Jr., the former president of Kidder, Peabody & Co., as co-chairman of Nomura's U.S. securities unit. 

The appointment of Mr. Chapman, effective today, marks an important step in Nomura's attempt to become accepted in the U.S. market as a full-fledged U.S.-style investment bank, rather than as merely the offshore outpost of Japan and the world's biggest securities firm. 

Mr. Chapman, 46 years old, will be co-chairman of both Nomura Securities International Inc., the U.S. broker-dealer, and Nomura Holding America Inc., a holding company that Nomura set up this spring.
The appointment will make him the highest ranking American at Nomura.
The other co-chairman in both positions will be Katsuya Takanashi, currently chairman of each. 

To some, the naming of an American to such a high position is a signal of Nomura's frustration over its inability to create a successful U.S. securities operation and crack the U.S. corporate finance market.
The appointment also signals Nomura's determination to have someone at the helm with a solid background in the higher echelons of U.S. investment banking. 

Saying that he would like to see Nomura with "a profitable, recognized and respected operation in the U.S.," Mr. Chapman said in an interview: "One of the things Nomura needs is a base of operation in New York which can provide services and products to its global operations; with the strengths Nomura has, the opportunity to build in the U.S. and leverage on those opportunities are almost endless." 

If Messrs.
Chapman and Takanashi succeed, major U.S. investment banks could face on their home turf a new, formidable competitor, backed by the deep pockets of its Tokyo parent company and the huge flow of investment funds coming from Japan.
If they fail, Nomura will remain little more than the lonely, marginally profitable outpost of a Japanese juggernaut. 

But so far, Nomura and other big Japanese securities firms have stumbled in their attempts to build bridgeheads in the U.S.
For the six months ended March 31, Nomura's U.S. broker-dealer had a loss of $2.5 million.
In the year ended Sept. 30, 1988, the subsidiary had a loss of $5.9 million.
Nomura's U.S. broker-dealer has about 550 employees, while the Nomura group's entire U.S. staff totals about 750. 

In the U.S., Nomura's strengths have been its primary dealership in U.S. government securities and its U.S. stock-trading unit, which serves as a vehicle for Japanese purchases of U.S. equities.
Both units are largely dependent on the parent company's Japanese customer base.
Primary dealers are an elite group of 42 firms that trade directly with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York when it buys and sells securities as part of its effort to guide U.S. monetary policy. 

But in the U.S. corporate finance market, Nomura and other Japanese firms have faced well-entrenched American competitors that have prevented them from building strong links to U.S. corporations and institutional investors. 

Nomura and its Japanese brethren have also had difficulty developing top-quality financial products that distinguish the firms sufficiently enough from their U.S. competitors to attract the attention of American corporate treasurers. 

In the past, Nomura also has had difficulty hiring and retaining top U.S. talent; some of the Americans felt alienated by their Japanese superiors and frustrated with the deliberate, highly structured manner with which Japanese business approaches issues. 

Like senior American executives at other Japanese firms, Mr. Chapman, some observers believe, may act as a sort of "godfather" to the U.S. staff, thereby reducing some of their apprehensions. 

Mr. Chapman conceded the need for Nomura's U.S. unit to improve its trading skills and build better products to enhance the firm's money-management capabilities and corporate finance proficiency. "It's hard for me to believe why a Fortune 500 company wouldn't want to have the world's largest securities firm as one of its investment bankers," he said. 

Yoshihisa Tabuchi, Nomura's Tokyo-based president and chief executive officer, said, "I'd like to take measures so that Nomura Securities International becomes a real Wall Street company and not be just a subsidiary of Nomura Tokyo." 

Mr. Tabuchi added that the parent company intended to create three "regional headquarters" -- the U.S., Europe and Southeast Asia -- "each of which has independent operations." The Tokyo parent would coordinate activities among the three. "That's my wish, but it is a heavy challenge," he said. 

While the other three of Japan's so-called Big Four securities companies -- Daiwa Securities Co., Nikko Securities Co. and Yamaichi Securities Co. -- have at one time or another appointed Americans to the position of either co-chairman or vice chairman of their U.S. subsidiaries, Nomura has always been regarded as the most resolutely Japanese of the four firms. 

Moreover, none of the other Americans had ever been the chief executive of a U.S. investment banking firm.
Mr. Chapman, on the other hand, has spent 10 years as a Wall Street investment banker and another 10 in the securities trading area, the later part of that time in general management.
Having spent his entire career at Kidder, Mr. Chapman resigned from the firm last February after being passed over for the job of chief executive of Kidder, Peabody Group Inc., Kidder's parent, which in turn is owned by General Electric Co. 

A key question is whether Mr. Chapman will have real authority at Nomura or just be an American figurehead.
Mr. Takanashi said the former.
Explaining the many months it took to recruit Mr. Chapman, Mr. Takanashi said, "It was very important that we find somebody who would be in the core management, not just an adviser -- somebody like {Mr.
Chapman} with actual working management experience in the middle of the Street." 

Mr. Chapman said that he hoped to spend three to six months becoming more familiar with Nomura's U.S. operations, but said: "I expect eventually to see more Americans in very important positions." 

Yet some U.S. investment bankers who know Mr. Chapman question whether the intense ex-Marine is the right person to help lead a Japanese company.
While respected as a very aggressive and competitive executive, Mr. Chapman is also considered ruthless, according to some Americans who have worked with him.
Some also contended that he is a loner. 

Mr. Chapman conceded that as the son of a professional Marine officer, he learned to be independent at an early age. "I am competitive; I am driven, but I also feel that I am fair and honest," he said. "I consider myself a good athlete; I hate to lose.
Some might consider that as ruthlessness; I don't see myself that way." Mr. Chapman also said that both the military and athletics have taught him the importance of teamwork as necessary ingredients for success. 

Mr. Chapman said he had never considered that one day he might be working for a Japanese firm. "I'm red, white and blue.
I played football; my father is a Marine," he said. "I hope that's what Nomura wants.
I didn't study Shintoism as a scholar.
I am what I am." 

