.START 

The National Association of Securities Dealers Inc. expelled Waddell JenMar Securities Inc. and barred two of the firm's employees from associating with NASD members for allegedly misappropriating customer funds. 

The move against the Chapel Hill, N.C., firm was among 54 disciplinary actions taken by the self-regulatory agency for the over-the-counter stock market. 

Guilford T. Waddell III, a registered principal, and Susan T. Maddry, an associated person, also were fined $1,390,000 and $25,000, respectively.
The NASD charged that the two employees misappropriated a total of $1,140,909 by "transferring funds to bank accounts of an affiliate" and used the money for purposes other than to benefit customers. 

The NASD said the firm underwrote an offering that required the sale of a minimum number of units.
When that minimum wasn't reached by a set date, the firm failed to return funds to investors, the NASD said.
To close the offering, Mr. Waddell bought five units and paid for them out of the offering's proceeds, the agency added. 

Mr. Waddell and Ms. Maddry couldn't be reached for comment.
The firm's telephone number couldn't be found by directory assistance. 

Howard, Weil, Labouisse, FriedrichsInc. of New Orleans; six of its registered principals: John B. Levert Jr., Alan C. Arnold, Joseph C. Pascal, William H. Walker, Patrick R. Mooney and Patrick R. Hastings; and a registered representative, Keith E. Butler, were fined a total of $50,000. 

Without admitting or denying the NASD charges, the firm and individuals agreed to the agency's findings that Messrs.
Arnold, Mooney, Hastings, Walker and Butler failed to comply with certain qualification requirements. 

The firm, acting through Messrs.
Levert, Pascal and Arnold, failed to maintain or enforce written procedures to ensure that all associated individuals were properly registered and qualified, the NASD said. 

Messrs.
Walker and Hastings of Howard Weil wouldn't comment, and referred questions to the firm's president, Mr. Arnold, who didn't return a telephone call. 

Chelsea Securities Inc. was fined a total of $10,500 jointly with certain associated persons.
Neither admitting nor denying the charges, the Newport Beach, Calif., firm consented to findings that through two associates, the firm engaged in the securities business while maintaining insufficient net capital.
The NASD also said the firm didn't file an ownership form on a timely basis. 

Underhill Associates Inc. of Red Bank, N.J., was fined $15,000, based on findings that it made certain securities transactions at unfair prices.
The firm also failed to disclose on four confirmations the amount of markdown for purchases of equity securities from the four customers, the NASD said. 

A former broker of Underhill Associates said the firm has discontinued operations and Jonathan Alan & Co., a new brokerage firm, now occupies its space and has kept its telephone number.
The woman didn't identify herself. 

Oberweis Securities Inc. of Naperville, Ill., settled with the NASD without admitting or denying wrongdoing.
Accepting a fine of $16,000, the firm consented to findings that it, among other things, failed to prepare accurate net-capital computations and made securities transactions while maintaining insufficient net capital. 

The NASD barred seven individuals from associating with NASD members. 

John J. Connolly of Staten Island, N.Y., also was fined $100,000.
The NASD charged him with, among other things, failing to pay on a timely basis for securities purchased in his personal account and with establishing an account under a fictitious name and buying and selling securities in the account without paying for them. 

Also, Edward T. Hackney of Phoenix was fined $30,000 and ordered to disgorge $54,450; Richard D. Costanza, Pittsburgh, was fined $15,000; Byron K. Griffith, Memphis, was fined $15,000; James E. McCracken of Vineland, N.J., was fined $15,000; Vincent P. Olszewskiof Highland Park, N.J., was fined $15,000; and Beverly Jean Duncan of Louisville, Ky., was fined $10,000. 

Six individuals were barred without admitting or denying wrongdoing: Joel Norman Light of Derby, Kan., also was fined $25,000; Kenneth G. Rogers, Silver City, N.M., was fined $25,000; Zeke C. Soliz of Keansburg, N.J., was fined $15,000; Raymond J. Strawbridge, Gadsden, Ala., was fined $15,000; James Edwin Binning, Valrico, Fla., was fined $10,000; and Saundra K. Johnston of Montgomery, Ala., was fined $10,000. 

Akiva Bar of Valencia, Calif., was fined $10,000 and suspended for five years, and Fernando Augusto Moreno, San Francisco, was fined $20,000 and suspended for three years.
They didn't admit or deny wrongdoing. 

Paul H. Hall of Orem, Utah, and John F. Lukas of Miami each received a six-month suspension.
They were fined $25,000 and $2,000, respectively.
John M. Bethea of Littleton, Colo., was fined $1,000 and suspended for three months.
Mr. Bethea didn't admit or deny the NASD's allegations.
Mark J. Parker of Cinnaminson, N.J., was suspended for 30 days and fined $17,000.
Ira Robert Landis, New York, was fined $5,000.
He also was suspended from associating with any NASD member in a principal capacity for one month and required to requalify by examination following the suspension.
Daniel Martin Michael McKeown of Marietta, Ga., was fined $1,000 and suspended for five business days.
Thomas A. Timberlake of Tampa, Fla., was suspended for five days.
Messrs.
McKeown and Timberlake didn't admit or deny the NASD charges. 

Messrs.
Moreno, Olszewski, Parker, Rogers, Soliz, Strawbridge and Timberlake weren't available to comment. 

Mr. Griffith declined to comment.
Messrs.
Hackney, Hall, Landis, Light, Lukas, McCracken and McKeown, as well as Ms. Duncan and Ms. Johnston, couldn't be reached. 

