.START 

California's Department of Insurance ordered an immediate six-month freeze on private auto-insurance rates while it holds public hearings on the state's rate-slashing initiative, Proposition 103. 

Under terms of that initiative, after Nov. 8 insurance companies must have the department's approval before raising rates.
The freeze was ordered to prevent insurance companies from increasing rates in the interim period. 

Proposition 103, passed by voters last November, called for a 20% cut in rates.
But in June, California's Supreme Court essentially voided the rollback in cases where it deprived a company of a chance to earn a "fair rate of return." 

Insurance Commissioner Roxani Gillespie said the hearings, which begin Oct. 30, will be used to make a final determination of the fair rate of return for insurance companies.
The hearings, expected to be completed by the end of the year, will also determine cuts in rates that are deemed excessive, and discuss enforcement of the initiative. 

Ms. Gillespie has suggested that 11.2% is a fair rate of return, a figure the department said has been the average U.S. return for property and casualty carriers over the past 15 years.
However, that figure has angered consumer groups who question the methods by which it was determined.
As reported, an insurance-reform group has sued Ms. Gillespie, accusing her of failing to implement the provisions of Proposition 103. 

Last month, State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. notified the department that it planned to implement the "good-driver discount" plan ordered in the Proposition 103 legislation.
The Bloomington, Ind., company said it didn't know how the freeze order would affect its filing. 

State Farm, one of the largest auto insurers in California, said that if a driver qualified for the discount, rates could be lowered about 20%.
It estimated that 89% of drivers might qualify for the discount.
Those who fail to qualify could see a rate increase between 29% and 36%, the company said. 

Farmers Insurance Group, a subsidiary of Britain's B.A.T Industries PLC, last week notified the Department of Insurance that it planned to raise auto insurance rates by 5.9%.
A Farmers spokesman said it's unclear whether the department "has the authority to implement a blanket freeze" on rates.
The action doesn't help Farmers solve its major problem, which is the high cost of insuring "high risk" drivers under the state's "assigned risk" program, he said. 

Aetna Life & Casualty Insurance Co., Hartford, Conn., also questioned whether Ms. Gillespie had the authority to order the freeze. "There's little difference between ordering a freeze and a rollback.
Both are arbitrary decisions without knowing how profitable a line of business is or whether a company is earning a fair rate of return." 

Beatrice E. Garcia in Philadelphia and Earl C. Gottschalk Jr. in Los Angeles contributed to this article. 

