.START 

The mobilization of federal government resources in response to the AIDS outbreak has been unprecedented in the history of U.S. public-health policy.
This fiscal year, the federal government is expected to spend $1.59 billion for AIDS research and education, more than for any other single disease, and more than for heart disease, stroke, hypertension and diabetes combined. 

While it is easy to find some mistakes, there also have been breathtaking successes that have flowed directly out of federal AIDS expenditure programs.
It is possible today, just eight years after the clinical discovery of AIDS, and five years after the identification of HIV (the AIDS virus), to realistically consider the possibility that neither death nor AIDS will be the inevitable outcome of an HIV infection. 

We now know, largely as a result of federally sponsored epidemiologic research and disease surveillance, what the general magnitude of the AIDS outbreak has been and will be, and who is most at risk for acquiring HIV. Research has debunked the myth that AIDS can be casually transmitted, and established that after more than a decade of HIV transmission, neither AIDS nor HIV infection has moved much beyond the traditional risk groups of gay/bisexual men, intravenous drug abusers, hemophiliacs, transfusion recipients of blood or blood products, or the sexual partners and perinatally infected children of those in these traditional risk groups. 

But the overwhelming majority of Americans fit into none of the traditional HIV/AIDS risk groups. 

It will become increasingly difficult to ignore the fact that IV-drug-free females are at much greater risk from breast cancer than they are from AIDS or HIV infection.
During 1988 there were 130,000 new breast-cancer diagnoses and 43,020 breast-cancer deaths, compared with 33,401 AIDS cases reported over the past 12 months (of which 10.8% were female) and roughly 17,000 AIDS deaths in 1988.
Mammograms, breast self-examination and other preventive measures have the potential to drastically reduce the incidence of these cancers in the population, but neither the press nor the politicians nor the Public Health Service is devoting anywhere near as much attention to breast-cancer research, education and prevention as it is to AIDS. 

I have been chastised for noting that the federal government spends only a few cents for research per dollar of patient care on fatal diseases such as cancer, heart disease, diabetes, stroke, Alzheimer's disease and emphysema, while spending more than $2 on AIDS research for every dollar of AIDS patient care.
AIDS kills people mainly in their prime years of adulthood, but as the accompanying chart indicates, so do many other potentially preventable causes of death.(See accompanying chart -- WSJ Oct. 3, 1989) And among those not already HIV-infected, AIDS is probably the most readily avoidable fatal risk. 

What should be the appropriate level of federal spending on AIDS?
To even ask the question is to raise issues that are anathema, particularly to many health-care providers.
The health-care sector in the U.S. has yet to awaken to the reality, long apparent to more competitive economic sectors, that resources are scarce and must be allocated responsibly across a myriad of opportunities both within and beyond health care. 

AIDS has received the same sort of haphazard high-tech crisis-response approach that typifies both the strengths and weaknesses of American medicine.
The cumulative federal AIDS costs through 1989 will be about $6 billion.
These resources have played a major role in disease surveillance, identifying HIV, protecting the nation's blood supply, developing new standards of HIV/AIDS patient care and discovering new therapies for slowing the progression of HIV-related disease.
For the cost of a handful of B-2 "stealth" bombers, the societal benefits of federal AIDS expenditures in terms of avoided HIV infections, improved patient care and survival, improved national peace of mind, and even national security have been an unquestionable bargain. 

But this is not to say that all federal AIDS funds have been well spent.
The $22 million it cost to mail the surgeon general's vaguely worded AIDS pamphlet to every U.S. household could have been much better spent on educating those at highest risk.
The recent General Accounting Office AIDS study, regurgitating and arbitrarily inflating obsolete AIDS projection models to generate alarmist caseload projections through 1991, was a good example of garbage-in garbage-out analysis. 

Forty percent of the Centers for Disease Control's budget for the fiscal year just ended was used for HIV/AIDS.
This exceeded total federal research, education and prevention spending for any one of the following categories: diabetes, stroke, hypertension, Alzheimer's disease and premature birth.
It is likely the major achievements that have resulted from federal AIDS spending would have occurred even at lower spending levels. 

With AIDS, as with all diseases, rationalization of spending for patient care, research, education and prevention must be brought out of the dark ages.
If, and it is still a big if, the recent press releases on the benefits of AZT therapy in asymptomatic HIV-infected individuals prove correct, it will not be possible to avoid some tough questions.
Back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that if an additional year of life could be saved for an HIV-infected person at the cost of $5,000 or less, this would be a real bargain, as medical interventions go. 

But where would we get the additional $2 billion or so annually needed to fund this additional care?
Would that $2 billion save even more years of life if it were devoted to heart-disease or breast-cancer screening and prevention or to prenatal care or to drug-abuse prevention?
If the taxpayer is going to foot the bill for much of this additional care, does society have a right or even an obligation to ensure that those receiving government-sponsored care not continue to transmit the HIV virus?
These questions were never even considered when the research scientists at the National Institutes of Health bumped AIDS to the top of their priority list. 

Health-care spending is fast approaching $2 billion per day in the U.S., far ahead of every other country, either per capita or as a percentage of gross national product.
Even so, many health indicators are showing very poor trends.
It is becoming increasingly clear that difficult questions regarding health-care spending will have to be examined and debated.
While government health-care programs are now making a mess of almost half of all health-care spending in this country, the latest not-so-new reaction of the starry-eyed liberals is to give them the other half. 

There are better market-oriented alternatives.
My Stanford colleague, Prof.
Alain Enthoven, has outlined one of these.
But regardless of how we move in solving the health-care cost crisis, we are going to have to begin the painful process of determining which lines of biomedical research, prevention, education and patient-care activities are cost-effective and then using these guidelines to make tough choices about allocating resources. 

Mr. Hay is a research fellow and health economist at the Hoover Institution. 

