.START 

International Business Machines Corp. said it received a U.S. patent for a compound with thallium that works at the highest temperature recorded for any superconductor. 

The patent was the first one awarded in the U.S. for a high-temperature superconductor, several of which have been discovered during the past three years.
Such materials conduct electricity without resistance when cooled, and promise advances in electronics, power generation and other technologies. 

The awarding of the patent to IBM surprised many in the field.
University of Arkansas scientists led by physicist Allen Hermann first reported in early 1988 the discovery of thallium superconductors and were considered the leading group in the race to get a patent on them.
Shortly after the Arkansas discovery, the IBM group developed a particular thallium superconductor that works at minus 234 degrees Fahrenheit -- the current temperature record for superconductivity. 

The IBM patent was based on work at its Almaden Research Center in San Jose, Calif.
It covers only a narrow range of superconductor compositions and may not preclude other patents related to the materials with thallium.
But it may prevent any other group from getting a broad patent on thallium superconductors. 

"If one species of a compound is patented, it prevents later generic claims," said Sam Pasternack, a Boston patent attorney who handles superconductor patent applications for Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
He added, however, that the University of Arkansas can still challenge the IBM patent. 

Robert Barrett, a patent attorney representing the University of Arkansas, said it is "possible" that the school will challenge the IBM patent by seeking an interference proceeding, a hearing in which rival patent claims are considered.
No decision has been made yet on the matter, he added. 

Other superconductor patent claims already have spawned interference proceedings, including one over rights to the so-called 1-2-3 compound.
That proceeding involves conflicting claims by the University of Houston, American Telephone & Telegraph Co., IBM and the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. 

