.START 

Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari appealed to the U.S. to open its markets to Mexican goods, particularly steel, textiles and automobiles. 

President Salinas, who is on his first state visit to the U.S., said in a meeting with reporters that his country has removed barriers to U.S. goods, but "hasn't benefited on equal terms" because the U.S. market is somewhat more closed than Mexico's. 

Things seem set to improve, though.
Today, President Bush and Mr. Salinas are to sign a wide-ranging bilateral understanding covering trade issues, including intellectual property, investment, agriculture, steel and textiles, according to a spokeswoman at the office of the U.S. Trade Representative. 

Trade is growing rapidly between the U.S. and Mexico, and Mr. Salinas said new border crossings are needed to relieve bottlenecks. "Trucks can wait for up to two days," he said.
The U.S.-Mexican border is one of the busiest in the world, with 22 million crossings a year. 

Mexico is trying desperately to slough off years of economic stagnation and boost its growth through increased commerce.
There are some encouraging signs: In the first six months of this year, the country's economy grew at an annual rate of 2.4% after inflation, up from just over 1% in 1988.
Mr. Salinas says his government has set a target of 3% real economic growth for 1990, adding "we can't grow faster because of the lack of investment in the past." Inflation now is down to about 1% a month, its lowest level in years.
Meanwhile, the U.S. is setting new steel import quotas for the coming year.
Mexican Commerce Minister Jaime Serra Puche, who attended Mr. Salinas's meeting with reporters, said Mexican officials "believe that we'll have more access" to the U.S. steel market when the new quotas are announced.
But he declined to specify how much of an increase Mexico might receive. 

Under the five-year U.S. steel import quotas that expired Sept. 30, Mexico was allotted a 0.48% share of the U.S. steel market.
That allowed it to export a little more than 400,000 tons of steel a year to the U.S. 

The House yesterday approved legislation, 354-10, extending overall U.S. steel import quotas for 2 1/2 years.
The Senate also is expected to pass the measure, which closely tracks a proposal by President Bush.
The trade representative's office hasn't yet released a breakdown of the quotas among countries that ship to the U.S., as that is still being negotiated. 

Mr. Salinas said he was pleased with his country's recent debt agreement with foreign banks, but added that he hoped "the most important banks in each country take (the) new money" option in the accord.
Under the accord, foreign bank creditors who hold about $53 billion of Mexican government medium-term and long-term debt can exchange their loans for bonds that represent a 35% cut in principal, swap them for bonds that carry a 6.25% fixed rate of interest, or put up further loans.
The Mexicans recently have been concerned that only a small number of banks will choose to make more loans. 

The debt agreement already has had beneficial effects for Mexico, Mr. Salinas said.
He said domestic interest rates have dropped 20%, saving the country as much as $10 billion a year.
In addition, he said, there has been a net capital flow of $2 billion to $3 billion into Mexico so far this year, and foreign investment is up. 

Mr. Salinas and Finance Minister Pedro Aspe, who also attended the press briefing, took issue with some big estimates of capital flight from Mexico that have been published in the U.S.
In particular, Mr. Aspe, citing some U.S. Treasury figures, said the flight of capital from Mexico in recent years has been about half the $80 billion estimate published by a unit of New York banking company J.P. Morgan & Co. 

