.START 

Barry K. Davis, founder of the controversial telephone stock tip service Traders & Investors Alert, has been permanently barred from the Fort Lee-based service by New Jersey securities regulators. 

In addition, Mr. Davis, also known as Barry K. Sutz, has been assessed a civil penalty of $50,000 and has been permanently enjoined from acting as an investment adviser, broker dealer, agent or issuer in New Jersey. 

Mr. Davis also has been barred from giving investment advice through any business entity or other individuals. 

The New Jersey attorney general, on behalf of the state's Bureau of Securities, has filed a complaint in Bergen County Superior Court alleging that Mr. Davis provided securities-investment advice to individuals from the offices of Traders & Investors Alert, in violation of state securities law. 

Customers of the service call in for tips about hot stocks.
Mr. Davis's recommendations have affected the market. 

To settle the complaint, the Bureau of Securities said, Mr. Davis accepted a consent judgment permanently enjoining him from the securities business in New Jersey.
Mr. Davis has declined to comment on the matter. 

In 1971, the Securities and Exchange Commission permanently barred Mr. Davis from the securities business, revoking his broker-dealer license and barring him from associating with any broker dealer, investment adviser or registered investment adviser. 

Mr. Davis's departure from the service follows weeks of negotiations with the Bureau of Securities, which sought his departure in exchange for allowing Traders & Investors to continue to operate in the state. 

Under a consent order entered Friday by the Bureau of Securities and Douglas W. Hall, Windahall Investors Inc. has been registered by the state as an investment adviser, allowing it to provide investment advice. 

Mr. Hall is the principal of Windahall, a firm that operates at the same address as Traders & Investors Alert. 

The approval was conditional on Windahall's agreement that it won't associate with Mr. Davis; with Bruce Horowitz, who has identified himself as a consultant to Traders & Investors; or with Eric Wynn, who owns much of the tip service's computer equipment, except insofar as Traders & Investors's relationship with Mr. Wynn as a vendor. 

