.START 

Eastern Airlines' embattled unions filed suit against the carrier's parent, Houston-based Texas Air Corp., charging it engaged in a pattern of "fraudulent empire building" and seeking unspecified damages. 

The suit, a counterclaim in a 16-month old case Eastern filed against the unions, is another shot in the three-year battle between the airline and two of its unions, the Air Line Pilots Association and the International Association of Machinists.
Both Eastern's suit and the unions' counterclaim allege violations of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations act. 

Few of the unions' charges are new, and they come after efforts to wrest control of Eastern from Texas Air have stalled.
The unions made similar complaints against Eastern in Congress, federal court and the Department of Transportation.
The two sides are still battling in federal bankruptcy court, under whose supervision Eastern has been operating since March.
The unions have had few victories there, failing in their attempt to deliver the airline to a potential buyer or keep Eastern from selling assets. 

An Eastern spokesman said the unions' suit, filed Friday in Miami, was a collection of old claims packaged "into a single pleading under RICO.
These include arguments that have already been rejected." 

The unions claim Texas Air used fraudulent misrepresentations to acquire Eastern, leaving the carrier in precarious financial condition.
They also charge that Texas Air and some of its units stripped Eastern assets in an attempt to extract large wage concessions from the unions, and to benefit nonunion Continental Airlines, another Texas Air unit.
The unions allege those actions continued a practice that began in the late 1970s at other carriers controlled by Texas Air. 

Other defendants in the counterclaim include Texas Air Chairman Frank Lorenzo, Eastern President Phil Bakes, Continental Airlines and Jet Capital Corp. Jet Capital is Mr. Lorenzo's personal holding company, which has 34% of the voting control of Texas Air but only 1% of its equity. 

Eastern was grounded by striking machinists and pilots, forcing the airline to seek Chapter 11 protection.
Although the strike continues, a slimmed-down Eastern has been flying with replacement workers since the summer. 

