.START 

Akio Morita, chairman of Sony Corp., shot back at U.S. criticism that the company's purchase of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. was a takeover of American creativity. 

In a charged news conference, the 68-year-old Mr. Morita said that it was unfortunate that the Americans still viewed the Japanese as "strangers." 

"There are examples in the past where foreigners bought American movie companies," said Mr. Morita. "But people criticize only when the Japanese make the purchase." 

Later, Mr. Morita indicated that Sony wouldn't interfere with Columbia Pictures' management.
He said Sony wouldn't object even if Columbia were to make a movie critical of the late Emperor Hirohito, although he added that people in Japan might not want to see it. 

Sony's agreement last week to acquire Columbia Pictures for $3.4 billion has caused an outcry in the U.S.
A Newsweek poll said 43% of the people opposed Sony's purchase of Columbia, while only 19% were in favor. 

Indeed, the Japanese have been making foreign acquisitions at a dizzying pace.
Last month, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. bought a 4.9% stake in New York's Manufacturers Hanover Corp. and 60% of Manufacturers' CIT Group Inc. for a total of $1.4 billion.
On Monday, entertainment giant Fuji Sankei Communications Group said it acquired 25% of Virgin Music Group from London's Virgin Atlantic Group for about $155.5 million.
Fuji Sankei said it intends to strengthen its U.S. presence through its stake in Virgin. 

And now, Hollywood's Spelling Entertainment Inc. is putting itself up for sale.
Analysts are already speculating about the possibility of a Japanese company taking over the studio. 

"If one or two more companies follow, (the Americans) may not stay quiet," said Etsuro Ogisu, an electronics analyst at the Tokyo office of UBS Phillips & Drew International Ltd. 

Mr. Morita argued that Sony's purchase of Columbia Pictures will enhance the entertainment company's sales and profits.
Sony's acquisition of CBS Records last year boosted sales and improved working conditions there, he said. 

"By proving that (the acquisition) was a good thing for the U.S., we could ease the U.S.'s unneeded anxiety towards Japan," said Mr. Morita. "We think it's our mission to make the effort." 

Mr. Morita didn't say what Sony plans to do with the newly acquired film library, but said that he was thinking of airing the programs on a satellite network that Sony has a stake in. 

Although Mr. Morita insists that Sony won't meddle with the management of the entertainment companies, some industry watchers fret that sooner or later Sony may get more involved.
For now, however, Mr. Morita said Sony was "fully satisfied" with CBS management and didn't plan any changes. 

