.START 

Part of a Series} 

Older people don't think younger folks have very intelligent buying habits. 

The surprising thing is that large numbers of younger people don't think so either. 

Very high percentages -- sometimes 75% or more -- of both older and younger Americans see today's younger consumers as spending too freely on items for immediate pleasure, caring too much about prestige items and designer labels, being heavily influenced by advertising and preferring to buy new products rather than trying to repair the old ones. 

That, at any rate, is the image that emerges from The Wall Street Journal's "American Way of Buying" consumer survey.
As part of the Journal's survey, Peter D. Hart Research Associates conducted in-depth interviews with over 2,000 adults nationwide.
Among other questions, men and women under 50 years old were asked whether particular phrases better described the shopping and buying habits of their own generation or those of their parents, while people over 50 were asked whether the same phrases better applied to their own generation or the one that came after them. 

"It's not a very flattering picture of the younger consumer," Mr. Hart says. "American marketers may be reaching him, but the public doesn't seem to find this person very attractive.
They're saying, 'We don't think you're a very smart shopper. '" 

Many of the under-50 respondents echo this analysis.
Peter Hanlon, a computer analyst in his late 20s at Gonzaga University in Washington state, says people of his generation "want things fast -- they want it now.
They are less concerned with quality.
They want short-term pleasure.
They are less frugal.
Companies have to be more competitive -- they need flashier products and flashier names." 

Barbara Wetherill, a Nevada secretary in her early 20s, says younger people "are going through the 'I' syndrome.
People want more things for 'me. ' Instead of later on in life, they want things now." 

Some market-research specialists aren't surprised by younger consumers' critical self-image. "Young people," says Jane Fitzgibbon, a senior vice president at Ogilvy & Mather, "do a lot of fad and impulse buying -- and they constantly have objective proof, in their homes and in their closets, that what they bought was either precipitous or a mistake.
The $100 silver top with the pink rose which they absolutely had to have for that Saturday night date is still hanging in their closet six months later, used just that once.
Or they paid $300 for a Cuisinart they've used only twice in the year since they bought it, both times to make cole slaw. 

"They're prone to self-examination, and so they think about these things and recognize their own frailties," she adds. "But that doesn't mean they're going to stop doing it." 

The older and younger respondents in the Journal's consumer survey also generally see eye to eye on how the older generation shapes up as shoppers and buyers.
That picture is both more traditional, and more flattering.
Large majorities of both the under-50 and over-50 groups agree that older people care more about finding good buys and saving money, are generally more thrifty, and have a greater willingness to stick with favorite products. 

Nick Nakagawa, a California car salesman in his late 20s, observes that his parents "wanted things to last over the years.
Today, younger people don't care about that.
It comes down to a question of what we want -- if we want it, we get it.
Our parents went without things.
They saved their money." In the same vein, Tennessean Larry Thomas, an electrician in his early 30s, adds: "Today you buy what you want, not just what you need. . . . My parents usually saved to buy something they wanted." 

Just as interesting as where the two generations agree is where they don't.
About two-thirds of the over-50s, for example, believe they are more likely than their children to care about quality and to be willing to pay extra for it.
In contrast, a slight majority of the under-50s believe they care more about quality than their parents do. 

Similarly, under-50 people think they know more about their rights as consumers than the older folks do and that they dress better and eat healthier foods; the older respondents think they outclass the younger in these departments. 

Says Mr. Hart: "The young people see themselves eating bean sprouts and other good stuff.
Older people see them eating junk food." 

When the survey respondents were asked to volunteer their views rather than react to a set of specific questions, their comments for the most part only reinforced the comparatively critical view of the younger shoppers. 

For instance, asked how they thought consumers under 35 differed from their seniors, large numbers of all age groups, including those under 35, freely volunteered that younger adults lack a sense of fiscal responsibility, are far too trendy and faddish, and too often search for instant gratification.
This sort of critical comment was particularly common, of course, among older age groups.
For instance, Jeff Bozicevich, an elderly Minnesotan who sells printing inks, complains that "they expect more, period] A lot of clothes, a lot of 'for show' purchases. . . . The younger generation will buy whatever is available." 

But 14% of those between 18 and 29 also offered up some variant of the belief that the younger generation is interested only in the latest fads.
Twelve percent suggested that younger people spend too freely and don't value money enough, 12% mentioned that younger people "expect everything for nothing" or "want their parents to give them everything," and 11% tendered the thought that the younger generation is too intent on instant gratification. 

Two other themes run through many of the survey comments, and again, among both young and old: "There's much more choice today," but "things are too expensive." About half of the respondents in all age groups happily note that there's a far greater variety of goods and services available now than in earlier decades, but anywhere from 21% to 30% of the various age groups complain about high prices.
Surprisingly, the high-price complaints are more common among the younger groups than among the old. 

Younger people are also more inclined than older people to volunteer that things are of poor quality nowadays.
Double-digit figures in all age groups mention that younger people are far more likely than their predecessors to charge things instead of paying cash. 

Says a Southern Californian in her late teens, a receptionist in a government agency: "I get what I want, not just what I can afford.
I buy without thinking about finances or savings.
Credit cards help me buy more of what I want." 

