.START 

What the New York Stock Exchange has accomplished in the two years since the Crash is phenomenal.
The trading floor still looks to the uninitiated like a paper-littered maelstrom.
But it now bristles with new gadgetry: multi-windowed CRT screens in every nook and cranny and brokers toting what look like walkie-talkies, but are actually "electronic display books." 

NYSE Chairman John J. Phelan Jr. says the expansion and modernization project begun just after the October 1987 Crash will have cost $50 million when completed in 1991 or 1992. "What we've tried to do is take Oct. 19 and 20 of 1987 and make those 600 million share days look like 200 million share days," he says during an interview in his office, where his own CRT screens keep him in touch with the trading floor and in the wide world beyond 11 Wall Street. "That would give us a peak capacity somewhere in the billion-share range, or five times normal market volume." 

A billion-share day sounds fantastic.
But the most interesting question facing the exchange is whether it will ever need the new capacity.
No one doubts that it will remain at the center of world-wide securities trading.
But changes occurring in the capitalist system itself are moderating trading on exchanges. 

There are, for example, more private placements of stocks and bonds as big institutional investors buy directly from issuers.
More large companies are going private, which also takes stocks out of the public market.
The advent of leveraged-buy-out syndicates, which can muster huge amounts of capital, has resulted in the privatization of some corporations despite resistance from existing management. 

While institutional investors are finding alternatives to the public market for investing their rapidly growing piles of cash, individual investors who would normally use the public markets are getting out.
Harvard Business School Professor Jay O. Light writes in the latest Harvard Business Review that households have been liquidating direct and indirect stock holdings at an unprecedented rate, selling $500 billion in common shares, or 38% of their holdings, over the past five years. "Why have stock prices risen sharply despite this massive sell-off?" asks Prof.
Light. "Because there has been one huge buyer -- corporations themselves.
LBOs, MBOs, share repurchases, leveraged mergers and acquisitions and takeovers have been contracting the supply of publicly held equity.
In 1988, 5% of the market value of public equity (more than $130 billion) disappeared through these kinds of transactions even after adding back all of the new issues brought to the market during the year." 

Writing in the same issue, Prof.
Michael C. Jensen concedes that the total market value of equity in publicly held companies has tripled over the past decade -- from $1 trillion in 1979 to $3 trillion in 1989. "But newly acquired capital comes increasingly from private placements, which have expanded more than 10 times since 1980 to a rate of $200 billion in 1988.
Private placements of debt and equity now account for more than 40% of annual corporate financings." 

Mr. Phelan acknowledges these trends.
But not surprisingly, he doesn't think they spell the end of public securities markets.
Among other things, LBOs, MBOs, share repurchases and the like have shifted corporate capital structures to debt from equity.
He believes that trend will be self-correcting. 

"Private placement of debt has been significant, but something has changed that.
The LBO has changed it.
You have a double-A debt rating one night and a C-minus the next night.
Not only do you have a C-minus but you are kind of looking for liquidity.
It is not clear that the private placement market is still there for you without unbelievable discounts.
So while private placement has been attractive, you might want to get out of that.
It is even more true with equities, because there is a real question whether there will be enough liquidity in the private market.
At some point, business might move back to the public market, where there was and is and I think will continue to be greater liquidity." 

Other factors have affected trading volume as well.
The events of October 1987 had a sobering effect on managers of large funds, to put it mildly, so that they are not moving money from place to place as energetically as before.
Before the Crash, they had a false sense of the underlying liquidity of markets world-wide and when the Crash came they were frozen into their positions, unable to trade because of a lack of market liquidity.
Large investors are still employing computerized trading programs, but without the confidence they placed in so-called "portfolio insurance" before the Crash.
That expression is no longer heard.
Program trading accounted for 10.3% of average daily Big Board volume in August, so it is not giving volume a big boost. 

Further affecting volume is the decision by managers of some big funds to simply "index" their portfolios, buying all the stocks in the S&P 500 and sitting on them.
They will never do better than the market as a whole, but neither will they do worse, which suits some of them fine. 

All these things have affected share turnover.
Mr. Phelan notes that turnover at the NYSE is running about 50%.
That is to say, of all the shares listed on the exchange half turn over in one year.
At the height of the 1987 speculation, it was running over 100%.
A further decline in turnover, to say 30% or 40%, could have a profound impact both on market volume and liquidity.
In that dismal era in the late 1970s, when inflation had seriously eroded stock values, turnover was only 15%. 

All these things considered, Mr. Phelan expects that the securities industry will be less profitable in the 1990s than it has been in the 1980s.
Not only has the market pace slowed, but more competition is likely.
It seems inevitable that banks will become more involved in the securities business, Mr. Phelan says. 

"We live in a time that I don't think could be more interesting.
A lot of people want the days of yesteryear and it's very difficult to get out of their minds that those days are not going to return.
I think many things have stabilized but the psychology hasn't stabilized and that's in a kind of aftershock mode.
That's true with professionals, institutions, money managers and everyone else.
Maybe because of that psychology we're going to go into a period of consolidation here for a while." 

All the signs would seem to point in that direction.
But then, of course, it is never possible to predict with any certainty what will happen in markets.
Mr. Phelan believes that if there are future shocks they will most likely come from external causes, not from inside the markets.
Some of those influences could be good ones, of course -- a cut in capital-gains taxes, for example.
But whatever happens, the Big Board expects to be far better prepared the next time around than it was in 1987. 

