.START 

Hungary's Communists gave themselves a fighting chance to survive the first genuinely free elections in the Soviet bloc with a shred of the absolute power they once wielded. 

By voting to disband and recreate itself as, in effect, a party of social democrats, the Hungarian Socialist Workers Party cut loose from the Stalinist ball and chain that threatened to discredit it with voters.
Parliamentary elections are to be held before June, and a presidential election is set for late this year. 

It was an unexpectedly strong win for the party's reformers at an extraordinary congress in Budapest during the weekend.
More than 1,000 of the 1,202 delegates, most of them attending a party congress for the first time, supported a motion to establish a fully democratic party in the Western mold and to christen it the Hungarian Socialist Party. 

"Uncontrolled power, the one-party system, that is what made our mistakes possible," party Chairman Rezsoe Nyers told the delegates. "We must put an end to that.
In my judgment, the new party can't be Communist." 

The vote showed the Hungarian rank-and-file to be perhaps the most realistic party members in the Communist sphere.
In China and in East Germany, despite Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's gentle hints, Communists are reacting to democratic pressures by building barricades.
In the Soviet Union, anti-reformers continue to throw their weight around.
Poland's humiliated Communists have clung to influence only by the grace of special deals. 

Until this weekend, it appeared that the Hungarian hardliners might also succeed in carrying their ideological purity to the party's political grave.
As it turned out, the acceptance of a progressive program avoided a potentially suicidal walkout by reformers.
In practical terms, it may also have saved the party's solid organizational structure -- and much of its wealth -- for the reformers' election use. 

That doesn't guarantee, however, that the born-again Communists will prove themselves sufficiently different from the old party to retain power in a democratic Hungary.
The hardline lobbied hard to keep the word "workers" in the party name, but in the current climate the "socialist" label alone may be enough to spell doom at the polls. 

"With that word, in Hungary, you lose," said Charles Gati, a specialist on the country who teaches at Union College, Schenectady, N.Y. Mr. Gati says the party has the potential to win 20% of the vote in the parliamentary elections, if it "totally dissociates itself from its past." 

In their effort to avoid a rupture, the reformers made concessions at the congress that leave its stance somewhat fuzzy.
As approved, a document outlining the character of the new party rejects excessive centralization of power, but supports a "mixed property social market economy" that would retain both private and state property.
The document also denies the need for an outright purge of hardliners, saying it would admit all those "who accept the ground rules." 

This may mollify all but the most rigid Stalinists who at this juncture represent only an extremist fringe.
But it could also cause resentment among reformers who feel the changes should have gone further.
The leadership had hoped a liberal turn would stem a tide of defections.
This year alone, 70,000 members have resigned from the party, bringing membership to 725,000.
At its peak, a million Hungarians carried party cards. 

But the voters may not be impressed at all.
This year, the party has tasted defeat in four midterm elections.
All were won by the Hungarian Democratic Forum, the most popular of several new parties that have cropped up in the past year.
The Forum, with 20,000 members, is firmly antiCommunist and staunchly nationalist.
It is neither overly pro-Western nor especially tolerant of non-Hungarians. 

In talks with opposition parties earlier this year, the Communists agreed not to seek a rigged electoral system that would enable them, like their Polish brethren, to keep power even after a trouncing.
However, two strongly liberal parties that grew out of Hungary's former dissident movement refused to endorse the agreement on the suspicion that the Communists and the Democratic Forum struck a deal. 

Under it, Imre Poszgay, the Communists' leading reformer, would almost certainly sweep unchallenged into a democratic presidency this year.
In return, it is said, the Forum would get Communist support in naming a prime minister and forming a government after elections to Parliament.
With the victory of his reform program, Mr. Poszgay seems poised to follow through on that plan.
A recent visit to Moscow, where he is said to have met with Mr. Gorbachev, may have allayed Soviet doubts about his willingness, as president, to keep Hungary in the Warsaw Pact. 

Still, the fickleness of Hungary's voters is untested.
One other party has considered nominating a prince of the old Hapsburg monarchy as its presidential candidate.
Hungarian politicians don't doubt that he would have a chance to win. 

(See related story: "Mass Movement Demanding Reform in East Germany Shakes Hard-Line State" -- WSJ Oct. 9) 

