.START 

Everybody loves an elephant.
For that reason, one of the more successful movements of our time has been to stir up anger against African poachers who slaughter elephants to sell their ivory.
Unfortunately, some save-the-wildlife types are about to enact a solution that will likely compound the tragedy.
Worse, they will insist on doing it their way despite evidence that other African nations have learned how to nourish both elephants and a market for ivory. 

Elephant herds are increasing by about 5% a year in the southern African nations of Zimbabwe, Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa and Zambia.
In 10 years, Botswana's elephant population has grown from 20,000 to 51,000. 

The elephant population booms in the region for roughly the same reason cows are so numerous in the U.S.: It is legal to sell elephant products.
Officials at the Kruger National Park in South Africa cull about 350 elephants a year from their herd.
The $2.5 million they raise from selling tusks and hides supports park management.
In Zimbabwe, the wildlife industry is annually worth between $100 million and $200 million.
Much of that income flows to the people who live near the herds.
Villagers recently ceded land for an elephant habitat in exchange for hunting permits.
The permits are then sold at great profit to visiting gamesmen. 

In a remarkable article in the fall issue of Policy Review, Randy Simmons and Urs Kreuter point out that this complementary arrangement is being threatened.
In Lausanne, Switzerland, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species is about to ban trade in all elephant products. 

Supported by the World Wildlife Fund, Senator Bob Kasten and Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr., the group wants the ban under the misguided notion that trade itself is responsible for the diminishing elephant populations in eastern and central Africa.
Messrs.
Simmons and Kreuter, economists at the University of Utah, identify a crucial prejudice: "Perhaps those who wish to save the elephant are simply misled by the no-trade ideology of many Americans and European environmentalists -- a biological imperialism imposed regardless of local realities and values for wildlife." If the elephant populations are diminishing in Kenya, where it's illegal to hunt them, it's not the fault of trade but because a local market has been driven underground.
As a result, poachers, who obviously have no incentive to nurture the herds, dominate the market.
Other Kenyans encourage the slaughter; unable to profit from the elephants, they see the herds as mainly an economic threat: Elephants knock over trees, graze voraciously and drink scarce water. 

A lethal guerrilla war between poachers and wardens now rages in central and eastern Africa.
The elephant population in Kenya, for example, is down from 140,000 in the 1970s when the hunting ban went into effect, to about 20,000. 

A wider ban will most likely make a bad situation worse.
Ivory prices will rise, the black market will grow.
A similar convention ban on the black rhino in 1976 nearly wiped out that animal.
Why not try to replicate and improve on the southern Africa model?
Give legitimate ranchers an incentive to nurture herds.
Privatize, don't pulverize, the elephant. 

