.START 

It's noon on Saturday, 2 1/2 hours before Clemson University's football team is to play Virginia, but already the far-flung parking lots that ring 80,000-seat Memorial Stadium are pretty well pawed over.
The school's orange-and-white tiger-paw symbol appears on people's caps and shirts, car doors and the tablecloths that display their tailgate feasts.
Some folks, adults included, have paws painted on their cheeks. 

Dick Herbert's display, however, stands out even in this gaudy crowd.
The white-bearded cemetery owner is wearing an orange cap, white shirt with paw logo, and orange pants, and his loved ones, arrayed around him are similarly attired.
His auto, a repainted Cadillac hearse, has an orange top and white chassis with the words "The Paw Bearer" on its sides.
When its horn is beeped, it sounds the notes of "Hold That Tiger." 

That Mr. Herbert's rig sits in the shadow of the stadium attests to his status; parking on Clemson football days, as well as access to hard-to-get season tickets, is as stratified as the decks of the QE II, with the best going to the oldest and most generous donors to IPTAY, the university's athletics fund-raising arm.
With few exceptions other than for students, the rule is simple: No contribution, no tickets.
Mr. Herbert's $1,000 annual gift entitles him to buy eight football season tickets and six basketball season tickets; it also gets him other perks, including the choice parking spot. 

The Anderson, S.C., resident, a transplanted New Jerseyite who isn't a Clemson grad, figures that, including ticket and travel costs, he spends about $5,000 a year following Clemson teams, but considers the money well spent. "It's good fun and a way to get the family together," he says.
Besides, "when you live in South Carolina, you follow either Clemson or the University of South Carolina, or watch TV.
The choice isn't tough." 

It's a choice made by enough Clemson fans to put the school in the front rank of the fund-raising scramble that supports big-time college sports.
Despite the 80,000-seat stadiums, TV contracts and big-city ticket prices ($16 per seat for football here), these activities do not support themselves.
This puts them in the company of such higher-toned mendicant entertainments as opera and ballet.
Just how dependent on philanthropy college sports have become is mirrored in IPTAY's revenue graph.
It took the organization 25 years -- from its founding in 1934 to 1959 -- to raise its first $1 million.
It raises that almost every two months now.
Its 1988-89 take amounts to $5.4 million. 

But the current Clemson nut this sum helps to defray is so large that IPTAY is thinking about changing its name, and aim.
IPTAY originally stood for "I Pay Ten A Year," meaning ten dollars.
That minimum was raised to $20 in 1969 and $30 in 1976, but even that amount now looks quaint.
Last year's haul came from about 20,000 members, putting the average check at $270. 

"Some people favor raising the minimum but keeping the name," muses Allison Dalton, the group's executive director. "I personally like it.
It's unusual.
I think it's a reason we've done well; part of our mystique, if you will." 

There's nothing mystical or unusual about another reason for IPTAY's success -- the ticket tie-in.
A survey done for the Sporting News showed that 14 of the nation's pre-season college football Top 20 schools have similar requirements.
At Clemson, all but a literal handful of the 57,500 tickets sold on a full-season basis go to IPTAY members who kick in at least $100 a year.
The scale climbs in steps to $5,000-a-year donors, who get, among other things, access to 12 football tickets and two parking spaces for their vans. 

It's testimony to the cause's appeal that the money rolls in even though there's a rub at the higher levels: Longevity as well as munificence counts in football seating. "Anyone who maintains his contribution keeps his seat," shrugs the smiling, baldish Dalton, an ex-furniture retailer and campaign aide to Sen. Strom Thurmond. "That means we have longtime $100-a-year people on the 50 yard line, and $5,000 donors on the 30.
It might not be the best thing for fund-raising, but what's fair is fair, and it's what our members want." 

Another thing members want, and get, is their group's independence from other Clemson fund-raising.
Although IPTAY is part of the state-supported university, its accounts remain separate, and earmarked for sports.
This was established most firmly in 1954 after a study by a management consulting firm recommended that all Clemson fund raising be pooled.
IPTAY's president at the time, textile executive R.C. Edwards, argued so impressively for the status quo that he was hired by the university, and later named its president. 

IPTAY has raised about $60 million in all, some $50 million in the last dozen years.
That period has been the apex of Clemson sports, with the school's football teams attaining seven Top-20 national rankings and a national title, in 1981.
Coincidentally, though, Tiger basketball and football teams have been slapped with stiff penalties from the NCAA for violating recruiting and financial-aid rules, and the football program is under investigation again.
In both previous cases, "representatives of the school's athletic interests," i.e., boosters, were involved. 

Any relationship?
None, claims Dalton. "IPTAY, per se," has never been involved in rules violations, and welcomed recent new NCAA statutes restricting booster contact with athletes and recruits, he says.
He's "as concerned as anyone" about the bigness of college sports, but doesn't believe they've become "unmanageable." 

He adds: "I love the level of presentation we have today.
It beats the old days a mile." 

And, indeed, the presentation was impeccable during Clemson's 34-20 win over Virginia on Saturday, but it also was the night before at a soccer game against Yale at Riggs Field, next door to the big stadium.
Admission was $3, no donations required, and $1 for students.
None of the players stood 6-foot-8 or sported a 19-inch neck.
The band played, but playfully, and in mufti.
Spectators laughed and cheered.
It looked like fun.
I suppose that's because it was fun. 

