.START 

Daisy Systems Corp. said continuing losses are producing a "significant liquidity problem," and its stock price fell to a level indicating investors doubt it can recover. 

The maker of computer-aided engineering systems expects to report a net loss for its fourth quarter ended Sept. 30 with revenue substantially below the $44.9 million posted in the quarter ended June 30. 

The company wouldn't be more specific about the size of the loss or the decline in revenue.
For the 1988 fourth quarter, net income was $2.8 million, or 16 cents a share, on revenue of $30.9 million. 

Daisy blamed delays in new product availability and customer uncertainty about the company's long-term financing arrangements.
It is believed to be losing market share to competitors such as Mentor Graphics Corp, of Beaverton, Ore.
Daisy has also been burdened by debt associated with its acquisition earlier this year of Cadnetix Corp., of Boulder, Colo., a union that has apparently produced more problems than benefits.
Daisy had already posted a loss of $120 million for the first nine months of its fiscal year. 

Daisy's stock, which traded as high as $8.25 during the past year, fell $1.25 a share Friday, or 53%, to $1.125 a share in very heavy national over-the-counter trading that reflected dumping of the stock by investors. 

The company said it is taking steps to cut costs and expenses, and holding talks with its bridge-financing lender, Heller Financial Inc., of Chicago, to obtain additional short-term funding.
Daisy said it has retained its investment banker, Bear, Stearns & Co. to pursue "feasible financial alternatives." 

Earlier this year, Daisy arranged $50 million in bridge financing with Heller for its hostile bid for Cadnetix.
In its fiscal-third quarter ended June 30, Daisy incurred a $32 million charge from the sale of a Cadnetix unit. 

Daisy officials couldn't be immediately reached to provide estimates of its assets and liabilities. 

Daisy launched a hostile bid for Cadnetix last year.
Cadnetix, also a maker of computer-aided engineering systems, accepted a sweetened offer of $9.50 a share, or about $200 million, after rejecting earlier proposals and seeking another suitor. 

