.START 

The Commerce Department said it is easing a much-criticized rule that imposes U.S. licensing requirements on foreign products that contain sensitive U.S. parts. 

The department said foreign manufacturers no longer will need prior U.S. approval to export such products to most countries if the U.S. content of sensitive parts doesn't exceed 25% of the value of those products.
Previously, the department applied the 25% level to only a few countries; for other destinations it applied a 10% standard. 

Dennis Kloske, undersecretary of commerce for export administration, said the more liberal rule will help reverse the "de-Americanization" trend, or the inclination of foreign manufacturers to engineer U.S. parts out of their products.
He said many of those manufacturers have been doing that just to avoid "being bound by U.S. export regulations." 

Foreign companies that hadn't complied with the U.S. requirement faced Commerce Department prohibitions on shipments of U.S.-made parts.
Foreign governments have objected to this "extraterritorial" reach of U.S. law, and U.S. component suppliers complained that they were being regulated out of business in important foreign markets. 

Sensitive goods are high-technology products that can have both military and civilian uses, and require a license for exporting from the U.S.
At the 25% level, many more foreign electronics products can incorporate U.S.-made microprocessors, disk drives and other parts without triggering additional U.S. licensing requirements.
The new rule went into effect on Friday, although it also provides for a 30-day period for public comment. 

The 1988 trade act instructed the Commerce Department to undertake this change, but an inter-agency debate over what exceptions could be made to the new rule delayed action for months.
The 25% rule, for instance, is to apply to all but eight countries being proscribed for foreign-policy reasons -- Iran, Syria, South Yemen, Libya, Vietnam, North Korea, Cuba and Cambodia.
Foreign manufacturers shipping products to these countries will still be held to the 10% standard.
Other countries could be added to the list in the future. 

The Commerce Department also is working on new rules to free older supercomputer models from stringent export-control rules.
In most cases, foreign buyers of U.S. supercomputers are required to take extraordinary measures to prevent these devices from being misused.
Such rules, however, place U.S. supercomputer manufacturers at a disadvantage in foreign markets because their Japanese competitors aren't similarly bound. 

Under some proposals being studied, the Commerce Department would "redefine" supercomputers and apply such exceptionally tight controls only to the latest models and less restrictive ones to the older models. 

