.START 

Computer makers are expected to report spotty third-quarter results due to slowing growth in most sectors, while software makers' results vary depending on factors such as product cycles and acquisitions. 

In the personal-computer software market, giant Microsoft Corp., Redmond, Wash., already has surprised analysts by disclosing a better-than-expected 34% revenue increase.
Lotus Development Corp., Cambridge, Mass., is expected to post gains after a year of negative earnings comparisons.
However, Ashton-Tate Corp., Torrance, Calif., remains mired in losses related to updating its key dBase software. 

Among makers of software for larger computers, Oracle Systems Corp., Belmont, Calif., is slowing from the 100% growth pace of past years to 60% or so, analysts say.
But Computer Associates International Inc., Garden City, N.Y., is an unknown quantity because of questions about the accounting treatment for its acquisition of Cullinet Software Inc. last month. 

In the more predictable computer-services sector, analysts see continued steady growth for big companies such as payroll processor Automatic Data Processing Inc., Roseland, N.J., General Motors Corp. 's Electronic Data Systems Corp. and Computer Sciences Corp., El Segundo, Calif.
The last two are benefiting from customers' growing eagerness to turn over to independent experts the job of connecting and managing their networks of computers. 

"The broad-based computing trends -- downsizing and open systems -- are clearly differentiating the software vendors," says David Readerman, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Hutton. 

Bahar Gadwani, an analyst with Kidder, Peabody Inc., adds: "There's some evidence of concentration in the industry.
The majors are broadening their product lines and putting a squeeze on smaller companies." He notes Microsoft and Lotus are both signing joint marketing agreements with some big hardware makers. "It should result in a stock price premium for the big guys," he says. 

Microsoft and Lotus's gains are coming in the face of a sharp slowdown in PC sales from 1988 growth rates.
Overall, "it's the worst year for PC software in the history of the industry," says Mr. Gadwani. 

However, Microsoft's fiscal first quarter ended Sept. 30 was bolstered by growing sales of its Windows software, growth in Europe and Asia, and sales of its hardware mouse, or hand-operated controller, analysts say.
After Microsoft disclosed the revenue gains, analysts boosted their earnings estimates for the quarter to about 85 cents a share, up about 30% from the year-earlier $36.6 million, or 65 cents a share.
Based on the company's first-quarter strength, Mr. Readerman thinks Microsoft will become the first PC software company to top the $1 billion level in sales for its fiscal year ending June 30. 

"Lotus, we also think, is going to have a good quarter," says David Bayer, an analyst with Montgomery Securities in San Francisco.
Lotus finally started shipping updates of its best-selling 1-2-3 spreadsheet during the quarter and pent-up demand for the upgrades resulted in a 28% revenue gain to about $150 million, he says.
Earnings rose about 50%, to 45 cents to 50 cents a share, from $14.3 million, or 31 cents a share, analysts say. 

Mr. Gadwani says some of the sales growth "is coming primarily from stuffing the (dealer) channel." He suspects the software may be piling up on dealers' shelves rather than being snapped up by users.
However, other analysts, and Lotus itself, say dealer stocks aren't excessive. 

Ashton-Tate remains the weakest of the major software stocks, analysts say.
After customers complained about numerous bugs in its dBase IV upgrade of its bestselling software, the company pulled the product off the market.
The revised rewrite is expected soon, but Mr. Gadwani says Ashton-Tate will probably report losses for the third quarter ended Sept. 30 of around 54 cents a share, including onetime write-offs.
Revenue, he says, declined about 26% to $56 million from $75.7 million. 

The growth pace of database giant Oracle Systems continues to astound analysts.
Mr. Readerman says, "I went to a users group meeting in Dallas last week looking for a reason to downgrade the stock, and I couldn't find one." He notes that data processing managers like the idea of being able to use Oracle's software on many different computers. 

For the fiscal second quarter ending Nov. 30, he predicts earnings and revenue will grow 60% to 21 cents a share on $200 million in revenue. 

Computer Associates, the biggest company in the industry, acquired Cullinet Software in a pooling of interest in September.
Mr. Bayer says that, without the acquisition, he believes Computer Associates would have earned about 20 cents a share, up from 18 cents a share in the year-ago period.
Revenue would have been up 27% to about $285 million, he says.
With Cullinet included, "revenue should be higher and earnings per share lower," he says. 

After adjusting both this year and last for the merger, Mr. Readerman says he expects earnings per share to drop to about nine cents from 16 cents in the yearearlier period.
Adjusted revenue will rise about 15% to about $315 million, he predicts. 

