.START 

Standard & Poor's Corp. said the number of companies whose corporate credit ratings were lowered exceeded those whose were raised in the third quarter, but the agency upgraded more municipal credit ratings than it downgraded. 

S&P noted, however, that the dollar amount of corporate credit raised was greater than that of ratings lowered.
The ratings agency said that preliminary data show that ratings on 109 issues, representing $38.1 billion, were downgraded, compared with ratings on 73 issues, representing $45.9 billion, that were upgraded. 

The higher downgrades were mostly in the industrial sector, where downgrades more than doubled upgrades.
About 40% of these downgrades were for issues rated triple-C or lower.
Above triple-C, the ratio of downgrades to upgrades was less than 2-to-1. 

Downgrades also dominated among electric utilities, but upgrades exceeded downgrades for utilities as a whole.
The agency said the results were mixed for banks, insurance, transportation, and international sectors. 

S&P said the results are an improvement over the second quarter.
In that period, both the number of company ratings and the dollar amounts downgraded exceeded those upgraded.
The ratings of 85 issues representing $29.7 billion were lowered, compared with 72 issues representing $27.1 billion that were raised. 

In the third quarter, S&P rated a total of $76.1 billion of domestic corporate debt, of which $62.9 billion was investment grade and $13.2 billion speculative grade. 

In the area of municipal ratings, S&P raised ratings on 51 issues and lowered 37.
The upgrade represented $7.1 billion debt, and the downgrade, $6.6 billion.
In the second quarter, 33 ratings representing $7.1 billion were downgraded, compared with 36 representing $1.3 billion upgraded. 

"Municipal credit quality had a positive rebound in 1989's third quarter," S&P said.
It attributed the showing partly to the upgrading on Oregon's general obligation rating that offset the downgrading of Massachusetts' general obligation rating.
These two were the largest rating actions of the quarter. 

The ratings agency said most of the other general obligations ratings were upgrades.
Two major cities' ratings were raised in the quarter.
Newark, N.J.'s rating rose, reflecting substantial improvement in the city's economic base and continued strong financial management.
Cleveland's rating climbed based on its restructured economic base. 

After a long negative slump in 1988, the U.S. housing sector showed improvement because of stronger asset quality resulting from mortgage pool protection, reserve funds, pool insurance, good portfolio performance, among other factors.
Upgrades also exceeded downgrades in the hospital, educational institutions, municipal utility, and tax-backed issue sectors. 

