.START 

A group including Airlie Group Limited Partnership, a Fort Worth, Texas, investment partnership controlled by Dort A. Cameron, a Greenwich, Conn., investor, said it holds an equivalent 6.7% stake in First Executive Corp. 's common shares outstanding. 

In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the group said it purchased three million First Executive preferred shares on Sept. 27 in the open market for $42 million.
Each preferred shares is convertible into one share of common stock at $20 a share, the filing said.
In addition, the group acquired six million warrants for $4.3 million.
Each warrant entitles the holder to purchase one-half share of common stock. 

In total, the group controls 6,103,091 First Executive common shares, assuming conversion of the preferred shares and exercise of the warrants.
The stake also includes 14,470 rights to purchase preferred stock-warrant units that Mr. Cameron acquired in the company's Sept. 11 rights distribution. 

The group said in the filing that it bought the First Executive securities as an investment.
It said it has had discussions with First Executive management concerning ways to maximize long-term shareholder value. 

It said it has no present intention to convert the preferred stock or to exercise any of the warrants.
But if it changed its mind, however, it would do so for investment reasons, the filing said.
Depending on market conditions and other factors, it may decide to purchase or sell additional First Executive securities, the filing added. 

In Los Angeles, Fred Carr, First Executive chairman and president, declined comment. 

Airlie is an outgrowth of Investment L.P., an investment partnership founded by Mr. Cameron and Richard E. Rainwater, a Fort Worth investor, in 1984.
Mr. Rainwater has withdrawn as a limited partner of Airlie but remains a limited partner of Investment L.P. Morton H. Meyerson withdrew as general partner of Airlie in September because of differences in business philosophy. 

Earlier this year, Airlie was among the investors backing Pan Am Corp. 's unsuccessful bid to acquire NWA Inc.
It is said to have amassed more than $1.6 billion since being founded a year ago by Mr. Cameron, a former aide to Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. junk-bond chief Michael Milken, and Mr. Meyerson, who was president of Electronic Data Systems when H. Ross Perot owned the company. 

