.START 

Angela Kunze, a 25-year-old East German with piercing gray-blue eyes, is celebrating her country's 40th birthday in a special way.
Last Wednesday, she started a 10-day protest fast. 

Sitting on a blue mattress on the floor of East Berlin's Gethsemane church, wrapped in a blanket, she explains why. 

"Changes are taking place in many socialist countries, but in East Germany everything has stayed the same," she says with disgust. "We need changes here, too, and fast." 

In recent weeks, world attention has focused on the tens of thousands of disgruntled East Germans who have fled to the West.
At the same time, a development that is just as dramatic, albeit less visible, has been shaking this hard-line Communist state: the extraordinary rise of a mass protest movement for reform. 

Ms. Kunze and the half-dozen people who have joined her hunger strike at Gethsemane, a Protestant church, are but one manifestation of the new mood of defiance.
Last month, the nation's Protestant Church, shaking off its lingering inhibitions, went public with a call for sweeping political changes.
About 1,000 East German musicians and artists have signed a resolution condemning the "unbearable ignorance of the state and party leadership." 

And this anniversary weekend, thousands of demonstrators defied authorities by taking to the streets of several cities.
In Berlin, protesters marched for more than six hours around the town center chanting "Freedom, freedom." 

East German uniformed and plain-clothes police, who at first seemed at a loss as to how to deal with the protest, eventually used truncheons and water cannon to break it up and arrested several hundred demonstrators.
The emergence of a fledgling organized opposition to the Communist leadership is also bolstering the new-found activism.
In recent weeks, at least six new political groupings have sprung up across the country seemingly from nowhere, presenting a major challenge to the regime of Erich Honecker, the nation's ailing 77-year-old leader.
Tens of thousands of the 16 million East Germans are flocking to public meetings of these groups, often in churches to avoid confrontation with security forces on the streets. 

The birth of this new movement -- which is officially outlawed -- is due in part to the recent mass exodus of almost 50,000 East Germans.
Many who have long harbored hopes for a less rigid and repressive system say the government's tough handling of the refugee crisis was the final straw.
Others cite heavy-handed manipulation of the results of local elections last May, which has been extensively documented by activists who made independent checks. 

But the new activism also attests to the spirit of change now sweeping the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
East German reformists, like their counterparts in Hungary, Poland and several Soviet republics, are plucking up the courage to air their long-standing grievances in public and to press for greater freedoms. 

They are united by a belief that the system of authoritarian socialism established by Joseph Stalin in Eastern Europe four decades ago is bankrupt and on the verge of collapse.
Most of the East German activists, far from being supporters of capitalism, say they want to create a new and more democratic socialist state, one in which the press can tell the truth and citizens have guaranteed rights and can genuinely participate in government. 

Their road ahead is likely to be long and extremely rocky.
East Berlin has rejected out of hand all their demands as "anti-socialist." Pinned to the walls of Gethsemane church are lists of dozens of names of people jailed in recent weeks in Berlin, Leipzig, Dresden and elsewhere for taking part in illegal demonstrations or signing petitions. 

But the activists themselves say that whatever the short-term measures taken against them, reform of some sort is inevitable in East Germany. "Socialism must change or die," says Rainer Eppelmann, a Berlin pastor who heads one of the new political groups, Democratic Awakening.
The country must treat its citizens with more respect if it is to keep its position as the most affluent in Eastern Europe, he says.
To Mr. Honecker's chagrin, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev probably agrees with such assessments.
Visiting East Berlin over the weekend, Mr. Gorbachev for the most part supported his "longtime friend," Mr. Honecker.
But Mr. Gorbachev also dropped clear hints that he favored some liberalization here, too. 

Asked by Western reporters whether the situation in East Germany was perilous, he replied: "The danger is for those who don't react to life.
Those who take impulses from life and society and base their policies on them don't need to be afraid." 

Attendance at a public discussion of the new reform movement shows just how far the East German leadership is out of touch with life in its society -- and thus has every reason to be afraid.
The meeting, one of the biggest so far, was held in Berlin's Church of the Redeemer last Friday, only hours after a pompous official ceremony in the Palace of the Republic to mark the state's 40th anniversary. 

About 1,500 people, most of them under 40, crammed the pews, aisles and balconies of the church to debate the future of East Germany -- a topic barely raised during the ceremony at the Palace of the Republic.
The Protestant church was so full that latecomers had to stand outside, trying to overhear the debate through open windows. 

It started with representatives from the new political groupings outlining ideas for reform and reading aloud a joint declaration demanding "democratic restructuring." Rolf Henrich, an activist of "New Forum," one of the groups, told how he was thrown out of the Communist Party and lost his job as a lawyer more than a decade ago because, disgusted with the system, he was writing a critical book. 

The new groups are only now starting to work out their strategies.
But the question of what sort of tactics they should adopt is already a hot topic for debate.
Fearing a repeat of the crackdown against reformists in China, many urge extreme caution. 

"We must remember that there was a man named Gandhi who proved you can break a stone with gentle water," said one participant, deploring an incident in Dresden last week when protesters threw paving stones through windows. "But Gandhi organized demonstrations, and we must do the same," shouted another. "We need to let off steam," agreed a third. 

Fear of reprisals no longer seems to scare away potential protesters as much as it did in the past.
For many, the big turnout at the Redeemer Church meeting, and numerous ones like it around the country, is reassuring. 

"That sort of {Redeemer Church} meeting is still quite exotic," Mr. Eppelmann acknowledged the next morning, saying that the opposition must do more to organize itself.
He is convinced that the reformers will eventually win out.
While change from the top remains unlikely with Mr. Honecker in charge, Mr. Eppelmann hopes that Mr. Honecker's successors in the Communist Party will sooner or later realize there isn't any alternative. 

(See related story: "Hungarian Party Revamps In Bid to Boost Chances Of Winning Elections" -- WSJ Oct. 9, 1989) 

Polish Deputy Prime Minister Leszek Balcerowicz announced the new non-Communist government's preliminary plans to create a market economy, saying Poles will face tight money, bankruptcy and unemployment along the way. 

But he said Western countries are ready to help Poland and if the measures are put into effect, beneficial effects would be discernible in a year.
He said the government would try to soften the pain of the program by introducing such measures as unemployment benefits. 

Previously exercised remedies such as price controls, ration coupons and centralized distribution would only worsen the problems and delay the cure, Mr. Balcerowicz said. 

After Mr. Balcerowicz's announcement, Solidarity leader Lech Walesa warned advisers that his movement -- and he personally -- could be blamed by angry Poles for the worsening situation. 

Yokohama Rubber Co., Japan's second largest automobile-tire maker, said it bought U.S. tire maker Mohawk Rubber Co. for $150 million.
A Yokohama Rubber spokesman said the Japanese company wanted to set up a production point in the U.S. "All the {Japanese} auto makers are investing abroad," he said. "It's absolutely necessary to have a production base." The Tokyo-based company, whose sales increased 9.7% to 327.4 billion yen ($2.30 billion) last year, currently exports automobile tires to the U.S. 

The Australian government banned mining in most of the Kakadu wilderness park, where the film "Crocodile Dundee" was shot.
The move delighted environmentalists but angered mining companies, particularly Broken Hill Proprietary, or BHP, which has spent $9.2 million in exploration in the park.
BHP, Australia's largest company, heads a consortium that had been planning to exploit the park's mineral deposits.
BHP executive Dick Carter said the company was "astounded" by the ban. 

Iran is said to be negotiating with French and Japanese companies to raise more than $1 billion now in return for oil shipments to continue over a period of time.
Iran needs the foreign exchange to pay for raw materials, food imports and the reconstruction of its industry after its war with Iraq, according to Persian Gulf bankers.
The pre-financed oil deals are one of the few ways in which Iran can borrow on international markets without sparking a domestic debate on borrowing from the West, the bankers add. 

Brazil announced emergency price controls in the wake of sharp price increases that President Jose Sarney blamed on "dishonest and ambitious speculators." Top ministers and businessmen signed an agreement to limit price increases for public utilities and 135 products, ranging from coffee to cars.
The agreement restricts price hikes to once a month and to a maximum of 90% of the previous month's inflation.
Last year, Brazil's inflation reached 1,200%; in this September alone, it reached 36%.
In a related action, Brazilian monetary authorities took steps expected to damp speculation in gold and the related free market for dollars.
Investments in gold and dollars have risen sharply since mid-September because of market players' growing fears that the new cruzado is losing its value. 

The European Commission of Human Rights agreed to investigate a complaint against the British government by three national newspapers banned from printing extracts of "Spycatcher." 

The three papers -- the Guardian, the Observer and the Times -- took their case to the commission after the House of Lords, England's highest legal authority, banned them in July 1987 from publishing extracts of the book by former British security-services officer Peter Wright. 

The government argued that the book was a threat to national security, a claim rebutted by the press on the ground it was already available in the U.S.
The EC agreed to consider an appeal by the newspapers that the government ban, overturned in June 1988, constituted a breach of human rights. 

The decision is the first step in a long battle that could eventually be taken to the European Court of Human Rights. 

An official Chinese newspaper said that several thousand first-year students from six Chinese provincial universities will be sent to military camps to correct their ideological outlook.
The military training "would be aimed at the bad influences on schools of the turmoil and counter-revolutionary rebellion," the paper said . . . Sony Corp. has donated $3 million to the University of Illinois to endow a research and teaching position in electrical and computer engineering. 

