.START 

Despite AMR Corp. Chairman Robert Crandall's reputation as the top U.S. airline executive, some AMR shareholders say they wouldn't necessarily back him in a "just-say-no" defense against a $7.54 billion bid by Donald Trump. 

AMR, parent of American Airlines, is understood to be considering such a defense among other alternatives including a recapitalization, restructuring, or sale to a white-knight buyer.
Although some of the alternatives may include sale of stock to American employees, that alone wouldn't be enough to thwart a hostile bid. 

The appeal of a "just-say-no" defense for Mr. Crandall is that it would allow him to match his record as the man who built American into the nation's leading airline against an offer from a real-estate promoter.
It would force Mr. Trump to obtain financing and then seek to oust AMR's 14 directors in a special shareholder vote known as a consent solicitation. 

However, institutional investors say an offer with financing could be a big vote-getter. 

"At $120 a share, I think Mr. Trump would have a lot of support," says Frank McGann, an airline analyst at Aetna Life & Casualty Co. in Hartford, Conn. "Even people who say that Crandall is the best airline guy in the world would say the shareholders haven't seen a lot of value relative to other airlines over the last five years." 

Richard Warden of IDS Financial Services Inc., Minneapolis, agrees. "Basically, the investor would like to support Mr. Crandall and AMR.
But at the same time you have to look at the valuation of the company and the stock price, and I think you need to have a positive response from the company, something that's going to really provide value for the shareholders, to make a decision." 

Another AMR stockholder says Mr. Crandall "hasn't devoted a great deal of energy or focus to the concern that there is a gap between his share price and fair net asset value." One airline analyst says that in focusing on operating the airline, Mr. Crandall "has always had a certain amount of disdain for shareholders." 

Even if Mr. Crandall lost a vote, he might still have time to pursue another transaction before Mr. Trump could gain control.
In the meantime, AMR doesn't show any sign of rushing to respond.
Its next scheduled board meeting isn't until Oct. 18.
Although directors can convene a special meeting on 24 hours' notice, so far it doesn't appear that such a meeting has been held. 

AMR stock advanced Friday amid reports of buying by Bear, Stearns & Co, Mr. Trump's stockbroker.
The shares rose $3.875 to $103.75 on volume of 3.9 million shares in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Some traders said the gain reflected more confidence that Mr. Trump is serious about pursuing AMR.
But the price remained far below the bid level, a sign of continuing doubts about the outcome. 

Although Mr. Trump is said to be pursuing a bank financing commitment for his bid, he is doing without merger advice from a Wall Street securities firm, which weakens his credibility.
AMR is being advised by Goldman, Sachs & Co. and Salomon Brothers Inc. 

Takeover experts warn that many of Mr. Crandall's possible responses have drawbacks. 

Pursuing political protection in Washington by arguing that airline takeovers are generating excessive levels of debt isn't likely to result in a bullet-proof defense.
The Bush administration has already allowed one leveraged airline takeover at Northwest Airlines parent NWA Inc. and may be ready to okay another at United Airlines parent UAL Corp. 

Mr. Crandall could try to barricade the company by selling stock to an Employee Stock Ownership Plan; or to a friendly "white-squire" stockholder, perhaps a foreign airline, or both.
However, it could be more difficult for AMR to sell a blocking stake now that Mr. Trump has made a bid and caused AMR stock to soar. 

There might be legal problems if the employees buy at an inflated price that later collapses because the takeover attempt fails.
And it could be difficult for American to sell stock to employees or a white-squire at a price below the bid while rejecting the bid itself as inadequate. 

In an interview yesterday, Mr. Trump said he believes it is "highly unlikely" that AMR would seek to block his offer with an ESOP because it could be challenged legally as an unreasonable response to his bid. 

Takeover experts also say selling a 20% stake to employees wouldn't necessarily block Mr. Trump's takeover effort, even though Delaware law blocks hostile buyers who fail to obtain more than 85% of a target's stock.
If Mr. Trump can oust the board before buying 15% of AMR stock, he could gain board approval and then wouldn't be subject to the 85% requirement. 

If American elects to compete economically with Mr. Trump in a recapitalization, such as a stock buy-back with a special dividend financed with new debt, it would then be difficult to make the political argument that excessive airline debt levels violate the public interest.
A recapitalization could also force AMR to put itself up for sale to the highest bidder.
In addition to its longtime outside counsel, Debevoise & Plimpton, AMR is also being advised by the takeover defense firm of Wachtel, Lipton, Rosen & Katz.
Mr. Trump is being advised by Willkie Farr & Gallagher. 

Last Thursday, the same day AMR disclosed the bid, Mr. Trump wrote letters to U.S. Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner and congressional leaders noting that his bid doesn't include any foreign airline participation.
Mr. Skinner has already forced Northwest to pare down an investment by KLM Royal Dutch Airlines PLC to prevent KLM from exercising control. 

Mr. Crandall's strongest defense might be hooking up with a more compatible buyer who could outbid Mr. Trump, particularly if they could gain the type of financing edge from employee cost concessions that UAL Chairman Stephen Wolf won from his employees. 

The leader of the union representing American's flight attendants' union, Michael Kelleher, met with company officials.
But the nature of the talks with Mr. Kelleher, president of the Association of Professional Flight Attendants, couldn't be determined. 

A white-knight buyer could be a leveraged buy-out fund or a wealthy investor such as Robert Bass, a resident of AMR's home base of Fort Worth, Texas.
Mr. Bass, who has already pursued United Airlines and invested indirectly in the takeover of Northwest, couldn't be reached. 

Under certain circumstances, a change in control at American could be lucrative for Mr. Crandall.
Although he owns only 38,500 shares and has options on another 26,000, he has the right to 355,000 shares if he is fired or quits "for good reason" following a change of control.
That means he could clear more than $50 million personally in a hostile takeover. 

