.START 

Having blamed the private sector for everything from inflation to hair loss, the self-appointed "consumer" groups now have targeted the insurance sector.
Accordingly, that industry is being blamed for price growth largely the result of sharp cost increases in medical care, auto repair, litigation, fraud and cross-subsidies. 

With California's passage last fall of its Naderite initiative to roll back auto and other premiums, a bad situation is well on its way to worse. 

"Good drivers" -- a class including those convicted of drunken driving within the previous three years -- were promised a rate reduction of 20%.
Territorial rating -- in which rates are based in part upon actuarial (loss) experience in different geographic areas -- was effectively abolished.
The office of insurance commissioner was made elective, thus politicizing it.
And the law provides that "consumer groups" enjoy permanent employment as paid intervenors in the regulatory process. 

Harvey Rosenfield, the chief promoter of the new regime, now is using data unadjusted for inflation, for other costs, for quality differentials, for types of services provided, or for the market value of capital investment in the industry.
That is the only way he can argue that the 20% rollback in rates will not deprive any insurer of a "fair return." 

And Mr. Rosenfield argued during the campaign that Prop. 103 would remove the insurers' "antitrust exemption." In fact, no such exemption existed, and an industry with 4,000 firms could not collude successfully in any event.
What Mr. Rosenfield was referring to was the legal right of insurers under the McCarran-Ferguson Act to share actuarial data, thus reducing a significant cost for small firms and so letting them compete.
So much for Mr. Rosenfield's great concern for consumers. 

Elimination of territorial rating will bestow benefits upon some consumers and penalize everyone else; this will be the outcome of the "reforms" now being proposed by consumer groups in other states.
Without territorial rating, consumers of insurance in low-loss areas will be forced to subsidize consumers in high-loss areas, a prospect recognized clearly by Californians last November.
Prop. 103 passed in only seven of 58 counties; of those seven, six are high-loss areas.
Without territorial rating, the system cannot work.
If two firms have differing proportions of clients in low- and high-loss areas, as is inevitable, the less fortunate firm will be unable to compete.
If it tries to make up its losses by raising prices to its low-loss customers, they will flee to other insurers.
Either consumers will have to be assigned to firms, as is the case under the current assigned-risk program, or the state will have to take over the whole mess.
What Mr. Rosenfield actually wants is a state takeover of the insurance business, a goal that he has proclaimed publicly and that is furthered by Prop. 103. 

It is no surprise, then, that the current Insurance Commissioner, Roxani Gillespie, already is trying to figure out how to subsidize drivers in Los Angeles and San Francisco without penalizing almost everyone else.
She is attempting this regulatory alchemy while under constant attack from Mr. Rosenfield, who complains that the rights of insurance-company shareholders actually are being respected by Ms. Gillespie despite the deadlines contained in Prop. 103.
Because of this political sniping, Ms. Gillespie has just proscribed both rate increases and territorial rating pending a series of mammoth hearings. 

This means that rates in high-loss areas will fall without any compensating increases elsewhere.
And the plans of one company to raise rates for drivers with poor records while reducing them for others have been abandoned.
All of this is just fine with the consumer groups, for it is high-loss consumers that form a large part of their constituency. 

The rest of America should be prepared for such posturing as that displayed by California Attorney General John Van de Kamp, who believes that the insurance issue will take him to the governorship if only he can exhibit a degree of crass opportunism shameless even by California standards.
Be on the lookout for very precise-sounding but meaningless numbers; an example is Mr. Rosenfield's claim that rates can be reduced 20% without any adverse effects.
According to Assemblywoman Kathy Wright, he admitted a while back to her that the figure was included in Prop. 103 because it "sounded good." 

Be prepared as well for perverse policy prescriptions promoted under the banner of "consumerism." The court dockets will grow ever more congested.
And, if there is justice in the world, the "consumer" groups will find insurance unavailable. 

Mr. Zycher, a Los Angeles County economist, advises the journal Regulation. 

