.START 

Foreign buyers are good for America, whether they're purchasing U.S. companies, property, manufactured goods or Treasury bonds.
And lately, there seems to be no limit to the foreign appetite for U.S. assets. 

Japan's Sony Corp. has offered $3.4 billion for Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. Tokyo-based Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. has paid $1.4 billion for a slice of New York banking behemoth Manufacturers Hanover Corp. and 60% of its CIT Group Inc. Meanwhile, British, Dutch and Australian companies are investing hundreds of millions of dollars in such U.S. air carriers as UAL Corp. and Northwest Airlines. 

But the latest round of direct foreign investment is touching off a new period of Yankee paranoia.
It's fine for foreigners to make indirect investments, through U.S. bonds and stock, according to this view.
But when they invest directly, in U.S. companies and real estate, they're no longer merely taking over assets -- they're "taking over America." 

Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner is the latest hand-wringer on foreign direct investment.
He recently decided, apparently without consulting colleagues at other agencies, to take a tough line against KLM Royal Dutch Airways' $400 million investment in Northwest Airlines.
He forced the European airline to reduce its planned investment, saying that it contravened the spirit of the federal aviation laws that prohibit foreigners from owning more than a 25% voting interest in U.S. airlines and that say the carriers must be controlled by U.S. citizens.
Under Mr. Skinner's pressure, KLM agreed to curb the powers of its representative on the Northwest board and to drop plans to have a KLM-controlled advisory committee for the airline. 

With less fanfare, an interagency task force called the Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S. has screened dozens of prospective takeovers.
Under a short amendment to the 1988 trade act, Congress empowered the president, based on the committee's recommendations, to reject a foreign take over on national-security grounds. 

The anti-foreign rhetoric and investment obstacles belie how positive -- indeed, how essential -- foreign investment has become.
It brings in capital to compensate for the low level of U.S. savings.
With the nation still running big trade and budget deficits, such investments help hold down interest rates. 

Moreover, when foreigners own property and corporations in the U.S., they are less likely to cut and run in bad times -- and more likely to invest extra capital, introduce new technology and create jobs.
If they put all their dollars into government bonds that can be bought and sold in seconds, there's a much greater risk that foreign investors will simply sell out when prospects darken. 

Total foreign investment in America still constitutes only about 5% of U.S. assets.
Direct foreign investment represents less money than the U.S. has invested directly abroad.
At the start of 1989, foreign direct investment in the U.S. totaled about $304 billion, compared with $329 billion of U.S. direct investment in other nations. 

Apart from Mr. Skinner's actions withdrawing the foreign-airline welcome mat, the Bush administration has generally applauded foreigners buying into American companies. "The administration's policy is to encourage foreign investment, with the exception of those investments that threaten national security," a senior Treasury official says. 

And in recent testimony to Congress, Mr. Skinner himself seemed to be trying to draw back a bit from his earlier toughness.
He emphasized the "potentially significant benefits" to be derived from attracting foreign capital investment to U.S. airlines. 

Mr. Skinner's apparent backtracking may have something to do with the displeasure that some of his colleagues expressed with his approach. "Mr.
Skinner -- as far as I know -- acted under specific transportation laws," a Treasury official says. "To my knowledge, his decision wasn't reviewed by the Economic Policy Council," the official adds.
The interagency EPC, led by the Treasury, generally reviews economic-policy decisions.
Mr. Skinner says he's consulting fully with other government agencies. 

In the wake of Mr. Skinner's action, the administration is making soothing noises.
It is mindful that the European Community is starting to deregulate its own airlines, and some American carriers may well want to buy into European lines. 

"We are basically for as much open investment as possible, so long as it does not create a problem for our national security or our strategic interests," U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills told members of Congress last week when she was asked about Mr. Skinner's moves. 

"The investment that has occurred from the Dutch, the British, the Japanese," she added, "has been not a negative factor -- any more than our investment in the European Community." It's hardly a coincidence she mentioned those three countries; they're the biggest foreign investors in the U.S.
The Japanese and the British, who invested $28.3 billion directly in the U.S. in 1988, accounted for two-thirds of all foreign direct investment.
The Dutch, while stepping up their interest in U.S. airlines, already control the parent of U.S.-based Shell Oil Co. 

