.START 

Nova Corp. of Alberta expects within a month to name a winning bidder for its Novalta Resources Ltd. unit, one of four valued at a total of 500 million Canadian dollars (US$426 million) that Nova put up for sale in June. 

"We have two offers in hand now, each of which would be worth more than C$200 million to Nova," S. Robert Blair, chairman and chief executive, said of Novalta, a Calgary-based natural gas producer and marketer. 

Mr. Blair didn't elaborate on the offers or name the bidders for Novalta.
He said Nova has rejected as inadequate offers for another unit, Italy's Grove Italia S.p.
A., but it still hopes to attract acceptable bids for Grove, a valve maker, as well as the other units.
Nova, a big petrochemicals, pipelines, and oil and gas concern, put the units on the block as part of a debt reduction plan. 

Nova's long-term debt rose to C$4.2 billion at the end of 1988 from C$2.4 billion a year earlier, mainly reflecting its September 1988 acquisition of Polysar Energy & Chemical Corp. 

Mr. Blair said Nova has already reduced its debt by roughly C$1 billion, which was its target for the 15 months ending Dec. 31, partly by applying proceeds of C$456 million from a recent rights offering.
The sale of units and other means could reduce debt as much as a further C$500 million by year's end, he said. 

Turning to earnings, Mr. Blair said the downturn in petrochemical prices this year "has come earlier and gone deeper than we had expected, and it's certainly cutting into producers' profits," including Nova's.
He wouldn't estimate Nova's earnings for 1989 or 1990, or respond to analysts' forecasts, however. 

For the first half, Nova had net income of C$205 million, or 80 cents a share, on revenue of C$2.51 billion, up from year-earlier net of C$171 million, or 75 cents a share, on revenue of C$1.34 billion. 

Some analysts sharply reduced their 1989 earnings forecasts for Nova recently, to about 90 Canadian cents a share from C$1.20 to C$1.25, citing lower prices for polyethylene, polystyrene and other petrochemicals made by Nova. 

"Generally, demand has dropped a little and capacity has increased more" than expected, Mr. Blair said. "Many of us have been extremely proud in the last two years of our ability to add production capacity at relatively low incremental cost, but there has been more capacity coming on in aggregate than expected." 

