.START 

In the summer of 1984, Susan Van Buskirk was fired for refusing to work in her company's new office building.
She was sure the building caused the headaches, dizziness and bleeding she began suffering within days of moving there, and she wasn't dissuaded when her employer, Phoenix Leasing Inc., insisted that testing showed insignificant toxin levels in the building. 

Joined by three other female employees, Ms. Van Buskirk sued the company, its parent Phoenix American Inc. and the building's designer and contractor.
Phoenix Leasing declines to comment, but settlement negotiations are under way. 

The Van Buskirk suit may be a harbinger.
Only about a dozen such indoor air-pollution suits have been filed in the past two years.
But in a recent report, the Environmental Protection Agency estimated the economic cost of indoor air pollution totals tens of billions of dollars annually in lost productivity, direct medical care, lost earnings and employee sick days. 

As scientists hone their ability to determine what levels of contamination make people sick, lawsuits are expected to grow sharply.
Already, environmental consultants are multiplying, and architects and engineers are taking more account of indoor air pollution in their designs. 

The syndrome is an outgrowth of the energy crisis of the 1970s, when buildings were designed with sealed windows and heavily insulated walls to cut costs.
Inadequate fresh air and poor ventilation systems led pollutants to build up inside. 

One of the most publicized outbreaks of building-related illness came in 1976, when Legionnaire's disease killed 29 people at an American Legion convention in Philadelphia as bacteria in a hotel's cooling tower spread through the ventilation system. 

The adverse health effects of some indoor contaminants, such as asbestos and secondhand tobacco smoke, are generally acknowledged in the medical community.
But the effects of vapors from photocopying machines, cleaning liquids and solvents are less widely understood, says Bruce Tichenor, an environmental engineer at the EPA.
He also says scientists aren't sure why compounds that are safe individually combine with other office pollutants to cause building-related illnesses. 

Now, Congress is turning its attention to the problem.
The House of Representatives is scheduled to hold hearings on a bill to fund research on indoor air pollution and to publish health advisories.
A similar bill is pending in the Senate. 

As a growth field for lawyers -- and a potential menace to defendants -- sick-building suits could rival those that have proliferated over asbestos, the insulation material.
Lawyers are closely watching a case being tried against Burlington Industries Inc., a Greensboro, N.C.-based carpet manufacturer.
It is believed to be the first sick-building syndrome case to go to trial.
Suits against Blomfield Co., an Anchorage, Alaska-based owner and operator of commercial properties, and Prudential Insurance Co. of America, based in Newark, N.J., are likely to go to trial soon. 

In the past, workers' compensation laws prohibited workers from suing employers over most safety and health issues.
But attorney Laurence S. Kirsch of Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft says workers are increasingly seeking to circumvent that barrier by contending their employers knew about the health problem and failed to act.
In the Phoenix Leasing case, the women successfully argued they should be allowed to sue their employer because they believed that Phoenix Leasing fraudulently concealed the presence of the toxins. 

So far, pretrial settlements have relieved judges of the burden of establishing case law on indoor pollution.
But as courts begin to grapple with sick-building cases, they will face a myriad of complex medical, scientific and legal issues.
Often the symptoms of sick-building syndrome are similar to those of a virus or job stress, environmental lawyers say, making it difficult to determine conclusively if the illness is building-related. 

In the case against Blomfield, the plaintiffs have found no single toxin to blame for the respiratory illnesses they allegedly suffered while working in the building.
Instead, says Madelon Blum, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, they must prove that various toxins built up over time because of an inadequate ventilation system. 

Blomfield has argued that the illnesses can be explained by the workers' pre-existing conditions and other causes unrelated to the building.
Trial is scheduled to begin next year. 

The potential liabilities make employers increasingly cautious.
In December 1986, South Florida Savings Bank moved from a new building after employees complained of nausea, chest pains and fatigue.
Tests on the building were inconclusive, says Russ Murphy, a lawyer for the landlord.
But if it had been established later that the employees' illnesses were building-related, the thrift might have been held liable, says Cadwalader's Mr. Kirsch.
As it was, the thrift, now called Southeast Bank for Savings, was sued by its landlord for breaking the lease.
A Southeast spokesman says settlement talks are under way. 

Increasingly, some architects are reacting to sick-building syndrome by designing windows that can be opened to let in fresh air, thereby giving corporations more control over indoor air quality.
Engineers, meanwhile, are developing ways to circulate office air more frequently.
In many instances, outside air is pumped into the building and then filtered back outside through an exhaust system.
But such improvements are costly.
By making buildings less energy efficient, heating and cooling costs will rise. 

While indoor pollution has been slow to gather momentum as a public-policy issue, it was brought home to the EPA last summer.
Agency employees picketed their Washington, D.C., headquarters to protest the EPA's handling of complaints at its own building. 

Workers blamed respiratory and other illnesses on fumes from new carpets installed in a poorly ventilated area of the office.
William Hirzy, a senior scientist at the EPA and president-elect of the union, says the EPA recently agreed to remove the carpet, but EPA spokesman Luke Hester says "there was no demonstration of cause and effect" between the carpet and the illnesses. 

Now the union is pushing the EPA to adopt uniform indoor air standards that manufacturers must comply with, as well as testing procedures for new carpets. "If it can happen to us," Mr. Hirzy says, "it can happen to anyone." 

