.START 

Integrated Resources Inc. has a backup bidder for its core businesses should the agreement the financial-services company has to sell them to Whitehall Financial Group fall through. 

"There is another company that is working very diligently trying to catch up to the progress that's already been made in connection with the Whitehall transaction," Jay Chazanoff, Integrated's senior executive vice president for marketing and sales, told the company's field force of financial planners and brokers in a telephone conference call Friday. 

The other bidder, which Mr. Chazanoff declined to identify, has "made a great deal of progress," he said, and Integrated is "viewing that as a potential alternative" should the agreement with Whitehall fail.
In late August, Integrated signed a letter of intent to sell most of its businesses to Whitehall, a partnership of a branch of the Bronfman family, and Mandy Moross, a London investor, for $310 million. 

But at the same time, Mr. Chazanoff made clear that the transaction with Whitehall "continues to move forward" and that Integrated expects Whitehall to "cross the finish line first." In response to a question, Mr. Chazanoff also said the company is "looking at the 16th {of October}" to reach a definitive agreement. 

"That's a critical date, and any delay beyond that is going to cause substantial disruption in our ability to maintain the distribution system," Mr. Chazanoff said.
Reaching a definitive agreement by that date is viewed as essential if Integrated is to maintain its valued sales force of brokers and planners, called Integrated Resources Equity Corp., or Irec, one of the subsidiaries included in the sale accord. 

Irec is a loosely constructed group of independent brokers and financial planners who sell insurance, annuities, limited partnerships, mutual funds and other investments for Integrated and other firms. 

Integrated has been trying to avoid a bankruptcy-law filing since it failed to make interest payments in June on nearly $1 billion of debt.
The company also has been trying to sell its smaller businesses and recently agreed to sell its United Resources tax-sheltered annuity business to Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. for a sum that wasn't disclosed. 

Integrated is still trying to sell its ordinary block of business at its life-insurance company and its Capitol Life Insurance unit.
The parent is expected to continue to administer remaining real estate and other partnership businesses. 

Mr. Chazanoff also confirmed that the company plans to sell its Financial Clearing & Services Corp. unit, which had been part of the Whitehall deal, to Pershing, a unit of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette.
But he said the agreement with Pershing would have "no impact" on the price Whitehall is paying.
The capital in the clearing-firm unit "will be freed up prior to closing," Mr. Chazanoff said. 

Whitehall also has agreed to buy Integrated Resources Life Insurance Co., Integrated Resources Asset Management Corp. and Resources Trust Co. 

Mr. Chazanoff also said Integrated plans to begin the process of changing the company's name next week, and that the name probably will be Royal Alliance. 

