.START 

Many schoolchildren learn the rhyme "In Fourteen hundred and ninety-two, Columbus sailed the ocean blue." Yet 25% of the college seniors surveyed in a Gallup Poll didn't know that Columbus landed in the New World before 1500. 

The 87-question survey was commissioned by the National Endowment for the Humanities to test basic knowledge of history and literature as people graduate from college.
The results aren't good.
If the poll had been a test with 60% as the lowest passing grade, 55% of the seniors would have flunked. 

The poll, along with a report that calls for a revamping of college curricula, is the latest in a series of studies spotlighting the failings of the U.S. educational system.
But while many other studies have focused on what high school students know, this is one of few to look at what people know, or don't know, after four years of college. 

Only 58% of the seniors knew that the Civil War was fought between 1850 and 1900, and 23% incorrectly said Karl Marx's phrase "from each according to his ability, to each according to his need" appears in the U.S. Constitution. 

"Students who approach the end of their college years without knowing basic landmarks of history and thought are unlikely to have reflected on their meaning," says Lynne Cheney, chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities. 

In response to this state of affairs, Mrs. Cheney recommends that colleges and universities require all students to take a block of courses designed to give them "a core of learning" in the humanities, such as history, literature and philosophy, as well as in math and science, the social sciences and a foreign language. 

Now, Mrs. Cheney says, requirements are so loose that students can graduate from 77% of the nation's colleges and universities without taking a foreign language; from 41% without taking math; and from 38% without taking history. 

What's more, when requirements do exist, they're often lax.
Mrs. Cheney cites one Western university that, to satisfy a humanities requirement, allows students to take courses on interior design. 

The report outlines a sample core curriculum "that would encourage coherent and substantive learning in essential areas of knowledge." It stresses the importance of understanding the origins of Western civilization and American society by including works from the Hebrew Bible to Martin Luther King Jr. 's "Letter From Birmingham Jail," with the pillars of Western thought (Plato, Voltaire, Marx, Thoreau and many more) in between.
The curriculum also suggests two courses on other cultures, such as Asian and Islamic.
Mrs. Cheney emphasizes that its purpose is to provide an example of a core curriculum rather than a definitive model. 

Curriculum reform may seem like a simple and laudable task.
But last year a debate over what books Stanford University freshmen should read in a required Western civilization course turned into an acrimonious political spat that attracted national attention.
Students, chanting "Hey, hey, ho, ho, Western civ has got to go," charged that the reading list reflected the values of a white male, Western power structure and demanded books that recognized the interests of women, minorities and the Third World.
Stanford broadened its reading list. 

Mrs. Cheney, a tough-minded, politically adept conservative, threw herself into the debate, noting that "our society, like all societies, depends for its cohesiveness on common knowledge." 

Richard Rosser, president of the National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities, says he finds the poll results "appalling" but doesn't necessarily see them as an indictment of college education. "She's trying to focus on what she thinks we ought to do in college, but practically everything she's talking about is basic knowledge students should have learned in high school," he says. 

At the college level, he says, "there is no common agreement around the country about what you would call a core.
Some people today would argue that the core ought to be 50% aimed at dealing with international issues." 

In the 1960s and 1970s, many colleges and universities relaxed course requirements.
They argued that students learned more -- and teachers taught better -- when they were in classes out of choice rather than compulsion.
But in recent years, the tide has begun to turn back to more structure as national concern about the quality of U.S. education has increased.
This trend is likely to continue.
At President Bush's education summit last month, the administration and the nation's governors agreed to draft national performance standards for public schools. 

What College Seniors Don't Know 

A multiple choice test given to a nationwide sample of 696 college seniors last spring revealed that: 

-- 60% couldn't recognize the definition of Reconstruction, the period that followed the Civil War. 

-- 58% couldn't identify Plato as the author of "The Republic." -- 54% didn't know that "The Federalist Papers" were written to promote ratification of the U.S. Constitution. 

-- 44% didn't know that Herman Melville wrote "Moby Dick." 

-- 42% couldn't identify the Koran as the sacred text of Islam. 

Source: The Gallup Organization Inc. 

