.START 

National City Corp. is having a strong profit year because of a wider-than-normal spread in interest rates and good economic conditions in its Ohio and Kentucky service area, Edward B. Brandon, chairman and chief executive officer, said. 

Mr. Brandon said the bank-holding company will report third-quarter profit of $1.05 to $1.10 a share, up from $59.1 million, or 97 cents a share, a year earlier. 

For the full year, management is "comfortable with Street estimates of $4.30 to $4.40 a share," Mr. Brandon said.
That would indicate 1989 net income of $260 million to $265 million, up 12% to 14% from 1988 net of $233.2 million, or $3.84 a share. 

The spread between National City's interest income on loans and its cost of funds was particularly favorable in the first half, officials said.
The decline in the prime rate at the end of July resulted in lower margins recently, they said, and there has been some slowing in loan growth.
Nonetheless, the outlook continues favorable, they said. 

Reduced charges for credit-card loan losses will increase 1989 profit by $8 million to $10 million, officials said, and the company expects to get a similar profit increase in 1990 as credit-card losses continue to drop. 

In a wide-ranging interview, Mr. Brandon and William R. Robertson and David A. Daberko, deputy chairmen, outlined National City's strategy for increasing profit over the next five years.
The strategy includes: 

Continued cost reduction, particularly realizing savings possible because of the merger last year of First Kentucky National Corp. into National City. 

Acquisition of thrift institutions as a way to increase the company's market share in areas it already serves. 

And boosting fee income to 50% of revenue, from the current about 33%.
The opportunity to increase fee income, which includes trust services, mortgage banking and transaction processing, was one of the attractions of the First Kentucky merger, said Mr. Robertson, who is responsible for the fee-producing businesses. 

Management remains confident National City can realize savings and revenue increases from the merger of First Kentucky that will more than offset the dilution in earnings per share resulting from the merger, Mr. Brandon said.
However, it is likely to take a little longer to accomplish that objective than originally expected, he said. 

The merger reduced National City's 1988 earnings per share nearly 9%, he said.
Originally, management expected to realize within three years more than $20 million of after-tax profit from savings and revenue increases directly related to the merger, Mr. Brandon said.
The goal was $4 million in 1988, $12 million in 1989 and $6 million in 1990, he said. 

Currently, the company estimates it obtained $2.5 million of profit related to the merger last year and will get $7.5 million to $8.5 million this year, he said.
Management expects to obtain a further $12 million in 1990, he said, and additional benefits will be realized in 1991 and subsequent years. 

One major element of the cost-reduction program, standardizing the system for managing checking and savings accounts, will be completed by mid-1991, he said, a few months later than originally expected. 

However, it will be difficult next year to show an improvement in the interest margin between loan rates and the cost of funds, said Mr. Daberko, who is responsible for banking operations.
The Federal Reserve Board in the 1989 first half kept short-term interest rates relatively high in relation to intermediate and longer rates, he said.
Many of National City's commercial and consumer loans have variable rates tied to prime or other short-term interest rates, he said.
The cost of funds, however, reflects longer-term rates on certificates of deposit, he said. 

On the other hand, the company next year will have less competition for deposits from ailing thrift institutions "paying whatever they have to for deposits to stay alive," he said. 

Also, commercial-loan growth next year may be higher than in 1989, he said.
Commercial loans at year end are likely to be 7% to 8% higher than the $7.99 billion of a year earlier, he said.
Although 1990 budgets haven't been completed, commercial loans may rise 8% to 12%, he said "with 10% a good guess." 

Consumer loans are likely to be 8% to 10% higher at year end than the $2.89 billion on Dec. 31, 1988, he said, but the growth rate has slowed recently and loan growth may continue at a slower rate in 1990.
Auto companies' finance subsidiaries appear to be increasing their share of the auto-financing business, partly through below-market interest rates, he said. 

National City expects to complete the acquisition of Gem Savings Association, Dayton, Ohio, by year end, Mr. Brandon said, bringing National City's total assets to nearly $24 billion. 

Gem, which has $1.6 billion of assets, will be operated as a thrift for about a year, he said.
Some or all Gem branches then will be converted to commercial-bank branches, he said. 

