.START 

Carena Developments Ltd. said it agreed to join BCE Inc. in an effort to bail out BCE's financially troubled real estate subsidiary with as much as 415 million Canadian dollars (US$352.8 million) of new capital. 

The plan will put Carena managers at the helm of BCE Development Corp. and give Carena a substantial equity stake in the company.
As a result of the proposal, BCE Development called off its previously reported plan to sell its U.S. real estate assets, which have a book value of about $1.4 billion. 

Gordon Arnell, president and chief executive of Carena, said BCE Development has "a lot of good projects and good assets across North America." He said, "What a company like BCED needs is a patient shareholder with a lot of capital." 

Carena is a real-estate developer controlled by Toronto Financiers Peter and Edward Bronfman.
BCE Inc. is a Montreal-based holding company with interests in telecommunications, gas and natural resources. 

The Montreal company has been trying unsuccessfully to unload the 67%-held real-estate subsidiary, which posted steep losses for the first half of this year.
Olympia & York Developments, a real estate concern owned by Toronto's Reichmann family, recently dropped a C$700 million bid for BCE Development when an insufficient number of shares were tendered. 

The announcement pushed up share prices for both BCE Inc. and its subsidiary.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday, BCE Inc. closed at $36.675 a share, up $1.
In Toronto Stock Exchange trading Friday, BCE Development closed at C$1.89 a share, up 21 Canadian cents. 

Under the proposal, BCE Development shareholders will receive rights to acquire convertible preferred shares in the company.
A joint-venture company -- to be held 50.1% by BCE and 49.9% by Carena -- will ensure that the full C$415 million is raised, by buying up any rights that aren't subscribed for by the public, the companies said.
The plan requires approval by Canadian regulators and the board of BCE Development. 

Terms of the rights offer haven't been finalized, but Mr. Arnell said Carena will end up as "major shareholder" in BCE Development. 

BCE Development said its president and chief executive officer, Robert Naiman, resigned from the company to be replaced by Mr. Arnell.
BCE Inc. and Carena said they each will have the right to nominate four members to the 11-member BCE Development board and that three Carena managers will be assigned to the company to help draw up a turnaround strategy. 

