.START 

Bayer AG said it plans to more than triple its investment in research and development in biotechnology and genetic engineering within the next five years, but the company cautioned that it isn't expecting a quick payoff. 

"Genetic technology isn't a way to make money quickly," said Karl Heinz Buechel, head of research at Bayer. "We expect our {revenue} and earnings in that sector to develop slowly." 

As West Germany's third-largest chemical and pharmaceutical company after BASF AG and Hoechst AG, Bayer is fearful of falling behind in the accelerating race for new products in medicine and agriculture. 

Consequently, it plans to increase its annual research and development budget in biotechnology and genetic engineering to $265.1 million in the next five years from about $79.5 million this year. 

"Genetic technology is unavoidable for us out of pure economic reasons," Bayer Chairman Hermann Strenger said at a special forum on biotechnology earlier this month. "We must develop new technologies if we are to grow and remain competitive." 

Bayer also will double the capacity of its research center in West Haven, Conn., investing about $50 million by the end of 1991 and turning it into one of the world's largest such facilites, Mr. Strenger said. 

Analysts were encouraged by Bayer's announcement. "When a company of that size and brainpower invests heavily into research, that always spells good news for the company," said Kiran Bhojani, who follows chemicals and pharmaceuticals stocks for Shroeder, Muenchmeyer, Hengst Investment G.m.b.
H. in Frankfurt. "I think this strategy should work real well for Bayer, which is focused heavily on new pharmaceutical products." 

Company executives stress Bayer is prepared to wait for a payoff on its investment for at least 10 years.
According to a study done by the IFO research institute in Munich, the market world-wide for genetically engineered products is expected to soar tenfold to about $5.8 billion by 1995.
Companies using genetic technology will see sales gaining 10% to 20% a year, the IFO study said. 

Meanwhile, Bayer's world-wide sales of biotechnology products are expected to rise between 5% and 7% this year from more than $1.3 billion in 1988, Mr. Buechel said.
But growth will slow in the next few years until new products come on the market, Mr. Buechel predicted. 

Bayer is focusing on the most pressing of the world's health problems, targeting such ailments as diabetes, Alzheimer's disease, acquired immune deficiency syndrome and the common cold.
It also aims at developing diagnostic tools for early detection of cancer, arteriosclerosis and diabetes, and has intensified research into application of genetically engineered products in agriculture. 

The company doesn't have as yet any genetically engineered drugs on the market, although it is about to apply to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for permission to sell Factor-VIII, a blood-clotting agent developed by Genentech Corp. and licensed to Miles Inc., Bayer's U.S. subsidiary, for commercial production.
Clinical trials have shown the agent to be effective against hemophilia. 

Mr. Buechel said Bayer will apply to Japanese authorities for permission to market Factor VIII there sometime next year.
Preliminary reports from the Japanese medical community are "highly complimentary," he said.
Application to West German and other European authorities is also being considered. 

Horst Meyer, head of pharmaceutical research at Bayer, said that in the next two years more genetically engineered products are expected to be market-ready.
One is Acarbose, an anti-diabetes drug, the other is Dresylon, to be used in intensive-care therapy. 

At earlier stages of development are attempts to produce genetically engineered anti-shock agents Aprotinine and tumor necrosis factor antibodies, as well as to clone rhinovirus-receptors as a drug against the common cold, Mr. Meyer said. 

Bayer is also developing genetically improved plants, looking for ways to raise their resistance to herbicides and studying general plant defense mechanisms.
No marketable products however, are as yet available. 

Mr. Buechel stressed that while expanding its research capacity in the U.S. and later building a research and development center in Japan, Bayer will keep the research going strong in West Germany.
BASF AG got a jump on Bayer when it announced last year it was setting up a large research and development facility near Boston. 

Both Bayer and BASF claim that West-German government support for development of genetic technology is far below that in the U.S. 

In 1987, the West German support for biotechnology and genetic engineering totaled $115 million, while the industry invested nearly $500 million.
That compares with $2.7 billion spent by the U.S. government in the same year on direct and indirect funding of research and development in that field, while the U.S. industry spent an additional $2 billion. 

