.START 

Mercury Grand Marquis 

Is a 'Hot' Make in Texas 

CAR THIEVES, like car buyers, have distinct regional preferences. 

In New York, Toyota Cressidas are especially hot.
The state has less than 10% of the nation's Cressidas, but 58% of the large theft claims for the vehicle, says the Highway Loss Data Institute, an Arlington, Va., group funded by the insurance industry. (A large theft claim is defined as more than $10,000.) 

The most stolen vehicle in California: a 1988 Hyundai Excel.
But the thieves appear to be after radios rather than the cars.
Over 90% of stolen Excels are recovered, often with radios missing. 

Texas car thieves, particularly those near the Mexican border, like to steal cars that are in demand in Mexico.
These include Ford and Chevy pickups, such full-sized cars as the LTD Ford Crown Victoria and Mercury Grand Marquis, and the Volkswagen GTI and Jetta. 

Nearly 80% of large theft claims for the Grand Marquis come from Texas, although the state has only about 7% of U.S. registrations for the vehicle, says the Highway Loss Data Institute. 

El Paso, the state's largest border city, loses some 300 to 400 vehicles a month across the border.
The vehicles often are driven to Mexico within minutes of being stolen, says Sgt. Dave Connor of the El Paso Police Department. 

At least one El Pasoan scanned local police reports for seldom-stolen cars before buying.
Richard Teschner, a modern languages professor at the University of Texas at El Paso, did that before picking a Honda Civic to replace his Volkswagen GTI that was swiped two years ago. 

Some Car Warranties 

Extended -- Just in Japan 

FIVE MAJOR Japanese automakers have extended their engine and transmission warranties in Japan, but only one has a comparable warranty in the U.S. 

Toyota Motor Corp., Nissan Motor Co., Mazda Motor Corp., Honda Motor Co. and Mitsubishi Motor Corp. recently increased their warranty period in the Japanese market for engine, transmissions and other parts to five years or 100,000 kilometers (62,000 miles).
Previously, the warranties had been for three years or 60,000 kilometers. 

A few weeks earlier, Toyota had put a five-year, 60,000-mile "power train" warranty on cars and trucks sold in the U.S.
But other Japanese manufacturers haven't followed suit. 

"We don't feel it's necessary," says a Honda spokesman, explaining that his company counts on its reputation for trouble-free cars.
But Honda is re-examining its warranty in the wake of the Toyota decision.
It has only been a year since Honda increased its warranty on the entire car, not just the power train, to three years or 36,000 miles from just one year or 12,000 miles. 

Nissan estimates it would cost $50 to $60 per car to add a 60,000 mile power-train warranty on top of its much broader 36,000-mile basic warranty.
Thomas Mignanelli, executive vice president of Nissan's U.S. sales arm, says longer warranties aren't the key issue to most buyers, but do provide salesmen "a good closing tool" in the showroom. 

Can't Find a Town Car? 

Blame the Fancy Trim 

THE PRICIEST parking lot in the world may be in Woodhaven, Mich., where a shortage of trim parts has stranded $120 million worth of Lincoln Town Cars. 

Ford Motor Co. has been unable to ship about 4,100 of the 10,500 1990-model Town Cars it has built so far.
The problem: A shortage of trim, especially decorative moldings that skirt the car's sides along the bottom. 

"They've got eight or 10 of my cars tied up in the storage area without the molding," says David McAbee, a Lincoln-Mercury dealer in Orlando, Fla.
He has just two Town Cars in stock, a demonstration model and a showroom car.
Dealers are frustrated because the Town Car, Ford's biggest car, sells for about $30,000. 

"When it's all said and done, hopefully, this will be minor blip on the screen," a Ford spokesman says.
Another blip early this year forced Ford to delay shipments of more than 10,000 new Thunderbirds and Cougars.
The culprit in that instance: a squeaky bolt. 

The Little Lexus Falls 

Short of Sales Forecast 

TOYOTA'S LUXURY division is off to a good sales start, but buyers are yawning at the ES 250 model, the small car in the Lexus lineup. 

Lexus had figured 60% of sales would come from the LS 400, which starts at $35,000, and 40% from the ES 250, a sporty sedan with a base price of $20,050.
But so far, the ES 250 accounts for fewer than a fourth of the roughly 4,500 cars Lexus has sold. 

"Every article that's been written about Lexus for the last two years has zeroed in on the LS 400," says J. Davis Illingworth, vice president and general manager of Lexus. "The public isn't aware that we have a second car, the ES 250." 

The problem may run deeper.
The ES 250 has been criticized as being just a gussied up Toyota Camry.
Mr. Illingworth, naturally, disagrees, noting that the ES 250 has a different body style, interior and features package than the Camry.
But Toyota acknowledges that the two cars share the same chassis. 

Another problem: Consumers drawn to a Lexus dealership to look at expensive, prestigious cars may not even consider something with a price tag that's barely in the luxury class. 

Lexus plans to focus its advertising on the smaller car over the next two to three months.
Even so, Mr. Illingworth now predicts ES 250 will account for only about 30% of Lexus volume. 

