.START 

From the beginnings of European settlement on the North American continent, most educational philosophies and practices have migrated from east-to-west across the Atlantic.
In business education, however, this migration has tended to flow in the opposite direction.
Since World War II, American business schools, especially at the MBA level, have established a standard emulated throughout the world. 

Many European business schools founded during the past three decades have adopted this model, and many of the professors who teach in them were trained at U.S. universities.
But recently European business education has been undergoing an explosive growth, producing many new schools as well as new ways of conceptualizing, managing and delivering MBAs. 

The most evident difference between MBA schools in America and Europe is the institutional flexibility of the latter.
U.S. MBA programs, developed as part of already mature universities, emphasized research and teaching.
Further, American business schools are regulated by the American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business, which enforces uniformity of practice and standards.
Degree programs for full-time students have traditionally been the main product of these schools (continuing executive education for corporations has usually been a revenue-generating afterthought). 

In contrast, many of the best-known European business schools arose without a university base.
Schools such as IMEDE (the International Management Development Institute, recently merged with the International Management Institute) in Lausanne, Switzerland, and INSEAD (The European Institute of Business Administration) in Fontainbleau, France, have enjoyed neither the large endowments nor the taxpayer support of American universities.
This has forced them to focus on executive education, to stay close to their corporate constituents and to emphasize practice above research.
Moreover, no European accrediting body has been organized to standardize MBA education.
Because many European Community ministries of education do not recognize the MBA degree, schools can offer programs of widely varying duration, cost and quality. 

Some deans of U.S. business schools scoff at the European institutions.
But students and companies are expressing their preferences with their pocketbooks.
Applications to European MBA schools continue to swell, and expensive new buildings dot the landscape. 

Most striking to an American observer is the success that some European business schools have had in internationalizing their programs by creating an educational environment where no single national culture dominates.
This is accomplished through faculty-hiring and admissions policies, not through the launching of new courses and Ph. D. programs on international business, which have been the more typical American strategies. 

In their rapidly developing, largely unregulated market, European MBA schools also have come to understand the importance of product differentiation, a lesson largely ignored in the States.
American schools have responded in recent decades to the increasing demand for business education by copying the programs and policies of the industry's leaders.
Imitation is flattering, but when an under-funded small college tries to copy Harvard rather than developing its own unique program, quality on all fronts cannot help but suffer.
A far more logical strategic approach is to focus on one segment of the market as, for example, IMEDE has done in its attention to general-management, international executive education. 

Of course, the U.S. model has by no means lost all relevance.
University-based business research produces useful knowledge as well as obscure trivia.
Indeed, research is the one clear comparative advantage that educational institutions have over other competitors in the field of human-resources development.
The line between education and training is often a fine one, and European business schools should continue to ensure that the value they can provide is different from that of consulting firms and in-house corporate training programs. 

Regarding business education, what is needed today is a constant, simultaneous flow of ideas across the Atlantic in both directions: west-to-east and east-to-west. 

Mr. Schmotter teaches international business at Cornell University's Johnson Graduate School of Management. 

