.START 

Margaret Thatcher last month announced her support for the primitive tribes of the rain forest, declaring they had a oneness with their environment that Western man had lost.
This, a comment that Prince Charles might have made, was one in a series of speeches and proposals that have led political commentators to talk about the Greening of Maggie.
Such observers, including the London Times, have concluded that she has adopted the environmentalist, or "Green," view of world affairs. 

The public process began at a seminar at Downing Street on the so-called Greenhouse Effect.
The Environment Ministry subsequently was handed to a well-known former "wet," Chris Patten; stronger anti-pollution legislation has been placed on the agenda; and this week's Conservative Party Conference is to devote considerable attention to environmental issues. 

Is this a major turnaround in Tory policies and a signal to U.S. conservatives, who have been consistently hammered on such matters?
Certainly it would seem a break from a Thatcher revolution that has stressed harsh economic realities, value for money, and the new brutalism of monetarism.
Polls show that the Labor Party is still seen as a more reliable protector of the environment, and Labor politicians have hooted at the thought of Mrs. Thatcher actually spending money on a general cleanup. (Not that the old left, with its emphasis on resource-wasting heavy industry, has reason to crow.) 

How deep is her Greenness?
It would appear to be of a moderate hue.
Certainly, the seminar on possible future damage to the climate galvanized Mrs. Thatcher into action.
Rapid, imperious but pragmatic problem-solving does, indeed, characterize the Thatcher technique, though the decisions are often hampered by slothful ministers.
Furthermore, there is every political reason to support environmental causes, in Britain as in the U.S. 

Grass-roots opinion has been increasingly mobilized.
The 15% vote for the British Green Party in the recent European election was an unprecedented gesture from a group of voters, largely young and middle-class, who suddenly saw that the countryside, clean air and drinkable water were no longer reliable facts of life.
And although polls show that Green support has dropped to below 9%, more than 5% of Britons are enrolled in various environmental action groups. 

Some Tories feel that environmentalism is an old conservative ideal, and resent its hijacking by the New Left, who as "Red-Greens" now wield the muscle in the Green Party.
However, elements of the environmental package deal, which is anti-nuclear, anti-American, anti-NATO and anti-men, are not assimilable into Conservative Party politics. 

Since the EC election, besides, feeling gradually has hardened against the Greens from non-Tories, particularly from the new center parties that compete for the protest vote.
To them, too, the Greens are simply the Reds in a new guise, the poor man's Marxism stripped of difficult jargon and class warfare.
Feminism takes on a new coloration, too, with the Greens using environmental arguments to attack the patriarchal, white capitalist world.
Similarly, the environment functions for numerous U.S. leftists as a proxy for discredited socialist aspirations. 

When it comes to proclaiming the moral evils of importing bananas and peanuts, or the otherwise exploitative nature of world economic growth -- two Green crusades -- environmentalists will be making a mistake if they pin their hopes on Mrs. Thatcher.
She will take on single issues, and may even play a major role in spurring world action, just as Britain did with the slave trade in the 19th century.
But she will never accept global environmentalism, with its apocalyptic message. 

What she does stress is that material prosperity is needed to pay for acid-rain prevention and the cleaning up of polluted beaches, and that nuclear power is cleaner than coal.
Here the prime minister has been influenced by the experience of Eastern Europe, where pollution rages so unchecked that Sweden is paying the Polish government to clean up the Polish rivers that have turned the Baltic into a dead sea.
In ironic contrast to many of their Western counterparts, environmentalists in Eastern Europe blame socialism and the lack of property rights for their ills. 

Mrs. Thatcher can show that the "Victorian values" that she supports have room for some types of environmental ideals; the Victorian era produced John Ruskin as well as factory chimneys.
The Victorians thought long term, planting trees for their grandchildren to see, and above all they cared for saving energy and reusing resources -- "Waste not, want not." Suggestions for "polluter pays" taxation have been enthusiastically supported by the libertarian end of the British Conservative Party, just as in North America.
Mrs. Thatcher's trenchant adoption of this issue may end up averting more damaging splits between that wing and those in the party belonging to the paternalist tradition. 

However, the prime minister's approach to specific environmental problems is not likely to placate hard-line Greens.
Indeed, they see it as worse than useless.
It merely tinkers with the problem and induces a belief that something has been achieved, which they feel cannot be done without abandoning industrial society in its present form and accepting draconian interference in people's lives.
Environmentalism for them is not just cleaning up Europe's acid rain or saving the odd whale or two; it is a total change in everything from sexual habits (away from procreation and male dominance) to eating habits. 

This seems at first a shadow of the old argument between revolutionary Marxists and those who supported peaceful change.
But it is also about the true nature of Green support, which includes a powerful but unstructured belief in the wrongness of present-day life.
When ecological philosophers such as Arne Naess argue that man should be rooted in the land, and that threatened cultures are superior to the dominant Western model, they are enunciating a radical revolt against far more than sewage on the beaches or the possible melting of the polar icecap. 

In British politics today, just as across the Atlantic, the old division between wets and dries is no longer a clear-cut one.
The new political division is between limited-growth policies and a commitment to prosperity.
And here there can be no doubt as to where Mrs. Thatcher stands. 

Ms. Bramwell, a past fellow at Oxford's Trinity College, wrote "Ecology in the 20th Century" (Yale University Press, 1989). 

