.START 

An investigation has found widespread plutonium-handling problems at the Rocky Flats nuclear-arms plant near Denver and has faulted the Energy Department and Rockwell International Corp., which ran the facility, for "complacency" and "poor communication on safety matters." 

A summary of the investigation, released Friday by Rep. David Skaggs (D., Colo.), concluded that there never has been an uncontrolled nuclear reaction at Rocky Flats -- a potentially cataclysmic event called a "criticality." But, the report said, "criticality accidents are a real possibility." Rockwell and the Energy Department, the report added, haven't operated the plant "as safely as it can and should" be. 

Late last month, a besieged Rockwell announced that it was leaving Rocky Flats in the middle of its contract, and turning over the plant to Wellesley, Mass.-based EG&G Inc. 

The criticality investigation, conducted at the request of Energy Secretary James Watkins by an Idaho Falls, Idaho, company called Scientech Inc., made numerous recommendations aimed at improving the plant's safety program.
And in a memo dated Oct. 4 to his staff, Mr. Watkins directed that "an action plan responsive to these findings and their identified root causes" be prepared within 60 days. 

Nonetheless, Rep. Skaggs said: "This is at least the seventh report I've received from DOE in the last three years that says Rocky Flats suffers from lax safety attitudes and poor operating and management practices -- and that also admits things just aren't improving.
We've gotten plenty of reports but far too little action in implementing them." 

A spokesman for Rockwell said yesterday that after the Energy Department released the preliminary results of the criticality study in August, the company "took steps to respond to the deficiencies mentioned." But he said he couldn't comment on the final draft because Rockwell hasn't had a chance to evaluate it. 

For months, Rockwell has been blasted repeatedly for its work at Rocky Flats, one of the nation's 17 primary bomb plants and the only facility that currently supplies plutonium and the plutonium triggers that detonate thermonuclear warheads.
In June, federal agents raided the top-secret factory, accusing the company of violating various pollution-control laws. 

Then a fortnight ago, Rockwell sued the Energy Department, Justice Department and Environmental Protection Agency, claiming that it was being victimized by a regulatory wrestling match between various governmental bodies. 

Immediately thereafter, the El Segundo, Calif., defense contractor said it was exiting Rocky Flats in a mutual agreement with the Energy Department.
Since then, however, the department has said it essentially ousted the company because it was -- in the words of Deputy Secretary W. Henson Moore -- "fed up" with Rockwell's conduct and not satisfied that it was willing to make sufficient environmental, safety and health improvements. 

In any case, the Scientech report should give Rocky Flats personnel, who are expected to be retained under EG&G, plenty to think about. 

Specifically, the investigation cited "an absence of healthy inquisitiveness into safety matters" at Rocky Flats among Rockwell and Energy Department employees.
And, it added, those workers who were interested in offering feedback "were apparently afraid to raise their concerns to their own supervisors." 

Among other things, the investigation discovered a dangerous level of plutonium accumulation in various exhaust ducts in manufacturing buildings at Rocky Flats.
The report pointed out that "previous to this study, plant managers had insisted that this. . . . was not happening," despite warnings from a Rockwell engineer named James Stone. 

Mr. Stone, who was fired by Rockwell in 1986, contends he was let go because he tried to blow the whistle on safety problems at the plant.
The company has maintained he was laid off as part of a normal reduction in its work force.
The dispute is the subject of a pending lawsuit. 

Rose Gutfeld contributed to this article. 

