.START 

One of the New York Stock Exchange's major post-crash reforms -- its new stock-basket trading product -- is getting a faint reception from Wall Street securities firms. 

Only four firms have signed on as market makers for the Big Board's new trading tool: First Boston Corp., Morgan Stanley & Co., PaineWebber Group Inc., and Salomon Brothers Inc. Conspicuously absent are some of the other biggest Wall Street trading firms. 

The so-called Exchange Stock Portfolio is a basket of all the Standard & Poor's 500 stocks.
The stock basket is the Big Board's answer to a number of post-crash studies that called for a link between the stock-index futures and the stock market.
Unlike trading an S&P 500 stock-index future, a buyer or seller is actually dealing in the stocks.
Trading in the stock basket is scheduled to start Oct. 26, if the basket gets Securities and Exchange Commission approval. 

But traders say major securities firms are reluctant to become market makers because they fear the basket product may attract only limited trading.
That would leave market makers with little or no chance to cover costs and make money. 

Indeed, the Big Board expects a slow start for the new product.
Since the smallest trade in the basket is $5 million, traders think the basket will be used only by a relative handful of big institutions. 

If, as traders fear, stock baskets attract little customer interest, that would leave market makers less room to get out of unwanted positions.
A market maker would have to buy stock baskets from a seller if there are no other buyers, and sell if there are no other sellers.
Moreover, some traders say S&P 500 index futures already give institutions and others a way to trade the stock market as a whole. 

Absent from the list of market makers for the Big Board's new stock-basket product are big trading firms Bear Stearns Cos., Goldman, Sachs & Co., Kidder, Peabody & Co. and Merrill Lynch & Co. Officials at Goldman Sachs were unavailable, and executives at the other firms declined to comment. 

Among the absentees, "each firm has a different reason" for not participating, said Donald Solodar, senior vice president at the Big Board.
He said Merrill Lynch and Kidder Peabody still have an interest in becoming market makers.
Even with only four market makers, he said, "we are not disappointed." 

Getting stuck with positions shouldn't be a problem for market makers, said Mr. Solodar.
The stock baskets can be broken apart and sold as individual stocks. 

Several big Wall Street firms such as Kidder are active program traders.
Theoretically, big program traders should love the exchange's new product, which is a program trading superhighway.
Program traders rapidly buy and sell big baskets of stock with offsetting trades in stock-index futures.
Program traders currently route hundreds of orders to buy or sell individual stocks through the Big Board's specialist system electronically in their effort to lock in a price difference between futures and stocks. 

Now they can buy or sell the entire S&P basket in one shot.
And the basket product isn't governed by the exchange's "uptick rule," which says a stock can only be sold short when it is trading at a price higher than the previous trade.
Some program trading strategies call for short selling. (In a short sale, a borrowed security is sold with the intent of buying it back at a cheaper price later.) Exchange officials add that trading costs are a bit cheaper if a program trader uses the basket. 

But even some of the big program trading firms are wary of yet another stock basket product.
Two basket instruments, one at the Philadelphia Stock Exchange and the other at the American Stock Exchange, were shut down earlier this year in a regulatory dispute.
That shouldn't be a problem this time, however, since regulators have agreed that the Big Board's stock basket is a security, not a future. 

In developing the basket, the Big Board also is trying to ease into electronic stock trading, recapture business that's running to foreign markets such as London, and bring program trading under its own regulatory roof. 

One individual familiar with the exchange said this is the first time an electronic trading system has been developed that doesn't serve the Big Board's specialists.
A group of Big Board floor brokers, the Alliance of Floor Brokers, already have fired off a testy memorandum to the SEC criticizing the stock basket as risky and not in the interest of the public.
They griped that the most frequent users of the tool will be "index arbitrage trading desks of the brokerage houses, continuously attempting to wring a nickel out of the difference in rules between markets." 

But regulators would rather have program traders blasting orders through the basket market than the specialists. 

"The primary thrust of the system is to make sure that large program trades get handled by firms that are capitalized in the billions, rather than specialists that are only capitalized in the millions," said Howard Kramer, assistant director of the SEC's division of market regulation. 

