.START 

After a two-year boom, the European steel industry is facing up to a slight softening in local demand and potentially weaker prices, focusing attention on tactics needed to absorb the expected downturn. 

Those tactics are likely to involve a fine-tuning of strategies already in place, rather than the big restructurings many of Europe's giant steelmakers engaged in during the leaner years of the past decade. 

Reflecting this, executives attending this week's world steel industry conference in West Berlin see their companies moving cautiously into joint ventures and acquisitions to help fill specialty market niches. 

European steelmakers say their approach to the removal of internal European Community trade barriers at the end of 1992 will be less flamboyant than those seen elsewhere, notably banking, insurance and food retailing. 

"We've carried out a major restructuring and turned the group around," said Robert Scholey, chairman of British Steel PLC. "Now we are concentrating on developing our markets and products." 

In the past two years steel demand in Europe has soared, helping convert some of Europe's feeblest steelmakers into profit-making concerns.
Steel, once the scourge of investment analysts, has enjoyed a temporary place in the limelight, with lively demand from the construction and automobile industries underpinning the surge. 

But steel consumption in both industries has peaked, analysts say.
The downturn will force steelmakers to accelerate their efforts to improve margins by improving the quality and range of products.
As this involves considerable capital expenditure, the advantage will go increasingly to the companies with the strongest balance sheets. 

The International Iron & Steel Institute forecast that EC steel consumption, while on a slight uptrend in 1989 compared with 1988, would slip around 2.8% to 120 million tons in 

Though the drop isn't steep enough to be called a slump, analysts say the hidden danger is that a small retreat in consumption could trigger a nasty price war.
Because steel and its raw components trade like commodities, fluctuations in prices could be severe. 

Prices of some products, such as the previously buoyant stainless steel market, already show signs of wilting, with several European steelmakers expecting declines as great as 10%. 

British Steel recently closed its stainless steel division for several days, indicating slackening demand from the stock holding sector.
West German steel group Thyssen AG last month cut overtime work at its stainless steel unit. 

A number of other core products, such as galvanized (reinforced) coil, and flat steel products have also seen a weakening in demand, some European companies say. 

Indeed, British Steel's Mr. Scholey said U.K. steel demand "showed signs of cooling." Italy's state-owned Ilva S.p.
A. said last month it expects a 14.4% decline in domestic steel demand up to 1992. 

Some analysts, however, are confident that demand for steel will remain fairly stable in the run-up to 1992.
Peter Fish, head of steel analysis group Meps (Europe) Ltd., sees a period of quiet equilibrium ahead.
He reckons Europe's "pent-up need for a stronger infrastructure" will serve to underpin demand.
In support, Mr. Fish cites plans for a high-speed pan-European rail network, updated subway systems, and new airport developments. 

If and when the slowdown does bite, Europe's steelmakers will find themselves in relatively uncharted waters.
The previously protective hand of the EC has now been withdrawn. 

Before July 1988, the EC operated quota arrangements that set limits on company production, thereby helping to avert a price war during a market downturn.
Under new EC guidelines, quota measures would only be reintroduced in the event of a "manifest crisis." 

Against this uncertain background, Europe's steelmakers are readying for 1992. "We'll see a lot of joint ventures across borders in coming years, but it's unlikely there will be any major acquisitions of steel producers," says analyst Jim Lennon of Shearson Lehman Hutton International in London. 

British Steel announced Thursday that it is buying C. Walker & Sons (Holdings) Ltd, a U.K. steel-stock holder, for #330 million ($532 millilon), to help improve its distribution network for finished products and complement its existing stock holding operations in the U.K., Continental Europe and North America. 

More adventurously, Salzgitter AG, the state-owned West German steelmaker that is being sold to West German metals, energy and trading concern Preussag AG, is looking to the Eastern bloc to strengthen business.
At the recent Leipzig trade fair the company signed an agreement with the East German government on a long-term trading pact.
Currently, around 20% of Salzgitter's sales are from the Eastern bloc. 

