.START 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. said it expects to report a gain of about $550 million in the fourth quarter from the $1.1 billion sale of its theme parks. 

The Orlando, Fla., publishing and insurance concern also said it expects to take a charge of $130 million in the third quarter for various write-offs, related primarily to debt acquisition costs and publishing products that are being dropped or redirected. 

Harcourt declined to estimate results for the third and fourth quarters.
In the year-earlier fourth quarter Harcourt had a loss of $53.8 million on revenue of $253.3 million.
For all of 1988 it had a loss of $53.5 million on revenue of $1.27 billion. 

Harcourt emphasized that cash flow from publishing and insurance operations will be "entirely sufficient to pay cash interest obligations for the foreseeable future." It also said it has no intention at this time to sell more assets. 

The company, which last year saddled itself with a huge debt in a recapitalization to fend off a takeover attempt by British publisher Robert Maxwell, said it was releasing financial details after inquiries from shareholders and analysts about Harcourt's future prospects. 

Harcourt's stock price has been spiraling downward from $16.25 a share Sept. 28 when it announced the theme park sale at a price that disappointed many analysts and shareholders.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange Friday, Harcourt closed at $8.875 a share, down 75 cents in heavy volume. 

In an interview, John F. Berardi, senior vice president and treasurer of Harcourt, said the company believes "the price for the parks was a good one," and noted that prior to the sale, many published articles had miscalculated that the parks would fetch unrealistically high prices. "Some of those numbers would have been 20 or 25 times cash flow," he said. 

The company said that as a result of the sale to Anheuser-Busch Cos., it expects that "income in coming years will greatly benefit." It said operating profit from parks would be about $65 million for 1989, whereas the interest savings in selling the parks is about $115 million. "It's a positive move for cash flow," Mr. Berardi. "We're giving up $75 million in cash flow but picking up $115 million in reduced interest expense." 

Harcourt also said it expects operating profit from its university and professional publishing and insurance operations to be on budget for 1989. 

However, it added, school publishing will fall short of targets for the third quarter and the year.
It wouldn't quantify the shortage, which it attributed to sharply lower public funding for textbooks and instructional materials in August and September and to excessive expenses and lower sales in elementary school publishing. 

The company also said that the integration of operations of Harcourt and Holt, Rinehart & Winston last July 1 will pare capital expenditures for 1990 through 1994.
It said expense reductions from improved marketing and redirection and other areas will total about $30 million in 1990. 

