.START 

The Bush administration is hoping to sell a large arms package to Saudi Arabia.
It is not clear, however, that the Saudis will use these weapons for solely defensive purposes.
The country has been pursuing a less than benevolent foreign policy toward some of its smaller Arab neighbors.
If this continues, U.S. interests could be hurt. 

Such Saudi aggressiveness toward its neighbors had occurred during the '50s, '60s and early '70s, but had ceased during the Iran-Iraq War.
Interviews with high-level U.S. and Arab officials, however, reveal that since the war's end last year, Saudi Arabia has taken hostile actions toward Oman and the two Yemens. 

Oman's information minister, Abd-al-Aziz Al-Rowas, told me that the Saudis have revived their claims to Omani territory and that there have been armed clashes along the two countries' common border.
In addition, he said the Saudis have begun supporting opposition groups in Oman.
A U.S. diplomat in Muscat confirmed this and explained that one of the opposition groups had waged an abortive rebellion (also with Saudi backing) in northern interior Oman during the late 1950s.
The Saudis have also renewed support to the Dhofaris of southern Oman, whom they helped in the mid-1960s. 

In addition, a North Yemeni parliamentarian told me that the Saudis have presented claims to territory near Mareb, where oil recently was discovered.
He further indicated that there have been a number of border clashes between the two countries.
The Saudis also are helping certain tribes to resist the authority of the central government.
U.S. officials confirmed these reports too. 

Finally, North Yemeni and U.S. officials told me there have been border clashes between Saudi Arabia and Marxist South Yemen.
The Saudis apparently have extended their administration to certain villages the South Yemenis had ruled. 

The Saudis may be backing Omani opposition groups not to overthrow the Sultanate, but to make it seek Saudi support for its survival. 

Saudi hostility toward North Yemen appears to have been triggered by Riyadh's fear that this poor but populous country could pose a security threat if it finds itself awash with oil.
Thus the Saudis have revived claims to Yemeni territory where the oil was discovered. 

Saudi aggressiveness toward Marxist South Yemen has been made possible by continued political and economic paralysis following this country's civil war of 1986. 

Saudi Arabia's moves could have some unfortunate consequences.
Riyadh can easily foment unrest in these smaller neighbors, but may be unable to control it.
Rebellion could spill over into Saudi Arabia.
The U.S.S.R., Iran and Iraq may see this as an invitation to meddle. 

The Saudi bad-neighbor policy hurts U.S. interests too.
Oman is the only Arabian Peninsula country willing to provide military facilities for the U.S. Rapid Deployment Force.
Saudi hostility toward Marxist South Yemen comes when Washington is on the verge of re-establishing diplomatic ties, which probably would result in the regime letting American oil companies join their European rivals in developing its newly found oil fields.
Finally, if North Yemen perceives the U.S. to be supporting Saudi hostility, it might ask for increased Soviet military assistance -- not what we or the Saudis want. 

What can the U.S. do?
Threatening not to sell arms would be counterproductive, since the Saudis can afford to buy arms wherever they choose.
Diplomatic efforts aimed at getting Saudi Arabia to end its hard-line policy toward its neighbors might be more effective.
This is because, as a Saudi diplomat in Washington told me, the policy's efficacy is hotly debated within the Saudi leadership. 

If American diplomacy is unsuccessful in moderating Saudi policy toward its neighbors, however, then Washington should consider publicly expressing concern about Saudi actions and providing increased security assistance to Oman and North Yemen.
Washington should not remain idle when Saudi policies hurt our, as well as their own, interests. 

Mr. Katz, an assistant professor of government at George Mason University, is a fellow at the U.S. Institute of Peace. 

