.START 

We fear that the damage from the failed coup against Panamanian chief thug Manuel Noriega will prove more far-reaching and more lasting than President Bush's administration so far seems to suspect.
As more is learned of the events, they emerge as a study in American indecisiveness and irresolution.
Like the Bay of Pigs a generation ago, it's likely to be taken by friend and foe as a measure of a new President's mettle. 

Ronald Reagan's presidency profited from quick definition in two early events -- the PATCO strike and the Gulf of Sidra.
The Reagan crowd proved willing to go to the mat with the air controllers, despite their ability to wreak massive public inconvenience.
Whatever the lasting damage from firing recalcitrant strikers, it was surely a demonstration of will noticed around the world. 

Similarly, seven months into the Reagan presidency, U.S. F-14s summarily shot down two Libyan fighters that foolishly challenged them over the Mediterranean bulge claimed by Col. Gadhafi.
The hapless tactics of the attackers suggest they were sacrificed for the specific purpose of testing what rules of engagement had been issued to U.S. forces.
There was a flap because President Reagan was not even awakened, but in our view this served to underline the message that he was not a President with whom to trifle. 

President Kennedy, by contrast, ordered the Bay of Pigs invasion to go forward, trusting advice that it would be an easy affair.
When the clutch developed, he refused air cover.
There were many good excuses: The plan had been left him by President Eisenhower, and perhaps was doomed from the start.
But the Kennedy administration never really recovered.
The young President's martyrdom obscures the debility of his governance, culminating in the sanction for the coup against Ngo Dinh Diem that condemned the U.S. to a major conflagration in Vietnam. 

President Bush had just encouraged the Panamanian military to rise against General Noriega, and committed enough support to dirty U.S. hands.
But his planners accepted optimistic assessments that the job could be done on the cheap.
His administration was not prepared or not willing to commit enough forces to ensure success in the clutch: General Noriega was actually in captivity for hours.
According to the remarkable chronology reported by Frederick Kempe of our Washington bureau, in the denouement, the U.S. stood by as its chief ally in the endeavor was coldly executed. 

It is, alas, a tale all too familiar to a succession of foreign leaders who put their trust in the U.S. -- Diem, President Thieu, the Shah, the Hmong tribesmen, the 1956 Hungarian freedom fighters, the British-French-Israeli leaders at Suez, the Contras, and now very likely Jonas Savimbi and the Afghan mujahideen. 

At the moment it seems that despite this sorry record the U.S. has managed to hold on well enough and long enough to realize its postwar objective of moderating the Soviet regime.
But Soviet military deployments continue to grow while the U.S. effort wanes, and the balance of will could still be tipped by too many reminders of the American waffling.
And even if the Soviets are tied down by their own problems, the message will not be missed by the brigands and freebooters who have so successfully claimed the right to raid the airlines and hold hostages like the Barbary pirates in the lawless days of yore. 

Beyond such immediate concerns, there is the not-so-trivial matter of presidential image.
President Bush has succeeded wonderfully in conveying the image of a man who, unlike his predecessor, could get things done without confrontation.
He has exploited Soviet difficulties without making too many commitments, he has managed to pre-empt Democratic issues with relatively little outlay, has successfully defended his "read my lips" position on taxes and stands on the brink of a capital-gains success. 

We largely subscribe to this assessment of the Bush presidency, but it remains highly vulnerable to a defining event like Panama.
After all, another record can be written: Mr. Bush has allowed a succession of his appointees to be thrashed by the Senate as Major Giroldi was executed in Panama.
Given a chance to reverse the growth of entitlements by repealing catastrophic-health insurance, the Bush administration's posture is somewhere between opposed and waffling.
It has signed up for untold environmental spending, including obvious boondoggles like ethanol.
The capital-gains victory may yet go aglimmering, and the tax pledge may prove a one-year flash in the pan.
Mr. Bush's Treasury is participating in a mindless assault on the U.S. dollar while his Transportation Secretary has assigned himself the bizarre task of stopping foreigners from buying the assets thereby underpriced.
At a stroke, people could start to ask who is in charge here. 

We read that the White House has chartered an assessment of what went wrong in Panama.
We hope it does not stop with the immediate technicalities, but takes full measure of the possible damage.
The problem is not that Noriega remains in Panama.
The problem is that the failure has opened a wound that puts blood in the water, and the piranha may start to swarm. 

