.START 

After months of relative quiet in which few major leases were signed, New York City's real estate market is ready to snap out of its lethargy, real estate brokers say. 

A handful of mega-deals are set to be signed in the next few months by corporations which had bided their time following the stock market crash two years ago.
Rupert Murdoch's News America Corp., Coopers & Lybrand, Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, Kidder Peabody, CBS Records/SONY and Chemical Bank are all searching for new headquarters complexes. 

"If all the deals being talked about actually happen this year, it will mean about 22 million square feet of new leases done in 1989," says Raymond O'Keefe, an executive vice president with Cushman & Wakefield, a real estate brokerage firm. "That's more square footage than downtown Los Angeles." 

Companies were concerned that real estate might follow the stock market in the wake of the 1987 crash.
As a result, many delayed location decisions until they could figure out just how much harm was caused by the crash. 

The dust has now settled and it appears that asking rentals have dropped by about $2 a square foot, said Lloyd Lynford, president of REIS Reports, a real estate research firm.
He said landlords are offering tenants less work-space improvements and offering longer periods of free rent. 

Mr. Lynford said the quantity of big transactions doesn't necessarily mean the Manhattan market is out of the post-Black Monday doldrums. "A lot of these deals are just musical chairs, with tenants moving from one existing building to another," he says. "Overall, I think the vacancy rates in the city (currently around 13%) will continue to rise." 

Still, for the top layer of real estate brokers business is booming, and it isn't only the securities industry that is fueling the expansion. 

Within the last two months, Polo Ralph Lauren Corp. signed a lease to move its headquarters to 650 Madison Ave. and RJR Nabisco Inc. agreed to move its headquarters from Atlanta to a midtown building that once housed the headquarters of J.C. Penney.
Joining RJR Nabisco will be Siemens Corp., a German company.
Also, the accounting firm Coopers & Lybrand and the law firm Dewey, Ballantine, Busby, Palmer & Wood are close to signing deals to move to the 45-story tower, according to real estate brokers. 

Rupert Murdoch's American empire, which includes magazines, newspapers and a television network, plans to consolidate its offices under one roof in what is expected to be the largest real estate lease of the year.
For the last few months, Murdoch representatives have been negotiating with Solomon Equities to occupy up to a million square feet in a northern Times Square office tower.
The two sides recently began negotiating once again after initial negotiations fell through.
Among the options being discussed, people close to the talks say, is for Mr. Murdoch to purchase the building from the developer. 

There will be another blockbuster deal when Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, a securities firm, settles on a new headquarters site.
The firm plans to vacate its downtown Manhattan office by 1992, leaving it little time to build or renovate a new site.
Among the possible new sites, real estate industry executives say, is the McGraw-Hill Building, which is owned in part by Rockefeller Group Inc. 

Rockefeller Group, which is planning to sell a major portion of its assets to outside investors, also may figure in the plans of Chemical Bank.
The bank's lease on its Park Avenue headquarters expires in 1994.
Last spring, Chemical terminated negotiations to move to the planned Times Square development project and it apparently believes its current landlord is asking too much rent to renew the lease.
Real estate brokers say the company is discussing the possibility of moving to a now-vacant site on the northern part of Seventh Avenue on a site owned by Rockefeller Group. 

"We had a meeting in our office last week and out loud we counted at least 10 million square feet worth of tenants in the market in midtown Manhattan alone," says Martin Turchin, vice chairman of the brokerage Edward S. Gordon Co. "You'd have to say the market is improving." 

