.START 

A group of Long Island pharmacists has launched its own drug war -- of sorts. 

The pharmacists claim that blank prescription forms, issued by group-health plans and so named because they don't have a physician's name embossed on them, are too simple to obtain.
Banning the blank forms and making it so that only doctors can supply prescription forms would help keep abusable drugs safely behind the pharmacist's counter, the druggists say. 

They also are concerned that people on limited budgets and in need of continuing medicinal treatment will skip office visits and forge their doctors' signatures on the blank forms.
The pharmacists, members of Long Island Pharmaceutical Society Inc., are also worried about their legal liability in honoring the forms.
But National Prescription Administrators Inc., the Clifton, N.J., company that promotes the forms, says the pharmacists simply don't want to do the extra paper work that the forms require. 

Last week, placards in hand and clad in white smocks, about 30 registered pharmacists converged on Entenmann's Inc. to protest the use of blank forms by one of the bakery's unions. 

"You don't give the public blank prescription pads because someday someone will utilize them" illicitly, says Ethan J. Saffer, a Port Jefferson, N.Y., pharmacist and president of the Long Island group. 

"They may wish to bypass the cost of an examination to obtain a prescription.
We see this as a form of drug abuse," he adds. (He says skirting a doctor's visit is most likely in the case of a geriatric patient, who has been on the same medication for many years.) 

"We would pick up any fraudulent use," says Howard Wild, vice president of professional relations at National Prescription. "I just don't see {falsification} as happening, and it has not happened in our experience." He says the pharmacists "don't want to comply with the paper work that a doctor-originated claim form entails." 

"I may be upset with the paper work, but that is an ancillary issue," counters Mr. Saffer, who adds that Medicare forms are much more lengthy. 

Mr. Saffer isn't able to recall any time when falsification occurred specifically because of the blank forms.
And he acknowledges that health plans like the one provided by National Prescription, which requires use of generic drugs in most cases and allows for mail-order purchase of drugs, cuts into pharmacists' revenue.
Mr. Saffer says neither is an issue in this complaint. 

"I can't understand where the pharmacists are coming from," says Dick Tineo, a spokesman for Local 3 of the Bakery, Confectionery & Tobacco Workers Union, which represents 1,250 bakers, packers and mechanics at Entenmann's. "Management, right away, thought it was something the union stirred up," he adds. 

Entenmann's, a subsidiary of General Foods Corp., White Plains, N.Y., declines to comment on the matter.
The pharmacists' group says it targeted a well-known company to drum up media coverage. 

About 250,000 workers in the New York metropolitan area have medical plans that use blank forms provided by National Prescription; these include about 50,000 New York City unionized workers and members of the union representing public school teachers.
National Prescription calls the forms "doctor-oriented claims forms." 

For its part, the New York State Board of Pharmacy doesn't have a problem with use of blanks. "The board has not been advised of widespread abuse of the forms," says Lawrence H. Mokhiber, executive secretary of the organization, an arm of the State Education Department. "It has always been traditional practice that the prescriber has his own blanks," but "the law is silent" on use of blanks, Mr. Mokhiber adds. 

The latest fuss isn't the first for the 500-member pharmacist group.
Mr. Saffer says "some people in pharmacy" consider the Long Islanders troublemakers for their loud objections at pharmacist conventions and for picketing a physician's office last year. (The doctor was among the first in the area to fill prescriptions directly from his office, rather than send patients to a drugstore.) 

No one denies that catching bogus prescriptions, no matter what type of form is used, is a continuing challenge for pharmacists, and certain procedures have been implemented to aid them in the battle. 

For example, when prescribing certain "potentially abusable" drugs, a physician is required to pen in his or her personal Drug Enforcement Administration code number on the prescription form.
The seven-digit code is actually a mathematical formula that a pharmacist can decipher for authenticity. 

Herbert Mindlin, a pharmacist who divides his time at several Nassau County pharmacies, says another test is checking for doctors' characteristic scrawl. "Sometimes if the writing is too clear," he says, "you get nervous." 

