.START 

Senate leaders and Bush administration officials met through the weekend to try to speed action on a massive deficit-reduction measure.
But the talks snagged on attempts by both sides to win a tactical advantage in the fight over the capital-gains tax. 

Senate Republicans want to use the deficit-cutting measure as the vehicle for a proposal to cut the rate at which capital gains are taxed.
The House version of the bill, approved last week, includes a capital-gains tax cut that was supported by President Bush. 

For their part, Senate Democratic leaders are seeking to delay and, perhaps, kill the capital-gains tax cut by getting an agreement to exclude it from the deficit-reduction bill. 

Meanwhile, a group of 10 to 15 Senate Democrats who favor cutting the tax are preparing their own proposal for consideration when the Senate debate begins. 

The weekend maneuvering has as much to do with GOP efforts to realize Mr. Bush's campaign pledge to cut the tax as it does with efforts by lawmakers in both parties to place the blame for the all but certain across-the-board spending cuts that would go into effect if the deficit-reduction legislation isn't signed into law by Sunday.
Most lawmakers expect the automatic cuts to be restored once the deficit-reduction legislation is enacted. 

For both sides to agree in the Senate, the House also would have to find some way to pare down its own deficit-reduction measure, which it overwhelmingly approved last week.
House leaders are expected to return to Washington for a meeting tomorrow. "We don't have an agreement yet, but everybody in there today thought we should get one," Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) told reporters. 

Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (D., Maine) suggested removing items that don't directly affect the deficit in order to expedite Senate action on the deficit-cutting bill, which is supposed to bring the fiscal 1990 budget deficit to within $10 billion of the $100 billion target set by the Gramm-Rudman law. 

White House Budget Director Richard Darman and Chief of Staff John Sununu recently torpedoed a similar offer House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) made to House Minority Leader Robert Michel (R., Ill.) before the House took up its version of the bill.
Since that was made public, Democrats have charged that Mr. Bush was more interested in cutting the capital-gains tax than in reducing the deficit. 

GOP lawmakers and Bush administration officials are willing to keep the capital-gains-cut provision off the deficit-reduction bill as long as they are guaranteed a speedy, separate vote on the issue. 

Democrats are unwilling to give the capital-gains provision special treatment.
They also insist that capital gains receive no better treatment than issues such as child care, which is in both the House and Senate deficit-reduction bills. 

The budget measures have become magnets for hundreds of provisions that don't have anything to do with reducing the deficit.
In fact, some of these provisions make the deficit worse by extending expiring tax breaks and creating new ones. 

These items threaten to delay House-Senate negotiators who must reconcile the two chambers' versions.
The congressional leaders fear this would result in a prolonged period in which the Gramm-Rudman cuts would be in effect. 

The House-passed capital-gains tax cut is widely disparaged by senators from both parties as a budget gimmick that raises revenue in the short run because of a fire sale of assets, but then loses revenue in the long haul.
That measure would lower the capital-gains tax rate to 19.6% through Dec. 31, 1991, and then increase it to 28%.
Gains on assets acquired after Dec. 31, 1991, and held for more than a year, would be indexed to inflation. 

In its stead, a group of Senate Democrats are preparing a plan that would give a permanent preferential rate to both individuals and, to a lesser extent, corporations.
The longer that assets are held, the bigger the tax break on the profit from their sale.
Some benefit would be given to currently held assets, but a larger advantage would be given to newly acquired assets.
The plan also would target a low tax rate to stock issued by small, start-up companies. 

In addition, Democrats who favor a capital-gains tax cut are considering expanding the deduction of individual retirement accounts, but not as far as a bill passed last week by the Senate Finance Committee.
The finance panel would allow people who aren't currently eligible to have partly deductible IRAs.
These Democrats would deny the deduction to couples who earn more than a set amount, say $60,000 annually.
Republicans are preparing their own capital-gains tax-cut plan.
Unlike the House version, it would give some benefit to corporations and also would provide a permanent rate differential.
But the 45 Republicans in the Senate will need Democratic support to approve a capital-gains tax cut, giving an advantage to the Democrats' plan, the details of which are still being worked out. 

But, no matter how the Senate budget talks conclude, it appears likely that proponents of a lower capital-gains tax will have to find 60 votes to pass their proposal in the Senate.
If the capital-gains tax provision is placed on another bill, opponents of the cut probably would filibuster, and 60 votes are needed to stop one -- a number that would be difficult for them to attain. 

