.START 

Harry Truman said the only thing new in the world is the history you don't know.
Except for the greatest events, we still don't know much of what in fact happened between 1939 and 1945.
It will probably take another generation to completely research and reflect on those six years when the world spun into chaos. 

In that short period of time, 55 million people were killed; human nature was revealed to be capable of greater depths of evil than ever imagined and also greater reserves of courage, endurance and compassion.
Within the autoclave of war, science and technology sped through a time warp.
Front-line air force squadrons fought in Gladiator biplanes in 1939 and in jet fighters in 1945. 

Norman Gelb demonstrates in his new book, "Dunkirk" (William Morrow, 352 pages, $22.95), how productive it is to focus on an individual operation or battle and to synthesize what is already known with new research. "Dunkirk" is both a good adventure read and an instructive case study yielding modern lessons.
History does not repeat itself, but patterns in history and human behavior certainly do. 

Despite the publisher's claim, Dunkirk was not necessarily "one of the most incredible and important military operations in history." It was a rout pure and simple: A catastrophe well earned by the stupidity of successive British governments under Ramsey McDonald, Stanley Baldwin and Neville Chamberlain.
It is still viewed by many in France as yet another example of Albion's perfidy in running instead of fighting.
British success lay solely in rescuing 365,000 soldiers. 

Mr. Gelb begins his book with a brief summary of the two decades between the wars.
Like Henry Kissinger and other modern scholars, Mr. Gelb considers the fatal turning point not Munich in 1938, but the failure by France and Britain to oppose German reoccupation of the Rhineland in 1936.
That decision was determined primarily not by flaccid statesmen but by incompetent generals.
Despite overwhelming French strength, both British and French generals and their staffs temporized, studied and ultimately recommended against action.
The Germans were astounded. 

Indeed the most interesting new insight into Dunkirk is the amazing failure of allied military leadership in the years between 1936 and 1940.
In histories of the period the weakness and self-delusion of politicians are well-chronicled -- that of generals, overlooked.
Military historians at Sandhurst and St. Cyr have perpetuated the myth that defeat was caused because of lack of equipment and too many ill-trained reservists.
In fact, as Mr. Gelb recounts, both French and British soldiers fought very well, and often with incredible valor.
As for equipment, the French actually had more combat aircraft when they surrendered than when they declared war.
But 20 years of peacetime had raised to the top of both armies men skilled in politics, bureaucracy and staff work, not leadership and audacity.
In fact they were very much like Western admirals and generals of today.
When war came they had no capacity to cope.
Among other things they forgot in their planning that, as Churchill acidly commented, occasionally it is necessary to take account of the enemy. 

Luckily for the allied forces, the German army was not free of "lounge lizards" of its own in the form of the general-staff bureaucracy back in Berlin.
As Gen. Guderian's panzers were driving to close off the evacuation corridor, the enraged commanders were suddenly ordered to stop the advance while the general staff studied the situation.
This provided the time to shore up a defensive corridor for the evacuation. 

Churchill, newly installed as prime minister, had his own general-staff problems.
The service chiefs viewed him as an eccentric not likely to last.
He wished to delay the end of the evacuation in order to rescue more French troops, but couldn't prevail against them. 

All these astonishing things Mr. Gelb tells us in a forceful narrative style with copious footnotes and quotations -- in fact too copious.
His editors deserve a caning.
The book would be better minus a hundred pages or so and trimmed of a few tanks rolling "relentlessly on" and pilots taking off "never to return." 

Day by day, Mr. Gelb takes us through to the evacuation on June 4.
It was a great feat of logistics, but had it been subjected to modern-day media coverage instead of the strictest censorship, the British will to resist probably would have been destroyed.
Dunkirk was an improvisation with thousands of pleasure and merchant craft helping the navy; chaos, collisions and casualties from friendly fire accompanied the great bravery and endurance.
The army savaged the RAF for lack of cover, and the navy for lack of organization.
The navy blasted the RAF for ceding air superiority over the English Channel to the "Luftwaffe," and the army for chaos on the beaches.
It is a monument to British pluck, His Majesty's media censors and Churchill's inspirational leadership that such a monstrous disaster did indeed become, in Mr. Gelb's words, "the first step in the defeat of Hitler." 

Mr. Lehman, former secretary of the Navy, is a managing director of PaineWebber Inc. 

