.START 

Ford Motor Co. received early federal clearance to increase its stake in Jaguar PLC, setting off furious trading in the British auto maker's shares. 

The U.S. Federal Trade Commission, in an unexpected move Friday, granted Ford's request for an early end to an antitrust review that was holding up Ford's plans to buy 15% of Jaguar. 

Officials with the No. 2 U.S. auto maker declined to say whether Ford immediately began acquiring large blocks of Jaguar's stock.
But market sources said Goldman, Sachs & Co. was aggressively buying the stock on Ford's behalf.
Goldman Sachs declined to comment on whether it was acting on Ford's account. 

Friday's frenzied trading was sparked by speculation about a potential bidding war for Jaguar.
About 13 million shares, or about 7% of the British luxury-car maker's shares outstanding, traded on London's stock exchange Friday.
The pace was far above Jaguar's usual daily trading volume of one million to two million shares.
The intense activity drove the price of Jaguar stock up 62 pence ($1), to 731 pence ($11.77) in late London trading. 

Jaguar also was the most actively traded stock on the U.S. over-the-counter market Friday, capping a week of heavy volume.
Nearly 4.6 million shares changed hands Friday, boosting Jaguar's price in the U.S. market 25 cents, to $11.875 a share. 

Ford's push to get early federal approval apparently was driven by the same motive that triggered the surprise announcement of its plans last month: a desire to beat arch-rival General Motors Corp. to the punch.
Ford tried to head off talks then going on between GM and Jaguar with its Sept. 19 announcement of plans to buy as much as 15% of the British luxury-car company.
Ford already had bought slightly more than 1% of Jaguar at the time of that announcement.
British government restrictions prevent any investor from buying more than 15% of Jaguar shares without government permission until Dec. 31, 1990. 

Ford's decision to secure an early U.S. clearance "suggests that Ford was definitely concerned about something brewing" between GM and Jaguar, said Stephen Reitman, European auto-industry analyst at London brokers UBS Phillips & Drew.
GM now must "accelerate their timetable as well," Mr. Reitman went on. "I think it's going to become a grudge match." 

For the first time, Jaguar hinted something may be afoot.
Ford's early clearance may "encourage somebody else to have a go" at Jaguar, said Arnold Bolton, a Jaguar spokesman.
Even if Ford has raised its stake to 15%, Mr. Bolton said, "I don't think it makes a difference, because we have already said they are unwelcome." 

Ford officials in Britain, meanwhile, reiterated their willingness to negotiate with Jaguar Chairman Sir John Egan. 

Some analysts predicted GM and Jaguar could strike a deal this week.
GM had no official comment, but people familiar with GM's strategy said the No. 1 auto maker is still weighing its options.
GM, it's understood, is deeply concerned that the recent run-up in Jaguar's stock price makes the auto maker not worth buying because of its weakened financial condition. 

Jaguar, meanwhile, is talking with several auto makers about a possible friendly partnership, and any agreement is likely to be struck within the next few weeks, people familiar with the situation said. 

Jaguar shares have gained 158 pence ($2.54) since last Monday and advanced more than 80% since Ford announced its intentions Sept. 19.
At current prices, Jaguar's market capitalization is about #1.33 billion ($2.14 billion).
Analysts estimate Jaguar's value in a takeover fight is between #6 and #10 a share. 

Some British auto-industry analysts think Ford may wait for the volatile Jaguar shares to settle down before purchasing the maximum 15% allowed under the British government restrictions.
Buying at current elevated share prices "will put them in a position where they {Ford} are going to have to pay that for the whole company," said John Lawson, an analyst at Nomura Research Institute in London. 

