.START 

Times have changed. 

That's what investors are finding as they explore ways to reinvest a $150 billion treasure-trove of certificates of deposit maturing this month. 

Most of those CDs were purchased six months or a year ago, when the investment climate seemed very different. 

Back in April, for instance, average CD yields were about a percentage point higher than they are now, and with a little looking it was possible to find double-digit yields.
A year ago the Dow Jones Industrial Average was still well below pre-crash levels, making it easy for investors to decide to play it safe in insured CDs. 

Now, however, the nearly 30% gain in stock prices over the past year leaves many of them wondering if they missed the boat.
And a cloudy interest-rate outlook adds to the uncertainty. 

What all this means is that lots of investors are facing some especially tough decisions.
So far, at least some of them are trying to hedge their bets -- rejecting CDs and stocks, and opting for bank money-market accounts and money-market mutual funds. 

October is one of the biggest months for CDs -- and CD investors -- for several reasons.
Such certificates were fully deregulated in October 1983, unleashing a flood of CD money, much of it in six-month and one-year deposits that have been rolled over into similar CDs as they matured. 

Investors pulling their cash out of the stock market after the October 1987 crash added to that flood.
Six-month certificates purchased every April, when people tend to make financial decisions related to income-tax preparation and refunds, increase the billions coming due this month. 

CD investors tend to be a predictable lot.
Eager for a relatively worry-free investment, they put their money in the bank and forget about it until their deposits mature.
Then they reinvest the proceeds in another CD, often the same maturity as the last.
By some estimates, as much as of 98% of maturing certificates are simply rolled over into new ones. 

This time, however, some of those usually predictable CD investors aren't rushing to roll over.
Norberto Mehl, chairman of Banxquote Money Markets, a New York information service, says several of the bankers and brokers he surveys each week are reporting that there's less demand for CDs than in the past two Octobers and less demand than they expected. 

Says Robert J. Hutchinson, senior vice president for retail marketing at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. in New York: "As is typical in a declining rate environment, people are putting their money in liquid accounts, waiting to see if rates go up again." 

Investors willing to do their homework can find some banks and thrifts offering CDs with yields around 8.5% -- or even a little higher.
For the most part, however, investors who got yields of more than 9% on six-month certificates last April are finding they can't do much better than 8% on a comparable deposit today. 

They're also finding that being willing to lock up their money for a longer period doesn't help much.
A year ago, the average yield on three-month CDs was 7.06%; but investors willing to commit their funds for five years got an average 8.51%.
Now, yields average about 8% across the board. 

Another difference this time around is that there is a smaller gap between yields on short-term CDs bought through major brokerage firms and the yields investors can get directly from a bank. 

In late April, investors buying six-month CDs through brokerage firms got yields averaging 9.80% -- almost three-quarters of a percentage point higher than the average yield on comparable certificates sold directly by banks.
Today, the difference has shrunk to less than half a percentage point -- 8.52% at brokerage firms vs. 8.13% at banks. 

What's behind the changes in CD yields?
Overall interest-rate trends are the big factor, of course.
Interest rates generally have been declining since last spring, despite a few upward blips in recent weeks. 

Many financial-market professionals say the weak employment statistics released Friday make it likely that rates will move still lower.
But some experts say the biggest declines are likely to be in short-term rates; they expect heavy government borrowing in the weeks ahead to keep longer-term rates from falling as quickly. 

The big federal bailout of troubled savings and loan institutions is also influencing CD yields.
Some of the very highest yields, paid by those thrifts in a desperate attempt to attract deposits, have disappeared since many investors last went looking for the best CD deals. 

"In late July, there were at least 20 Southwest institutions posting the highest yields.
Now you can count them on the fingers of one hand," says Catherine V. Blake, director of Merrill Lynch Money Markets Inc. 

Lower CD yields at troubled S&Ls also mean lower yields at healthy banks and thrifts. "This reduction in interest-rate market pressure should enable other financial institutions to lower their rates," William Seidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., told the Senate Banking Committee last week.
It has a "significant impact on the cost of funds for all institutions that must compete for money in the market." 

Investors looking for a place to stash their cash while they sort things out are discovering that the gap, or "spread," between yields on bank money-market accounts and money-market mutual funds is smaller than they remember.
Money funds now offer about 1.5 percentage points more, compared with about 2.5 percentage points six months ago.
For investors with sizable CDs coming due, a number of banks and thrifts have high-yielding liquid accounts for large deposits. 

But although bank money-market accounts and money-market mutual funds are convenient havens, investors who adopt a wait-and-see attitude shouldn't become complacent.
If interest rates do continue downward, yields on money-market accounts and money funds will decline, too.
So investors need to remain alert -- and ready to act. 

"Typically they wait too long," says Manufacturers Hanover's Mr. Hutchinson. "Then they lock in when rates are low." 

the 12-month change in stock prices Report, The Wall Street Journal 

