.START 

International Business Machines Corp. will introduce tomorrow a laser printer that should make it a player in the low end of that market and accelerate the market's already rapid growth, industry executives said. 

In Armonk, N.Y., a spokesman for the computer giant confirmed that it has a news briefing set for tomorrow but declined to comment on the subject. 

The executives said the IBM machine can print nearly 10 pages a minute, making it more powerful than the Hewlett Packard Co. eight-page-a-minute printer that dominates the market.
At the same time, it will be priced slightly below Hewlett-Packard's machine, whose list price is $2,700 and which actually sells for $1,600 to $1,700. 

The IBM machine will certainly face an uphill climb against Hewlett-Packard.
Bis Cap International, a market-research firm in Norwell, Mass., said Hewlett-Packard has more than 50% of the low-end market for laser printers while IBM has almost nothing.
In addition, even though IBM's price will undercut Hewlett-Packard's, Hewlett-Packard typically gets quite a premium for its machines, so IBM is being only moderately aggressive.
Hewlett-Packard can always retaliate, too, and may well do so; it was extremely aggressive recently in introducing a four-page-a-minute printer that is selling for less than $1,000. 

But the IBM announcement will at least give it a foothold at an important time.
Bis Cap said the total market for laser printers will total $3.2 billion world-wide this year and grow to $3.9 billion in 1993 as unit shipments nearly double to 1.9 million from one million.
And the low end -- especially machines that print five to 10 pages a minute -- will grow particularly fast. 

In any case, the IBM announcement, coming on top of Hewlett-Packard's recent introduction, should accelerate the move to laser printers, which are faster and quieter and print neater than dot-matrix printers, but which have been too expensive for some tastes.
That certainly means more convenience for many users, who now may have to walk across the office to wait in line to print a letter on a laser printer.
It may also help clear the way for new flavors of software.
For instance, while laser printers enabled the development of desktop publishing, they need to become more ubiquitous to accelerate the next step in word-processing: the ability for even casual users to mix graphics with text. 

The IBM machine certainly seems to be aimed at the casual user.
It will initially lack Postscript capabilities -- Postscript being the language that computers typically use to tell printers how to produce a complex page in a desktop-publishing application.
In addition, while the IBM machine can be hooked up in a network, it will have less memory than is needed to handle the huge volume of printing that can back up when several people are simultaneously sending work to the printer. 

