.START 

Tonka Corp., burdened with a huge debt load from its 1987 acquisition of Kenner Parker Toys Inc., said it plans to nearly double its shares outstanding to pay some debt. 

The toy maker, which now has 7.9 million shares outstanding, said it filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a November public offering of 6.5 million new shares. 

The statement came after the close of New York Stock Exchange composite trading, where Tonka shares closed unchanged at $20.
Based on that price, the offering would raise about $129 million.
The company's debt at the end of the second quarter was $501.6 million. 

Stephen G. Shank, Tonka's chairman and chief executive officer, said the company wanted to take advantage of the strong stock market and the surge in its own shares -- from a 52-week low of $8. "When you have a high debt load, there's not a lot of margin for surprises," he said. 

Although the offering price for the new shares hasn't been determined, the company said that based on a price of $20 a share, the offering and subsequent paydown of debt would reduce the debt load to 67% of capitalization from 86%. 

Mr. Shank said that "at worst," the move would result in a modest dilution of earnings per share in 1990. 

Tonka also said that because of improved gross profit margins, it expects to report a third-quarter profit greater than the year-earlier $4.9 million, or 62 cents a share.
Revenue in the year-earlier period was $267.5 million. 

The toy maker also said a group that currently owns 19.5% of Tonka's shares said in an SEC filing that the group's "interests will be best served in exploring opportunities" to sell all or part of its Tonka stock.
But Tonka said the group, which includes Tonka Vice Chairman Gordon L. Bramah, also said it may acquire more shares on its own or with others "with a view toward obtaining a controlling interest in the company." 

Tonka said it believed the statement was a result of the Bramah group's perception that reduced voting power from the company's offering could reduce the value of the group's shares. 

