.START 

Over the past year, news has become "hot." In fact, news is now more than news.
News is entertainment. 

The latest in the flood of information ("reality-based") programming is "Saturday Night with Connie Chung" (CBS, Saturdays, 10 p.m. EST).
An engaging hourlong news-magazine, "Saturday Night" has, in its first three weeks, ranged from early civil rights leaders to Jane Fonda to traffic control.
It appears to split evenly between "re-created" stories and celebrity interviews -- half docudrama, half Barbara Walters. 

"Saturday Night" is on the cutting edge of news as entertainment in two ways.
First -- re-creations, reconstructions, simulations.
These fashionable new ways of faking the news have TV critics howling.
News shows used to be sacrosanct -- you showed real footage or you didn't show anything.
Today, those lines are blurred.
What's real?
What's TV?
Not even the president knows. 

"Saturday Night" plunged right into this battle in its first episode, hiring James Earl Jones to portray Vernon Johns, a preacher in Montgomery, Ala., in the early 1950s, and a forerunner of the civil rights movement.
Mr. Jones acts out vignettes from Dr. Johns's life, and delivers some of his sermons, including the astoundingly powerful "It's Safe to Kill Negroes" speech.
Interspersed with these scenes are interview clips from the actual members of Johns's congregation, as testimony about the man, his character ("Johns was a boat-rocker . . . he swamped the boat"). 

All of this adds up to a fine portrait of the fiery orator who many said made the civil rights movement possible.
It's an intriguingly original topic choice.
So maybe it's not traditional news.
But no footage of the man exists, James Earl Jones's portrait is wonderfully subtle (equally heroic and ornery), and the witnesses interject a solid grounding of fact.
Call it re-creation, call it what you like -- I think it works. 

I had more trouble with the second week's offering, the story of a 14-year-old crack dealer.
Using the transcripts of an interview, "Saturday Night" hired an actor to play the young man, speak his words, live his life.
Certainly, this made for entertaining television. (It was even informative: When the teen-ager talks about having money, power, control -- "the juice" -- he sounds just like any aggressive young entrepreneur.) But there are plenty of dealers out on the street, and using a recreation here just seemed like sloppy journalism -- they couldn't get what they wanted, so they made it up. 

In the coming weeks, "Saturday Night" will look at the Pan Am flight 103 that crashed over Scotland, and will use simulations to explore the different hypotheses about what happened -- the Rashomon approach.
This seems a perfectly sensible, indeed, ideal use of simulation.
We'll see. 

But if simulation gets all the ink, there is another facet of the "news as entertainment" trend that's more critical to "Saturday Night," and that's the emergence of the newsperson as star.
Certainly, the opening credits tell you what's going on here: "60 Minutes" has a stopwatch as a logo; "Saturday Night" has Ms. Chung's face.
And then, of course, the title -- "Saturday Night with Connie Chung." These days, everybody who is anybody gets his or her name in the title.
Well almost.
They still won't call this column "TV Wisdom with Robert Goldberg." 

As a personality, Connie Chung was a shrewd choice for CBS.
She's an extremely likable news figure.
With her winsome smile and her delightfully unpretentious manner, she's probably the most likable news person there is -- certainly more cuddly than cold fish like Diane Sawyer or Sam Donaldson. 

But the real question is -- Can this America's sweetheart be strong enough and serious enough to hold together a news hour by herself?
The results of the first three shows are curiously mixed.
For a show built around Connie Chung, there's surprisingly little Connie Chung in it.
She's relegated to minor voice -- over work and playing second fiddle to celebrity guests. 

The big coup of this past weekend was getting Marlon Brando for his first TV interview in 16 years.
But while Ms. Chung seemed lively and informal, she also let Mr. Brando run wild.
Why is he an actor? "Everybody in this life is an actor." Why did he leave the stage? "Why did you just cross your left leg over your right?" Is he going to act in more pictures? "I don't know . . . who can say . . . there's a hole in the atmosphere." And from time to time, Mr. Brando really wandered off into outer space: "That's like putting fried eggs in your armpits. . . ." 

Now admittedly Mr. Brando is a tough interview, right up there with William Hurt for addled metaphysical mush, but Ms. Chung was so starstruck, she didn't push hard enough.
We didn't even come away really understanding what his beef is with MGM about "Dry White Season" (his latest movie), which is the reason he granted the interview.
We gather he doesn't like the final cut, but it's hard to tell exactly why. 

The problem is that Ms. Chung is just too well mannered to rein in her guests.
That's why she's ineffective in her roundtable discussions as well: She won't direct them.
She won't focus them.
She won't cut off rambunctious interchanges (like the one between Emory Folmar, Mayor of Montgomery, and the Rev. Jesse Jackson).
And when she does get around to asking questions, they're soft and silly: "What would you say to your father if he were here today?" she asks Toni Johns Anderson. "What would I say to him?" says Ms. Johns Anderson. "I'd say, 'I'm glad to see you. '" 

Now there are some real strengths to the show.
By choosing only two topics for each hour, for example, it does get into some satisfying depth.
And Connie Chung does add a nice warm glow to the proceedings.
But curiously, "Saturday Night" plays to Ms. Chung's weaknesses instead of her greatest strength: When it comes to relating directly, one-on-one to the camera, she is, according to most industry people, one of the best in the business. 

Overall, I like Connie Chung.
I think she's great.
But to be the focus of an hour show, Ms. Chung's going to have to grow into it, to expand in strength and stature.
If she wants to be a star, she's going to have to fill the whole screen. 

