.START 

K mart Corp. expects to ring up annual sales of $50 billion and net income of $1.75 billion by 1995. 

The nation's largest discount retailer, based in Troy, Mich., made the forecast Friday at a closed-door session with analysts.
The meeting followed the company's announcement last week that it would report its third quarter in a row of declining profit, and some analysts were skeptical about K mart's ability to reach its ambitious long-term goals. 

"It's going to be tough," said Robert Buchanan of A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc. in St. Louis. "Over the next five or six years, I think we're going to see one discounter emerge as dominant.
I think that's going to be Wal-Mart, not K mart." 

In its latest fiscal year, ended last Jan. 25, K mart earned $803 million, or $4 a share, on sales of $27.3 billion.
The company hasn't publicly forecast earnings for the current fiscal year, but analysts expect net to trail last year's.
For the first half, K mart posted a 16% earnings drop. 

Nevertheless, the analysts said K mart is taking many of the right steps to improve its prospects. "I came away with a better feeling about the long-term strategy that's in place," said L. Wayne Hood of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc.
He added: "It's going to take some time to implement.
You've got to look at it as a 12 to 18-month story, not something that's going to happen next week or next month." 

The analysts generally were impressed with a prototype store that K mart opened near Detroit in August.
It features wider aisles, improved lighting and wider shelves designed to keep K mart from running out of merchandise as often as in the past. 

In addition, the company reduced by 20% the number of items carried in the store, using information available because of its new centralized buying approach to eliminate slow-moving goods. "It's astonishing to me that they couldn't determine before what some of these dead or unproductive items were," said Edward Weller of Montgomery Securities in San Francisco. "Nonetheless, it's better late than never," he added. 

K mart told the analysts that it will spend $1.3 billion during the next five years to expand its core business into a chain of more than 2,500 discount stores from its current 2,200.
As part of the program, K mart said it will expand or relocate 700 small stores, mostly in small-town markets, that are especially vulnerable to new competitors and that, analysts say, drag down the overall performance of the chain. 

