.START 

WPP Group PLC and Lord Einstein O'Neill & Partners settled their bitter and protracted lawsuits against one another, with Lord Einstein agreeing to pay WPP $7 million. 

The settlement puts an end to one of the most contentious battles the advertising industry has seen among its own -- a battle stemming from the 1988 walkout of the top management of Lord, Geller, Federico, Einstein after an unwelcome takeover by London-based WPP.
And while a statement describing the settlement said it "does not suggest admission of wrongdoing by any of the parties," it seems a clear vindication for Martin Sorrell, the Briton who runs WPP and whose reputation had come in for a beating in the Madison Avenue fight. 

The $7 million to WPP, however, still isn't close to the damages it had initially demanded: In its suit against the defectors and Lord Einstein, the agency they founded, it sought an amount equal to Lord Geller's value, which was about $40 million at the time. 

The suits had pitted WPP and its Lord Geller unit against Lord Einstein and Young & Rubicam, which agreed to finance Lord Einstein.
The contest had become a battle of wills between Mr. Sorrell, a brilliant and determined financial man, and the equally stubborn creative types who had left Lord Geller, notably founders Richard Lord and Arthur Einstein. 

According to a short statement, the case was settled "to avoid the expense and distraction that would accompany continued litigation." Neither side was permitted to comment further. 

But industry executives believe Young & Rubicam, for one, was eager to settle because of other concerns.
Just two weeks ago, it agreed to buy Landor Associates for a price industry executives put at more than $25 million.
And Friday, the agency was charged by a federal grand jury in New Haven on racketeering and conspiracy counts for allegedly bribing Jamaican officals to secure the Jamaica Tourist Board account in 1981.
It denies the charges.
The WPP suit had already been something of a black mark, with some competing agencies criticizing Young & Rubicam for getting involved in the messy fight between WPP and its former executives. 

According to industry executives, Young & Rubicam owns 49% of Lord Einstein and will pick up 49% of the $7 million paid to WPP. Lord Einstein's annual billings are about $90 million, while Young & Rubicam has some $5 billion in billings world-wide. 

WPP, meanwhile, had an incentive to settle to stick to its own knitting; the big holding company bought Ogilvy Group earlier this year, and Mr. Sorrell has been going out of his way to cultivate a more supportive relationship with executives there.
He has been dealing gently, for example, with the management of Ogilvy's Scali, McCabe, Sloves unit, which is interested in buying itself back much as Lord Geller had been before the bitter split. 

The costly fight between WPP and the former Lord Geller executives wreaked havoc on Lord Geller, which had been known best for creating the Charlie Chaplin-like "Little Tramp" ads for International Business Machines Corp.
After the top executives left, numerous clients, including IBM, as well as scores of staffers, fled the agency.
But the agency has since been rebuilding under new management, and executives there are anxious to put the fight behind them. 

Lord Einstein, meanwhile, started out with former Lord Geller clients, including the New Yorker magazine and WNBC-TV, and with a staff primarily made up of former Lord Geller executives.
Now, however, it has largely cut its ties to Lord Geller, adding such other clients as Saab-Scania and Kidder, Peabody & Co. 

WPP first sued Lord Einstein and its six top officers shortly after they walked out of Lord Geller in March 1988, charging them with breaching their fiduciary duty as directors and officers, and with conspiring to take away Lord Geller's business.
Lord Einstein and the executives countersued, charging WPP with defamation and demanding back pay and bonuses. 

In April 1988, Judge Herman Cahn of the State Supreme Court temporarily blocked Lord Einstein from taking Lord Geller clients or employees.
That was followed in October 1988 by a letter from Mr. Lord stating that Lord Einstein wouldn't work for Lord Geller clients.
However, now that Lord Geller has stabilized, there is little danger that Lord Einstein would take clients away. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

NEW ACCOUNT: Ralston Purina Co., St. Louis, awarded its Cookie-Crisp cereal account to Avrett, Free & Ginsberg, New York.
Ralston Purina also named Avrett Free to handle advertising for future children's cereal products.
Cookie-Crisp had been handled by Noble Tennant, Chicago, a unit of Noble Communications. 

