.START 

Engineers call it WW III, as in World War III.
It's the Woodrow Wilson Bridge, the biggest bottleneck in the interstate highway system. 

"It's a turkey," says Richard Morgan, executive director of the Federal Highway Administration. "Wanna buy it?" 

Things are so bad on WW III -- it's the drawbridge that carries the Capital Beltway and Interstate 95 across the Potomac River south of Washington -- that the federal government, the states of Virginia and Maryland and the District of Columbia are offering prizes of $150,000 to people who can come up with workable concepts to fix it. 

"It ain't a bad bridge," says Mr. Morgan. "It just ain't big enough." The basic problem is that the six-lane bridge can't handle the current traffic flow of 150,000 vehicles a day, let alone the 200,000 expected in a decade.
Even in routine situations -- say, a flat tire -- traffic backs up a mile or more; when the drawbridge is lifted to let a freighter, a Navy warship or even a 30-foot sailboat through, the backups can stretch for three and sometimes four miles. 

"Thank goodness they don't put machine guns in cars," says Florian Hocke, a rocket-propulsion scientist and a commuter on the bridge. "We'd use them." 

The 28-year-old bridge is a paradigm of the federal system run amok.
It is the only piece of the 42,000-mile interstate system the federal government owns.
But Virginia is in charge of lighting and electricity.
Maryland takes care of the bridge's surface and substructure.
The District of Columbia raises and lowers the drawbridge.
The Coast Guard sets the hours when the span can be opened.
The Army Corps of Engineers maintains the channel. 

Virginia state troopers patrol their half of the bridge.
But they have to cross over into Maryland to turn around.
Meanwhile, Maryland state troopers are going the other way, turning around in Virginia. (There's a kind of twilight zone in the middle of the bridge, a small portion that is actually in the District of Columbia.) 

Congress started the whole mess by ordering the old Bureau of Public Roads to build the bridge in 1954, and then failing to come up with enough money to do the job right.
The cost to build it then: about $15 million.
The cost to fix it now: up to $500 million. 

"Here I was," says Frances Alexander, of Annandale, in suburban Virginia, "tooling along to pick up my VCR that was being fixed, and I ran smack into this bridge congestion that backed up cars for miles.
And this warning sign they put up was blinking at me, 'Have a nice day. ' Give me a break." 

Howard Hill, from Springfield, in Virginia, was approaching the bridge one afternoon when traffic lights started blinking. "Brakes started squealing, and I could hear fender-benders behind me.
They'd opened the bridge to let this little sailboat through.
I could see it.
There weren't even any people on the deck, and up here on the bridge, there were 2,000 or 3,000 of us, mad as hell." 

It was worse for Dock Rogers Jr.
He recently broke down on the bridge while traveling with his family from Philadelphia to his home in Sellers, S.C.
He climbed out to see what was wrong and spotted a car veering straight at him.
He jumped over the side -- and landed in mud 30 feet below, with hardly a scratch. 

It does stir the bile. 

In desperation, the four jurisdictions that operate the bridge are sponsoring an international contest to come up with solutions.
Jock Freedman, from Maryland's Department of Transportation, is the contest chairman. 

The contest committee is churning out booklets and even a videotape for contestants. "We've got a complete package," says Mr. Freedman. "The booklet describes the problem in words.
The videotape gives you a feel, visually, for how awful it really is.
We took pictures flying over the bridge.
We took pictures driving across it both ways.
We went out in a boat and took pictures underneath the bridge.
We think it's the first time anybody's done so much for a project like this." 

Mr. Freedman figures about 20 groups will enter the contest.
The organizers expect most of the contestants will be consortiums of highway and bridge engineers, traffic consultants and environmental specialists.
A panel of judges will select the five most promising plans. 

Each of the semi-finalists will be given $150,000 "to go out and create concepts," according to Mr. Freedman.
If one or more of the semi-finalists' plans looks especially promising, there's $200,000 more in prize money that can be awarded.
All of it comes from the federal treasury. 

One idea is to expand the number of lanes on the approaches to the bridge.
But that poses problems, especially on the Virginia side.
Traffic coming across from Maryland feeds into the "old town" section of Alexandria, a late 18th century village that George Washington called his own. "You just can't move around here without stepping on history," says Mr. Morgan, the federal highway director, who is retiring soon, happy to leave the problem on his successor's desk. 

So, if someone proposes widening the bridge to the north, someone else's ancestors will have to be dug up and moved.
Hardly satisfactory.
Move to the south, and down come several apartment towers.
Add a bridge parallel to the old bridge, and the problem gets even trickier. 

Ferry boats?
Too slow.
A tunnel?
Ten times more expensive than anything else. 

"You could double-deck it," says Albert A. Grant, principal engineer for Bellomo-McGee Inc., consultant to the prize contest.
An upper deck, soaring so high above the drawbridge it would be unaffected as the span was opened and closed, might keep some of the traffic moving. 

More problems, though.
Airplanes coming in and out of National Airport fly right over the bridge. "We go up too high and we get in the way of the air lanes," says Mr. Morgan. 

Anyway, these experts agree, a bridge that big would be an eyesore. "People wouldn't like the way it looked," says Mr. Morgan. "They wouldn't like the way it messed up their bike lanes.
They'd worry it might mess up the bearded warbler.
Goldang, this is tough stuff." 

