.START 

Lobbyists hired to pursue funds from government agencies face new disclosure requirements under the $11.8 billion natural-resources spending bill that received final congressional approval from the Senate. 

Senators voted 91-6 to send the measure to President Bush, who is expected to sign it.
The bill also contains major timber and oil provisions as well as restrictions on federal funding for the arts.
The legislation is only the second to receive final congressional approval out of the 13 spending bills needed to fund the government in the year that began Oct. 1. 

The lobbying provision, championed by Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.), would require anyone seeking federal money to disclose which lobbyists they hire and how much they pay them to help in the quest for the funds. 

Mr. Byrd sought the language in response to the unfolding influence-peddling scandal in the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
The measure would apply to all recipients of grants and contracts in excess of $100,000.
Though still vulnerable to evasion, the reporting requirements promise a new base of information to track the activities of lobbyists within federal agencies. 

The bulk of the measure funds a diverse and unique set of accounts important to western and energy-producing states.
It includes language barring oil drilling in Alaska's Bristol Bay and along much of the East and West coasts. 

The measure also seeks to settle a bitter dispute between logging and environmental interests over the harvesting of old stands of timber in the Pacific Northwest.
Forest Service sales in the region would be reduced to 7.7 billion board feet over a two-year period.
Also, while logging companies are promised relief from current lawsuits, the measure imposes new requirements to protect the habitat of the northern spotted owl. 

The bill reflects the growing pressure to add spending for the acquisition of lands by the National Park Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Combined acquisition funding for the two agencies would increase 20%, and more than $258 million is provided for new park and wildlife-related construction projects -- nearly 36% above fiscal 1989, which ended Sept. 30. 

The spending bill also became the battleground for efforts by Sen. Jesse Helms (R., N.C.) to prevent the federal government from funding art projects that can be considered objectionable.
Compromise language in the measure would prohibit the national endowments for the arts and humanities from funding work or exhibits that may be considered obscene. 

The dispute centers on two National Endowment for the Arts grants that funded work many lawmakers viewed as sexually explicit and sacrilegious.
Depictions of "homoeroticism" or an "individual engaged in sex acts" are explicitly listed as examples of what may be considered obscene.
But final judgment would be left to the agencies, and the compromise incorporates phrases from a 1973 Supreme Court decision imposing an additional condition that a work also be found to have no "serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value." 

Mr. Helms called the compromise "a loophole big enough to drive 12 Mack trucks through," but lawmakers turned back, 62-35, his attempt make the language more stringent. 

