.START 

Sometimes, you don't have to be big to make a splash on Wall Street. 

When the New York Stock Exchange ripped the veil away from the hidden world of computer-driven program trading last year, many traders were stunned to see pint-sized Susquehanna Investment Group sharing the spotlight with Wall Street giants such as Morgan Stanley & Co. and Merrill, Lynch & Co. 

Since then, the secretive three-year-old trading firm with no customers and just $25 million in capital has regularly ranked as one of the top 10 program trading firms in the Big Board's monthly reports.
Moreover, Susquehanna is a source of rumors and suspicion on Wall Street for its secrecy, precision-timing and dazzling computer-driven program trades. 

"They really know how to tip the fulcrum when the market is vulnerable to their trading strategies," says one Chicago trader, reflecting widespread suspicions that somehow Susquehanna alone can cause markets to move suddenly through precise timing. 

So who is behind this undersized trading powerhouse? 

Susquehanna, based in Philadelphia, is run by a a small group of former dorm buddies from the State University of New York at Binghamton who used to bet on horse races guided by statistical analysis. 

Today, Jeffrey Yass, 31 years old, has turned his knack for math and betting into a business.
Susquehanna, which Mr. Yass controls with six other friends -- all under 35 -- executed more than one million shares a day in program trades on the Big Board in August. 

Susquehanna and its cadre of 65 traders, spread out among nine exchanges around country, are reputed to be some of the hottest stock-options traders around.
The firm's partners have combined their knowledge of options, as well as futures, stock indexes and the underlying stock market, with computer-trading analysis.
The result is a powerful trading machine that prowls all the markets for price aberrations and imbalances it can exploit.
But Susquehanna's partners say the firm's reputation as a deliberate market mover is undeserved. "We think of ourselves as mathematical traders, arbitragers in the old sense," Mr. Yass says. 

Eric Brooks, another Susquehanna principal, says, "We've heard wild, wild rumors" about the firm's trading, but he insists the stories are wrong. 

Program trading is familiar to most investors in the form of abrupt price swings in the stock market.
Those volatile moves are caused by traders buying or selling big baskets of stocks while making offsetting trades in stock-index futures and options to lock in price differences.
Traders say they are providing a service -- linking markets that shouldn't be out of line.
Critics say that computer-guided program trading is a source of volatility in the market that frightens investors. 

Part of Susquehanna's keen trading ability is related to its origins in the options market.
Options traders, perhaps more than any other market breed, live and breathe the concept of leverage.
Through the leverage of options (which give an investor the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell a security, which could be a stock or stock index, at a set price during a set period), an investor can control huge amounts of stock with relatively small amounts of money.
That is a tool that can make a small firm like Susquehanna mighty. 

At times, when Susquehanna trades one of its favorite vehicles, options on the Standard & Poor's 100-stock index, the firm buys as much as the maximum position allowed by the Chicago Board Options Exchange, knowledgeable traders say.
Given their strategies, their current limit is 7,500 contracts.
Establishing such a position would cost about $2.5 million, but with it a trader would control underlying stocks valued at about $250 million. 

Although housed in the same posh building as the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, Susquehanna is defiantly casual.
There's a slot machine in one office, for example.
Some of the directors still have a passion for the track, what they call "a hobby." The working dress is open-necked shirts, chinos and sneakers.
The atmosphere seems relaxed, but Mr. Yass and others are guarded about their trading strategies and profits. 

Mr. Yass, a New Yorker, came to the Philadelphia Stock Exchange in 1981, where getting started was cheaper and easier.
With $25,000 he says he borrowed from his father, he rented a seat and began trading stock options.
He had already been gravitating toward options for some time -- buying Alcoa options was his first securities trade back in high school and he wrote his undergraduate thesis on the social value of options. 

Over the next few years, his fledging company prospered enough that he asked several college classmates to join him -- Mr. Brooks, now 29; Andrew Frost, 32; Steven Bloom 33; and Arthur Dantchik, 32.
An options trader he met at the Philadelphia exchange, Peter Smith, 34, is now Susquehanna's director of stock-index arbitrage.
Joel Greenberg, 32, another SUNY chum, joined Susquehanna after attending Fordham University Law School and a stint at the Justice Department and is the firm's legal adviser. 

Mr. Yass and his friends quickly emerged as aggressive market-makers on the Philadelphia floor, trading for their own accounts in the stock, stock-index and futures currency options listed on the exchange. "They are not afraid to trade in size" with major securities firms "who want to do business on the Philadelphia floor," says Joseph Rizzello, the senior officer in charge of marketing for the Philadelphia Stock Exchange. 

Susquehanna was formed by Mr. Yass and his six colleagues in mid-1987.
It began getting attention outside of Philadelphia when the Big Board began publishing its monthly lists of the most-active program traders, in which Susquehanna typically ranks fifth or sixth. 

"We were a great trivia question," jokes Mr. Brooks. 

Little known or not, the firm has prospered.
Partners' equity in the firm totaled $17.7 million at the end of 1987, according to filings with the Pennsylvania Securities Commission.
A year later, it had risen to nearly $25 million. 

Although known for program trading, Mr. Yass and his colleagues see themselves as options traders first.
They also say they are risk-averse. "We play everything for the arbitrage," says Mr. Yass. "The key point is if we buy in one spot, we sell in another point.
We try to do everything as simultaneously as possible." 

Susquehanna's reputation as a market mover may come from the impact of its options-related arbitrage strategies -- its specialty.
Unwinding these positions just before the S&P 100 options expire can cause tremendous volatility, traders say.
That has caught the attention of the Securities and Exchange Commission, which is studying S&P 100 options expirations. 

However, Mr. Brooks says that Susquehanna's strategies shouldn't contribute to market swings. "Simultaneously unwinding positions of equal dollar amount should not cause any volatility in the markets." 

Susquehanna officials say having many traders on many different exchanges may give the appearance that the firm is moving the markets through coordinated trades.
They say that their floor traders are trading on their own, just trying to make a buck. 

There are some 65 floor traders already trading on exchanges around the country with Susquehanna's money.
There's a new crop in training at the firm's Philadelphia office right now. "We hire the most hungry.
Whether they went to Harvard or a community college doesn't matter," says Mr. Brooks. 

Susquehanna reaps a big benefit from having a broadly dispersed trading staff.
The traders have access to important market information from the floors of every major exchange.
Having an idea of how other firms are positioning themselves in a market can sometimes make or break a program trade, say traders familiar with such strategies.
For instance, knowing that a big firm is selling a basket of stocks for an institutional client might indicate that it's not the best time to make a program trade between index options and the underlying stocks. 

When Susquehanna begins to move a big position, its impact can be exaggerated by groups of speculators who try to follow the firm's trading "footsteps," floor traders say.
Says Arthur Cashin, a veteran floor trader at the Big Board: "Susquehanna may do something that might make others trade." But legends about the firm moving the market single-handedly are akin "to looking for Communists under the bed," Mr. Cashin says. 

"I don't think that any stock arbitrage firm can move the market," says Mr. Yass.
Besides, he adds, "I don't think they would make any money if they tried." 

Average monthly program trading volume for 1989 through August, in millions of shares. 

Source:New York Stock Exchange 

