.START 

Amcast Industrial Corp., Dayton, Ohio, expects "earnings growth" in the fiscal year that began Sept. 1 despite a plant strike that could cost as much as 10 cents a share a month, Leo W. Ladehoff, chairman and chief executive officer, said. 

The executive also said that in the fiscal fourth quarter, the company rebounded from a weak third period.
Construction orders "were at a very strong rate toward the end of the fourth quarter" and profit margins "snapped back" as the company increased prices on products in many of its segments, he noted. 

The company expects to report fiscal fourth-quarter profit of between $2.2 million, or 30 cents a share, and $2.5 million, or 35 cents a share, Mr. Ladehoff said.
That compares with year-earlier net income of $2.4 million, or 33 cents a share. 

Sales in the fiscal fourth quarter rose about 2% to about $80 million. 

"The earnings are in line with what analysts had been predicting," Mr. Ladehoff said in an interview. 

He said Amcast expects to report that earnings for all fiscal 1989 declined to between $7.7 million, or $1.07 a share, and $8.1 million, or $1.12 a share, as sales rose about 5% to nearly $330 million. 

In fiscal 1988 the company had profit of $9.3 million, or $1.30 a share, on sales of $312 million. 

Mr. Ladehoff said he couldn't quibble with analysts' estimates that the maker of cast and tubular metal products would earn between $1.25 and $1.45 a share in fiscal 1990. 

He said the month-old strike at the Stanley G. Flagg division, over the company's efforts to reduce health-care expenses, is costing Amcast seven to eight cents a share a month, or about $600,000 a month. "It might have an impact on earnings as much as 10 cents a share a month," he said. 

He described Flagg, which makes iron and brass fittings for industrial applications, as a profitable but underperforming asset.
Flagg accounts for 20% of total corporate sales and is being operated by salaried employees during the walkout. 

He also said total corporate sales in the current fiscal year "are likely to be off on a year-to-year basis" because of the sale of three iron-casting plants that had total annual sales of $30 million. 

The sale of the plants for $11.3 million, or book value, will be recorded in the current fiscal quarter, Mr. Ladehoff said. 

He said the company plans a stock buy-back, but declined to disclose how many shares would be involved.
The company has 7,181,000 shares outstanding and isn't actively repurchasing stock, Mr. Ladehoff said. 

The executive said Amcast in the fiscal fourth quarter had "very strong" cash flow and reduced debt about $9 million in that period and about $7 million for the full year despite an increased dividend and record capital spending. 

In fiscal 1989 capital expenditures were nearly $18 million, compared with the year earlier's $14 million.
Mr. Ladehoff didn't disclose what the company's outlays would be in the current year, but said Amcast usually has annual capital expenditures of between $12 million and $15 million. 

The official said the bulk of last year's capital expenditures were used for expanding capacity and purchasing new equipment in the company's growth businesses, such as cast aluminum wheels produced for General Motors Corp. 

"We've been adding capacity as fast as we can because GM is taking everything we can produce," Mr. Ladehoff said. 

"Despite what some people say is a softening in the automotive market in 1990, it still looks growthy to us," he added. 

"We feel the economy is sound and will continue to perform at a high level although it'll flatten out a bit." He also said he expects interest rates to drop further, "and that usually works to everyone's favor." 

Amcast already has contracts and agreements to handle expansion of its wheel-making capacity.
In addition, Mr. Ladehoff said the company sees growth for parts such as anti-lock brake system components and suspension parts as well as refrigeration and air-conditioning valves and components. 

Mr. Ladehoff said the company has also experienced "strong bookings in the last couple of months" for aerospace products. "Our business is up strangely enough in an area that had been in the doldrums last year." 

He attributed the rejuvenated demand for aerospace products to a correction from the sharp drop in military spending last year as well as stronger demand from commercial airlines that are contending with aging fleets. 

Mr. Ladehoff also noted that "housing and construction areas seem to be getting stronger." He attributed that activity to a drop in interest rates. "We also see strong business in building products -- from commercial and industrial to do-it-yourself buyers." 

