.START 

Housing Hot Spot Turns 

Chilly in California 

WHAT A DIFFERENCE a year makes.
Just ask home sellers in California's San Fernando Valley, where a sharply decelerating housing market provides the best indication yet that the state's real estate boom may soon be history. 

A year ago, people selling their homes in the valley north of Los Angeles routinely received as many as six offers, with the winning bid often higher than the asking price.
Prices skyrocketed as much as 35% in a single month last year. 

Now the valley has a glut of more than 11,000 homes that would take 9.1 months to sell at the current sales pace.
The number of homes sold has plummeted by 44% from a year earlier. 

"Sellers jumping into the market now may have missed the train.
They're simply not going to see multiple offers on high-priced homes," said James A. Link, president of the realty board in the valley, which generates 5% to 7% of the state's total sales. 

The supply is the highest since 1983, when more than 10,000 houses clogged the market because of high interest rates.
But this year's slowdown is strictly price-driven, economists said.
Few buyers, they said, are willing or able to pay the high prices. 

San Fernando's $219,000 median price in August, was 21% higher than the area's $181,200 median a year ago and higher than the $201,028 state median. 

Economists and brokers say the slowdown brings the valley's market back to normal selling patterns, but the price outlook isn't good for sellers.
Some San Fernando sellers have started reducing asking prices by 5% to 6%, according to the local real estate board.
Economists say they expect the valley's price reductions to grow and spread to other areas of California. 

Mortgage Bankers Win Bigger Market Share 

BELEAGUERED mortgage bankers, who had been hurt by shrinking mortgage volume that led to an industrywide shakeout, now appear to be winning a market-share scuffle with thrifts. 

The reason: Fixed-rate mortgages, the backbone of mortgage banking, are now widely available in single digits.
Savings and loans had been generating much of their business from adjustablerate mortgages.
Then rates on adjustables eclipsed those of fixed-rate loans, and many consumers turned to mortgage bankers. 

"Clearly, mortgage bankers have been the beneficiaries of recent events," said Angelo R. Mazilo, president of Countrywide Funding Corp., a Pasadena, Calif.-based mortgage banker. 

Said Richard W. Peach, deputy economist for the Mortgage Bankers Association: "Whenever ARMs' share starts falling, it's a pretty good bet that mortgage bankers will pick it up." 

Countrywide Funding, for instance, saw August volume for new mortgages and refinancings double to $402 million from $200 million a year ago.
A study by the Mortgage Bankers Association found that 30 of the largest U.S. mortgage bankers increased loan originations by an average 29% from June to early August. 

Over the long term, however, mortgage market shifts don't bode well for consumers.
As a rule, mortgage bankers don't offer steeply discounted mortgage rates.
And thrifts, pressed by recent legislation to boost their cash reserves, are discounting less these days. 

With ARMs, Don't Count 

On Accuracy in Lending 

FOR HOMEOWNERS with adjustable-rate mortgages, lender accuracy in payment adjustments isn't something to take for granted. 

In 100 ARMs studied earlier this year by Loantech Inc., a Gaithersburg, Md., mortgage consulting firm, 31 of the loans were found to contain mistakes.
Eleven of the errors favored lenders, while nine favored borrowers.
The rest had errors on both sides, but the mistakes offset each other so the net payment adjustments came out at the right level. 

Among the more prevalent mistakes: selecting the wrong week of a Treasury index to base payment adjustments on or choosing the wrong index entirely.
The errors, which also included bungling the mathematical calculation, can prove costly.
One borrower in the Loantech study, for example, was overcharged $8,000 to $10,000 during a two-year period because of faulty ARM adjustments by his lender. 

One reason for the error rate, Loantech said, is poor training of personnel responsible for payment calculations.
The complexity of the payment adjustment process doesn't help, either.
Even savvy homeowners have grumbled that the calculations involved are difficult and confusing. 

Few lenders believe the inaccuracies are intentional or widespread.
If the problems were significant, lenders would have been forced by now to institute safeguards, said David L. Wilson, vice president for research at the U.S. League of Savings Institutions.
Even so, Mr. Wilson conceded the error rate in the Loantech study "is alarming on the surface." 

Loantech, meanwhile, said it plans a wider study this fall. 

Odds and Ends 

FIRST-TIME buyers accounted for less than 30% of new home purchases this year, the smallest proportion in 12 years, said the National Association of Home Builders.
The chief reasons: high prices and big down payments. . . . Houston is the cheapest place to rent an apartment at a median $357.70 a month, requiring just 13% of the city's median family income of $32,900, said Sound Advice newsletter.
San Diego was most expensive in the 25-city survey at a median rental rate of $550.33, requiring 21.8% of the local median family income of $30,253. 

