.START 

Standing before a canal that empties into the Elbe River, the Rev. Gottfried Keller pushes away scrub grass to get a clear view. "Unbelievable, isn't it?" he says, turning his head away with a grimace. 

The flowing water hardly resembles water at all.
Soupy and charcoal black, it smells as bad as it looks.
And well it should: Like hundreds of cities in East Germany, Wittenberg doesn't treat its sewage.
The wastes of 56,000 residents run through sewer pipes beneath the city, into the canal and thence into the Elbe, contributing to its distinction as Europe's most heavily polluted river.
Towns down river use the Elbe as the source of water for drinking and bathing. 

Like the rest of East Germany's pollution problems, it doesn't end there.
The Elbe flows through West Germany and into the North Sea.
Because of the impact on the West, West Germany is paying to help clean up the Elbe. 

And East Germany isn't the only East European country afflicted with pollution.
Environmental specialists say that Poland and Czechoslovakia are in the same category as the most heavily polluted nations in Europe, if not the world.
Citing Poland's lack of sewage-treatment plants, use of cheap coal and the death of its rivers and lakes, a Polish government economist laments, "We have the worst environmental problem in all of Europe." Earlier this week, the Soviet news agency Tass quoted a senior government geographer as saying that last year more than a quarter of Soviet citizens lived in areas severely contaminated by industrial, chemical and nuclear pollution and that the situation will only get worse. 

Environmental activism is on the rise the world over, but in few places is the issue more highly charged than in East Germany.
More than 100,000 East Germans have left for the West this year, seeking personal freedom and better living conditions, including a cleaner, healthier environment. 

To Mr. Keller, Wittenberg's pollution of the Elbe is "a condition that reminds me of the Middle Ages." Today, he preaches about the sins of pollution from the same pulpit that Martin Luther used four centuries ago.
Mr. Keller's approach is reminiscent of that of his reformist predecessor. 

During a sermon last summer, he talked about the situation and challenged the congregation to change it.
As a result, about 2,500 citizens each has donated one East German mark and signed a petition calling for construction of a water-purification plant -- an illegal act that put the signers at risk of criminal penalties, including jail sentences.
Although it was a modest beginning, the pastor concedes, it is having results. 

Before the campaign began, he says, "many people didn't know that we were without a water-purification system." He adds that "during municipal elections last fall, the issue was widely discussed.
It is our duty to bring it to peoples' attention." 

East Germany's plundered environment is becoming a rallying cry for those dissidents who choose to stay.
With the unofficial backing of the East German Protestant Church, many protesters who also seek more personal freedom and enhanced human rights are coming together over their concern for the environment. 

"The average citizen can plainly see that the environmental situation here is catastrophic, and the state is doing very little about it," says the Rev. Hans-Peter Gensichen, who runs the Protestant Church's environmental research arm out of a grimy three-story building in Wittenberg. "That energizes people.
Some stay to fight.
Others get frustrated and leave.
But either way, it is a catalyst for change." 

The actual state of the environment in East Germany -- and its impact on public health -- is secret to all but a select few in the ruling Politburo.
Attempts to measure the water and air directly are forbidden.
When Greenpeace activists tried to bring testing equipment into East Germany two years ago, the equipment was confiscated, and the activists were sent packing. 

Mr. Gensichen contends that the secrecy reflects the government's own sensitivity to the issue. "The state is fearful of saying what exists.
That's why they guard the data so secretively," he says.
He should know.
Active in environmental affairs for two decades, Mr. Gensichen says nearly all his data are from Western sources.
But even he is reluctant to share his limited information, fearing that doing so might land him in trouble with the authorities. 

While scientific data may be scarce, the problem itself is everywhere.
From the oil-slicked seashores in the north to the pockets of dead and dying trees in the south, East Germany is wheezing under the weight of its environmental misdeeds. 

Just a short drive from Leipzig south along state highway 95 illustrates the scope of the problem.
Diesel trucks spew billowing clouds of filthy, black smoke.
The highway runs beside a stream fouled by a yellowish chemical slick.
Further along, the landscape is scarred by huge open pits where the ground has been stripped of its coal and its dignity.
In the town of Rotha, stacks of brown coal briquettes, used for residential heating, sit on the sidewalks.
In Espenhain, smoke from the giant ovens that make the briquettes is so thick that the sun, on what was a clear day, fades to a shadowy disk.
Objects just a short distance away look hazy. 

Although officials assert that the environment is cleaner today than it once was, such claims seem dubious in light of some grim statistics.
Just 57% of all waste water in East Germany is cleaned up, according to Western estimates.
The rest goes back into rivers and lakes, laced with raw sewage and lethal chemicals. 

East Germany's dependence on sooty brown coal for 70% of its energy poses an equally daunting threat.
Burning the coal produces sulfur dioxide, a heavy, colorless gas that in large quantities can suffocate humans.
It also makes acid rain. 

For this reason, lignite and other low-grade brown coals can't be burned legally in many Western nations.
But in 1986, East Germany discharged some five billion tons of sulfur dioxide into the air, according to West German government estimates.
That's more than twice as much that from West Germany even though East Germany has only one-quarter the population.
Acid rain has damaged 44% of the forests in East Germany, Bonn estimates.
East Berlin has pledged to lower sulfur-dioxide emissions 30% by 1993. 

Auto exhaust is another big problem.
East Germany's passenger cars -- the boxy Wartburgs and Trabants -- are powered by inefficient two-stroke engines that burn fuel mixed with motor oil, producing particularly filthy exhaust. 

The health consequences of polluted air are felt most acutely in the winter, when the residential burning of brown coal and the car exhaust combine to produce a thick blanket of low-lying smog over much of East Germany.
Pediatricians at the University Children's Hospital in heavily polluted Leipzig say children are commonly admitted in winter with wheezing lungs and blue lips, indicating oxygen deprivation.
The doctors also attribute the area's abnormally high rates of asthma and other lung disorders to polluted air. 

Dozens of autonomous grass-roots groups have formed to fight the state's disregard for environmental protection.
Today, the groups number about 60.
They distribute information, sponsor discussions and sometimes challenge authorities in specific campaigns.
In perhaps the most celebrated action, one group collected more than 40,000 signatures demanding the closure of the brown-coal briquette works at Espenhain.
But the plant is still puffing away. 

"Based on what you see, you'd have to conclude we're doing a pretty lousy job," says a Dresden environmentalist. "The air stinks, and the water looks tragic.
But we've made people more aware of the problems.
The situation would be a lot worse if we weren't active." 

Although the groups have limited contact with each other, all are informally linked through their affiliation with the Protestant Church.
Because the church is the only institution in East Germany's rigid Marxist society that can get away with dissent, this affiliation gives environmentalists some protection.
Just how much protection is never quite clear.
None of the dozen activists interviewed for this story would consent to be identified by name except for those directly employed by the church. 

Much of the church-supported activism centers on the Elbe.
By the time it reaches West Germany, the river is choked with sewage, mercury and other chemical wastes.
According to West German government estimates, the Elbe discharges 27 tons of mercury a year, compared with three tons a year by the Rhine River in West Germany.
In July, Bonn agreed to pay half the cost -- about 200 million Deutsche marks ($106.4 million) -- for six pollution-control projects in East Germany, two of which involve the Elbe. 

An environmentalist group based in Dresden has led numerous fights to bring polluters to justice.
East Germany does have environmental protection laws setting penalties for offenders, in theory at least.
But often the laws are sidestepped, sometimes with no explanation at all. 

Other obstacles undermine the activist groups.
Many complain about public apathy.
The difficulties of trying to extract environmental concessions from East Berlin have bred a black humor among the activists.
Asked to name his group's greatest success, one activist replies: "That we still exist." 

Mr. Keller, the pastor in Wittenberg, says he is convinced that the stakes are too high to quit, despite the odds. "You have to understand that human rights and freedom and the environment are all interlinked in our society," he says. "The basic problem is that we have to learn to stand up for ourselves.
Until we do that we will be like our rivers -- dead, lifeless." 

