.START 

In an unprecedented pact between domestic auto makers, General Motors Corp. and Chrysler Corp. signed an agreement to manufacture key automotive parts jointly in the 

The No. 1 and No. 3 auto makers signed a letter of intent to combine the operations of two plants that make the bulk of each company's manual transmissions and some important components for four-wheel drive. 

Under the agreement, GM will assign the Muncie, Ind., plant of its Hydra-matic transmission division to the venture, while Chrysler will contribute the New Process Gear plant in Syracuse, N.Y., run by its Acustar subsidiary.
Acustar will wind up with a 64% stake in the new company, with GM owning the remaining 36%. 

GM, Chrysler and Ford Motor Co. cooperate in research projects seeking to develop products such as vehicles that run on alternative fuels, and each of the Big Three has numerous manufacturing joint ventures with foreign auto makers.
But not since the dawn of the auto industry have any of the bitter Big Three rivals worked together in any aspect of manufacturing. 

Federal antitrust laws and U.S. Justice Department rulings have typically permitted linkups between the Big Three and foreign auto makers and among the Big Three for research.
It's less clear whether antitrust laws and the Justice Department will allow such close cooperation by members of the Big Three in manufacturing. 

"The agreement will have to be carefully structured to make sure there are no spillover effects from transmission production that would let these companies fix prices on automobiles," said Charles Rule, a Washington, D.C., attorney who was an assistant attorney general in the Justice Department's Antitrust Division in the Reagan and Bush administrations. "The general attitude has been that joint ventures should be condemned only when there are actually anti-competitive effects." GM and Chrysler argue that the joint venture isn't an antitrust violation because the two companies already develop and sell to each other a number of transmission parts.
The companies also say that the deal will benefit them both because Chrysler's New Process Gear plant has more business than it can handle and GM's Hydra-matic plant is running well below capacity. 

The companies expect to complete negotiations over the agreement and get approval from the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission in time to begin joint operations by Jan. 1. 

Acustar's chairman, Thomas T. Stallkamp, said the Syracuse New Process Gear plant is currently producing transmissions and four-wheel drive parts at 130% of its capacity.
A Hydra-matic spokeswoman said the Muncie plant is operating with only two of three shifts.
Mr. Stallkamp said about 40% of the Syracuse plant's output goes to auto makers other than Chrysler, with most going into GM vehicles. 

"Each of us is making a relatively small number of manual transmissions separately," Mr. Stallkamp said shortly after returning from Chrysler's board meeting in New York where the deal was approved. "Together, we can shift some manual transmission production to Muncie so New Process Gear can make more transfer cases." 

New Process Gear is the world's largest manufacturer of transfer cases, a part that permits shifting between two-wheel drive and four-wheel drive.
A boom in demand for four-wheel drive cars and trucks has left New Process Gear with a significant backlog of orders it has been scrambling to fill. 

But the Muncie plant makes only manual transmissions, which are rarely used in domestic cars.
Some of its transmissions do go into trucks, where stick shifts are more popular, but still demand for its products has been weakening.
In the 1988 model year, about 86% of U.S. cars were equipped with automatic transmissions. 

The proposed joint venture company still doesn't have a name or any top executives assigned to it.
Chrysler's Acustar unit will have two directors on the governing board for every one GM director. 

Together, the two plants will employ 4,100 workers.
GM and Chrysler officials said they expect no work force reductions under the joint venture, and workers at the plant will continue to work under their United Auto Workers contracts.
Mr. Stallkamp said he discussed the joint venture with UAW President Owen Bieber who, he said, expressed support for the idea. 

"This historic alliance is a win-win situation that means greater job security for both facilities," said Chrysler Vice Chairman Gerald Greenwald. 

"GM's future relationship with this joint venture," said GM President Robert C. Stempel, "will assure us of a reliable supply of quality components for many years to come." 

