.START 

Senate Agriculture Committee members introduced a bill that would aggressively beef up the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and force commodity exchanges to use electronic audit trails within three years. 

The bill, called the Futures Trading Practices Act of 1989, comes at a time when the CFTC is facing widespread criticism of its ability to regulate the commodities markets. "In the past nine months, regulation of the futures industry has suffered what some have called a nervous breakdown," said Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.), who co-sponsored the bill. 

The bill, which appears to have broad support on the panel, would take a much tougher regulatory stance than legislation passed by the House last month.
The Senate measure would boost the agency's budget by 50% after inflation over the next five years, primarily to boost the CFTC's enforcement and surveillance effort. 

The CFTC would be required to monitor each commodity exchange on a two-year cycle; if flaws are found, the agency would issue a "deficiency order" that would mandate the exchange to fix the problem within a set time.
If the exchange doesn't correct the problem, it would be subject to suspension and to fines of as much as $500,000 a violation, which is five times larger than the current maximum. 

Moreover, the bill would force the CFTC to suspend dual trading -- where brokers trade for their own account and for customers at the same time -- in cases where an exchange can't show that its oversight system can detect abuses of the practice. 

The bill also would allow customers victimized by floor traders who willfully break the rules to sue for recovery of funds plus punitive damages equal to twice the loss amount.
Currently, customers only can sue for actual damages. 

The bill, co-sponsored by Sens.
Richard Lugar (R., Ind.) and Bob Kerrey (D., Neb.), is certain to bring protests from the exchanges. 

Many futures exchange officials, unaccustomed to tough regulation, have said privately that they think the bill is much too harsh.
Publicly, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange said it supported the objectives of the bill, pointing out that the Merc and other exchanges are already addressing many of them.
The Merc added that while it didn't "subscribe to all the provisions" in the bill, it would work with the Senate committee to "achieve mutually satisfactory legislation." 

The Chicago Board of Trade said it also shared the committee's goals, but had concerns about two portions of the bill in particular.
The exchange said a proposed service fee in the bill looks like a "transaction tax in disguise" that could raise the cost of futures trading in the U.S. and hurt domestic exchanges ability to compete for international business.
It added that bill's version of an audit trail, something the exchange noted it is already working on, could be so restrictive that it might impair the liquidity, or depth, of the markets. 

Sen. Leahy contended that this was Congress's only chance to restore public confidence in the futures markets.
After reeling off a laundry list of confidence-shattering events of the past nine months, he argued, "We need to fix it once and for all so that we will not be back here next year" to fix it again. 

A central change is that of the audit trail to track the specifics and time of an order.
Currently, brokers write out cards containing orders, which they hand to exchange officials at designated times.
The exchanges have been chastised during the past year for what many observers perceive is an inability to accurately record brokers' and customers' trades. 

The legislation would order exchanges to create an audit trail within three years to record transaction times independently and precisely.
That trail could eliminate many of the trading abuses uncovered in the sting operation involving the Chicago markets. 

Although he is sponsoring the bill and its increase in CFTC clout, Sen. Kerrey leveled hefty criticism at the agency. "I have serious questions about their ability to regulate," he said in an interview. "I'm skeptical the commission can pull it off." 

He said he'll keep a close eye on the commission. "If I'm dealing with a police chief and he says my crime rate is going up and he says we need more money," Sen. Kerrey said, "then I've got to say, 'Chief, maybe the problem is you. '" 

