.START 

The Securities and Exchange Commission, in another sign of widespread problems in Wall Street's back offices, censured Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. for incorrectly monitoring about $200 million in securities. 

Prudential-Bache settled the charges, neither admitting nor denying guilt regarding the violations, which the SEC alleges took place in early 1988. 

But the firm, a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, agreed to set aside what industry officials estimate is $200 million to $300 million of its own capital for a period of two years, as a penalty for the alleged abuses.
That reserve, which must be held in cash or equivalent securities, is likely to cost Prudential-Bache about $2 million to $3 million in borrowing costs, the officials estimated. 

Neither the SEC nor Prudential-Bache would confirm the figures. "I'm not going to give you the number," said Loren Schechter, an executive vice president and general counsel at the firm. "Whoever said it was $200 million said it was $200 million." 

As part of the settlement, the firm also agreed to have its back office monitored on a semi-annual basis by an independent auditor, who will report to the commission. 

Brokerage firms' back offices are the huge, behind-the-scenes operations that support the firms' sales and trading departments.
The back office's most important function is to maintain and organize securities owned by the firm and its customers, and SEC officials worry that poorly organized back offices jeopardize customer funds. 

"This was a serious breakdown of record-keeping," said Martin Kuperberg, an SEC associate regional administrator in New York, where the case was brought. "While we have no indication that it was deliberate, there were some clear control problems." 

Prudential-Bache's Mr. Schechter said the firm's problems stemmed from the inability of its back office to identify changes in various transactions during the business day. "We couldn't tell whether we received or delivered securities in the intraday period," he said. "But we could the following day." 

He added: "I'm not trivializing this, but no funds were lost and no customers were affected.
We should count the beans better, that's all." 

The censure is the second major case to surface in the past month concerning brokerages' back offices.
Last month, a wide-ranging probe of major firms' stock-loan departments was disclosed after Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. 's former stock-loan head agreed to plead guilty to felony charges.
Stock-loan departments are back-office operations that lend billions of dollars of stocks, bonds and other securities in exchange for fees.
The government's stock-loan investigation is continuing. 

The case against Prudential-Bache centers on government securities that were bought by customers but held by the firm.
Under SEC rules designed to protect firms' clients, those securities should have been held in an account separate from Prudential-Bache's own holdings. 

But the SEC said the firm failed to keep those safeguards.
In fact, it was so lax in some cases, the SEC said, that it bought, but didn't receive or pay for, securities that had been pledged as collateral for customer transactions. "How can you safekeep securities that you didn't own?" asked Mr. Kuperberg. "They didn't have possession of them." 

Moreover, the SEC charged that Prudential-Bache didn't really know how much customer money it held.
Under current rules, all firms have to compute a weekly "customer reserve formula," which discloses how much a firm is holding for its customers. 

"They had a computation and a formula," said Mr. Kuperberg, "but after a review, we've alleged they were not able to determine the accuracy of that computation." After examining Prudential's books, the complaint alleged, the SEC found that the firm overstated the reserve formula by as much as $18 million. 

