.START 

On the eve of East Germany's 40th birthday party, the hardline Communist Party leadership has given up any pretense of jubilation and is bristling with nervous defensiveness. 

Despite a mass exodus of East Germans to the West, bemused officials here insist that their orthodox socialist course is the correct one, and they firmly rule out the sort of radical reforms adopted by their Soviet, Polish and Hungarian allies. 

"There is no doubt that every single person who leaves the German Democratic Republic is one too many," said Otto Reinhold, a conservative member of the policy-making central committee and head of the East German Academy of Sciences, who called the exodus "a tragic development whose consequences we will have to consider." But Mr. Reinhold insisted that any potential changes in East German society would be aimed at insuring continuity, and not reform for its own sake, or "away from socialism." 

He was speaking after a further 7,600 East Germans escaped to the West via the West German embassy in Prague and 600 more were allowed to leave Warsaw.
West German television says that 47,000 East Germans have fled to the West since early August. 

Most of the escape routes have now been closed following an agreement between the East German and Czech governments to impose visa requirements for travelers.
Armed police have sealed off the entrance to the U.S. and other Western embassies in East Berlin after about two dozen East Germans sought refuge in the U.S. and French missions Wednesday.
West German television reported that hundreds of people who had flocked to the railway station in Dresden in the hope of catching one of the special trains to the West from Prague were dispersed by police using water cannons and truncheons. 

The developments amount to a nightmare for East Germany's 77-year-old leader, Erich Honecker, who had hoped to revel in a newfound sense of international legitimacy during the forthcoming celebrations.
Mr. Honecker's hard-line leadership was seeking to present the state as a showcase of socialist progess, and had renovated many of the old buildings in downtown East Berlin, even opening up Western-style street cafes and boutiques. 

But the mood in East Berlin is anything but festive.
There are surprisingly few flags up on the streets, and hundreds of uniformed and plainclothes police patrol the town center.
Asked for directions, one middle-age woman pointed to a nearby bush and said with a giggle, "Ask the policeman on the other side of that." The uniformed man hovering behind the bush, who was wearing dark glasses, was so surprised to be found out that he tangled his walkie-talkie in the branches before pointing the way. 

The ailing Mr. Honecker is acting just as uncertainly.
In a speech this week to a group of "anti-Fascist resistance fighters," he recalled the beginnings of East Germany 40 years ago and said, "Then, too, there was no shortage of people who prophesized our downfall . . . but four decades have confirmed that the existence of the German Democratic Republic is a blessing for our people and the peoples of Europe." He added that East Germany does not have the "drug mafia and trade in babies that are common in West Germany." 

But Western visitors who might want to celebrate such a blessing are now apparently unwelcome.
East German border guards turned back several hundred toursists from West Berlin at the Berlin Wall.
No explanation was given. 

The newly formed opposition groups are trying to lower their profile to avoid possible confrontation with the authorities.
The "New Forum Group," a fledgling movement, has urged its members to avoid any clashes for fear of provoking the type of killings that occurred in Beijing last June. 

The high point of the anniversary, apart from a big military parade tomorrow, is likely to be the presence of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, who is arriving today.
He is scheduled to give a speech before the assembled leaders of East Germany and many of its allies.
Some Soviet officials hint that it could be an East European version of his addresss in Strasbourg, France, this summer, when he outlined his vision of closer relations between Eastern and Western Europe and what the West could gain from such a rapprochement. 

The East German leadership, perhaps prematurely, is drawing some comfort from Mr. Gorbachev's visit, which it claims shows Soviet support for its policies.
Mr. Reinhold said that the Soviet visit would be the answer to those "who want to drive a wedge" between East Germany and the Soviet Communist Party.
But he conceded that there are substantial differences between Moscow's reform plan and the East German stance. 

(See related story: "Everyone Isn't Scrambling To Get Out, as Sample Of Population Suggests" -- WSJ Oct. 6, 1989) 

