.START 

No, that wasn't a wave of "program trading" that just rocked the stock market. 

It was, um, package trading.
Or maybe a portfolio adjustment.
Or some other euphemism. 

Some of Wall Street's biggest users of computer-assisted program trading of stocks and stock-index futures have beefed up their activity lately, after a brief post-crash pullback.
But mindful of public relations, the brokerage firms are struggling to call their rapid-fire trading anything but what it is. 

At Kidder, Peabody & Co., for example, insiders joke about "the 'P' word" and hold high-level meetings on what the firm should call a reorganized program-trading department.
Kidder, a General Electric Co. unit that's one of the busiest program traders on the New York Stock Exchange, settled on the safe-sounding Global Trading Group. 

At Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., which hasn't done a lot of program trading up to now, but is planning to do more, officials push the monicker "package trading." That's because the program trading that investors know is the "knee-jerk," volatile kind, and Drexel won't add to that, says a spokesman. 

Few experts are swayed by such semantics. "Call it a package, call it a program, call it anything you want," says Robert Whaley, co-director of Duke University's Futures and Options Research Center. "The idea is you want to get in and out of the entire market or industry very quickly." And that's program trading, he says. 

In fact, the New York Stock Exchange, which since July 1988 has published monthly program-trading statistics, defines the activity broadly.
In the official definition, program trading is a "wide range of portfolio trading strategies involving the purchase or sale of a basket of 15 or more stocks. . . . Examples of program trading strategies are index arbitrage and portfolio accumulation or liquidation transactions." 

Then again, that definition was written before the Big Board announced its own stock "basket" product, enabling big investors to trade all 500 stocks in Standard & Poor's 500-stock index in a single burst.
The Big Board's name for this new program-trading vehicle?
Exchange Stock Portfolio. 

While Merrill Lynch & Co. is just as sensitive as the others about the program trading it does, it stands by the forthright name of its program operation, the Program Trading Desk. "We're kind of generic," explains a spokesman. 

