.START 

As the Senate scrutinizes the financial costs of catastrophic-health care, three new off-Broadway plays explore the emotional costs.
It would take an audience made of stone (or even a senator) to be unmoved by the family tragedies depicted here: a senile father, a husband dying painfully of cancer, and a victim of a grisly freak accident.
But, for the most part, the emotional moments are too predictable to be poignant and, like all too many of the moralizers on Capitol Hill, none of the plays offers more than a simplistic analysis of the strains on victim or caregiver. 

The tragic muse may not have blessed any of these shows, but the comic muse drops by from time to time with a joke in each of them, staying the longest in "Home Games" (at the Hudson Guild Theater).
Tom Ziegler's title is itself a joke, a pun on the play's double focus on baseball and domestic travail -- home plate and home life.
Billed as a comedy about a retired Yankee, "Home Games" is less about the old ballplayer than about how his young daughter chooses between him (an accident left him brain-damaged) and the man she loves. 

The love story takes the form of a screwball comedy, with Mertle Mae, the daughter, cast in a sassy Laverne/Shirley mode, and Frank, the bumbling, weakwilled boyfriend, as a kind of Chevy Chase, pratfalls and all.
True to the conventions of the 1930s, when the genre began in Hollywood, the Park Avenue suitor needs more than a gold corkscrew from Tiffany's to win the big-hearted career girl. 

John Braden is extremely likable as the father, who thinks his daughter is Casey Stengel and her boyfriend is Mickey Mantle.
In long asides, he treats the audience to endearing, if repetitive, confidences about the 1955 World Series and his late beloved wife.
In fact, he's such a delight that it's hard to see why Mertle thinks he's a burden, and harder still to imagine why she would consider exchanging the pleasure of living with this joyful man for the strains of life with her clumsy beau. 

Kymberly Dakin gives a confident performance as Mertle Mae.
Her brassy self-assurance and good-natured railings at everyone who crosses her path -- especially her blind kitty and the dimwits at her office -- are performed with gusto.
And she never lets her tenderness for her father get maudlin. 

Halfway through Gary Bonasorte's "The Aunts" (at the 47th Street Theater), Meg and her sister Nan and their niece Pita get stoned on the Alice B. Toklas brownies they have baked for Nan's husband, who's dying of cancer upstairs.
Nan has read that marijuana can ease his post-chemotherapy nausea.
But she and the others try out the "medicine" on themselves, and the ensuing silliness degenerates into an ugly family squabble. 

Nan's husband interrupts the scene by ringing a bell, the signal for Meg to bring him his pills.
She suspects that he's decided to kill himself. 

Suicide isn't the only big issue this play rushes by on its way to more small talk.
Euthanasia, abortion, divorce, alcoholism -- they all get jarringly lost in the general chatter. 

Ann Wedgeworth is irritating as Nan.
Her Mae West sashay and high-pitched titter, classic affectations of a stage coquette, detract from her character's more interesting fear of being left alone, which overrides her grief at her husband's expected death.
Mia Dillon doesn't fare much better as the chunky, plain niece who can't find a husband and seems more concerned about going easy on the chips and the cheesecake than about the baby she's decided to bring into this world. 

Bethel Leslie gives Meg a believable matter-of-factness and rigid self-control and often manages to rise above the banalities of her character as written.
Meg has come to stay with Nan as much to escape her empty nest and philandering husband and to find something useful to do with herself as to comfort her sister.
Trapped in a Pittsburgh suburb without a driver's license, any marketable skills or an attentive husband, Meg has turned to drink.
She's both bitter and wise on the subject of marriage. "It's a lonely road when you marry alone," she tells Pita.
And, "They never call and they never have a good excuse.
Have another glass of wine." 

"Beauty Marks" (at Intar) is Kim Merrill's study of the turbulent relationship beween two motherless, teen-age sisters -- one beautiful and beloved, one brainy and belittled -- in a small town in Nebraska.
The beautiful sister, June (Colleen Quinn), is competing for the title of Corn Husk Queen, a crown her mother once wore.
The ladies of the church sewing circle have made her a dress and now all she needs is the help of her nerdy sister, Daphne (played by Ms. Merrill), to write an ode to the stuff that grows as high as a elephant's eye. 

Catastrophe doesn't strike till Act II, which is good for the audience as well as the sisters.
In Act I there is some amusing bickering between the sisters who snap at each other in the same vein as precocious kids in a TV sitcom. ("How's school?" "A miracle occurred.
Another day passed without observing signs of intelligent life.") The squabbling between their grandfather and stepgrandmother is also rather clever. 

Post-tragedy, the play gets maudlin in a welter of reconciliations: between the sisters; between the girls and their grandfather -- a failure as a farmer and a father; between the girls and their stepgrandmother (played with just the right dollop of Midwestern affectionate starchiness by Elizabeth Lawrence); and between the grandfather and stepgrandmother.
Ms. Merrill would be wiser to stay away from the grander passions and stick to the cuter ones. 

Ms. Kirkpatrick is deputy editorial features editor of the Journal. 

