.START 

A National Research Council panel, anxious about slipping U.S. competitiveness in a "technological age," called for a $500 million-a-year boost in federal spending on agricultural research. 

The Board on Agriculture, in a report released yesterday, recommended using part of the multibillion-dollar savings from reduced spending on farm subsidies to "revitalize" the nation's oldest and largest industry, agriculture.
The panel urged the Agriculture Department to seek an immediate increase in its $50 million-a-year program, to $550 million, for competitive research grants.
Currently, the department spends a total of $1.2 billion a year on research and development. 

"Solving the problems of competitiveness, a high-quality food supply, and natural resources and the environment will require much more new knowledge than was required to solve previous problems," the panel said in its report. "The necessary new knowledge is unlikely to be acquired and expediently applied without substantial new funding." 

The report is unusual in several respects.
It expresses the consensus of a nationwide Who's Who in biotechnology and agricultural research and development.
It was produced on the Board on Agriculture's own initiative, not at the request of Congress or a federal agency, which is usually the case.
And the report is also noteworthy for its tone of urgency as it recounts missed opportunities, such as agriculture's halting application of biotechnology, and warns of growing challenges from trading partners overseas. 

"The agricultural sector cannot progress under the current level of funding," the report asserted. "It can only fall behind." 

Charles E. Hess, assistant agriculture secretary for science and education, said he would be "very pleased to see" a $500 million increase in research funding, but he couldn't say whether it would appear in the department's budget request for fiscal 1991. "As you realize, we operate within the constraints of the federal budget," Mr. Hess said. 

The report said that the government has been shortchanging agricultural research for years.
The National Institutes of Health, for example, dispensed $6.4 billion in competitive grants in fiscal 1988, while the Agriculture Department handed out just $40 million. 

The report also said that the department's competitive grants, which average $50,000 a year and are for two years, aren't large enough "to meet the demands of high-quality research." In contrast, grants by the National Science Foundation average $71,300 a year, while NIH grants average $154,900 a year.
Both are for three years or longer. 

Unless the U.S. renews its commitment to agricultural research -- first made with the passage of the Morrill Act of 1862 -- prospective scientists will shy away from careers in agriculture, the Board on Agriculture warned. 

The National Research Council is the operating arm of the National Academy of Sciences. 

