.START 

CAPITALIST COUNSEL: The Soviets turn to the U.S. for economic advice. 

At Moscow's request, Fed Chief Alan Greenspan will meet next week in the Soviet Union with his central-bank counterpart and the Soviet finance minister.
Fed member Wayne Angell recently made a similar trip.
The main topic: How can the Soviets soak up the country's excess rubles without setting off rampant inflation? 

The Soviets seriously consider Angell's suggestion to go on a gold standard.
Gold-backed ruble bonds, he told them, "would be snapped up in London and New York at about 3%, the lowest cost of capital in the world." Greenspan, however, is expected to be less enthusiastic about the proposal. 

The Fed chairman says one subject he won't discuss with the Soviets is their desire to get into world economic organizations.
He considers that an administration decision. 

STAR WARS SLIPPAGE sets off a scramble for the plan's huge funding. 

House Democrats and other critics of the space-based anti-missile plan are determined to funnel much of the money to anti-drug and other domestic programs.
But the Pentagon insists that the money, if it becomes available, is needed for conventional weapons.
Its shopping list ranges from ships and "stand-off" nuclear weapons to radar-eluding jets. 

"The scramble is under way in earnest," a senior military planner says. "And it's bound to get worse." With SDI expected to be relegated to an open-ended research program, Pentagon planners hope lawmakers will be less likely to cut other strategic programs.
Beneficiaries may include the B-2 Stealth bomber and the MX and Midgetman missiles. 

MEXICO BOOSTS relations with the U.S., but trade requests pose problems. 

New President Salinas wins praise for accelerating economic reform and attacking corruption.
The Mexicans also have more than doubled their drug-fighting budget and this year have confiscated over 20 tons of cocaine. "In Mexico, we now affirm that drug-trafficking is a threat to national sovereignty because, as in other nations, it corrupts whatever it touches," Salinas says. 

The U.S. administration is eager to help Salinas, who in meetings with Bush this week appealed for the U.S to open its markets more to Mexican products.
But the U.S. is hamstrung by its own protectionist import restrictions in two of the most important areas where Mexico wants more access: steel and textiles.
Quotas may be increased slightly at best. 

There also is political sensitivity on both sides of the border to the U.S. seeming to be doing special favors for Mexico. 

U.S.-SOVIET GLASNOST extends to the military.
Soviet Defense Minister Yazov's trip to the U.S. this week is expected to pave the way for more joint military visits and regular swapping of defense information.
U.S. officials say Yazov disclosed new details about the Soviet schedule for withdrawing troops from Eastern Europe. 

NEW NEWT?
GOP House Whip Gingrich strives to shed his hit-man image.
He praises Foley as a "remarkably fair" House speaker and says of Rep. Frank, "give the guy his day in court." But a skeptical Democrat contends a toned-down Gingrich is about as likely as "Jackie Mason becoming the spokesman for the Conference of Christians and Jews." 

ELDERLY OUTRAGE against the catastrophic-health-care program that was championed by the American Association of Retired Persons doesn't cut into the AARP's membership. "This has been our best membership year in history," an official says.
Some three million people have joined the 32 million-member group this year. 

JUMBO MUMBO: Asked whether his agency plans to impose new reporting requirements on debt-laden airlines, Transportation chief Skinner replies: "When you eat an elephant, you eat it one chunk at a time.
We've got a big elephant at the department and we're trying to digest it.
We'll take some more meals here shortly." 

SCIENTISTS FEAR the supercollider may turn into a super-headache. 

The atom smasher's expected $5.9 billion cost could escalate, pushing it far behind schedule and crowding out other projects.
Project scientists plan to redesign the supercollider's magnets and other machinery, raising the tab by $400 million.
But congressional staffers fret that the project will eventually cost billions more. 

Current funding already forces budget cuts elsewhere.
Officials say operating time of an atom-smashing accelerator at Brookhaven National Laboratory will have to be reduced about 20%.
Cutting funds for current-generation accelerators will "push young people out of the field," warns Lee Roberts, a Boston University physicist. 

As the supercollider's annual budget doubles in coming years, "there's clearly going to be tension" over science projects competing for money, says Stanford scientist Sidney Drell. 

MINOR MEMOS: Treasury Chief Brady urges the White House to replace the M&Ms in its candy jars with Kellogg's Cracklin' Oat Bran. . . . Colorado Sen. Armstrong declines to yield to Sen. Fowler during a debate because the Georgian is "so skilled in debate . . . he might embarrass me." Fowler's reply: "The senator is correct." . . . California Rep. Panetta introduces a resolution to make the monarch butterfly the official national insect. 

