.START 

Some NBC-TV affiliates want to air "The Cosby Show," "Alf" and other prime-time programs an hour earlier. 

NBC affiliates on the West Coast earlier this year began pressing National Broadcasting Co., a unit of General Electric Co., to alter a fundamental part of the television landscape by shifting the three-hour prime-time block to 7 p.m. from 8 p.m. Now, the movement has spread to NBC affiliates in the Southeast and New England. 

Such a change would affect affiliates on the East and West coasts.
In much of the middle of the nation, prime time already starts at 7 p.m. 

The problem, as affiliates explain it, is that 11 p.m. is the goodnight hour.
Viewing levels drop precipitously then, just when affiliates' local news casts come on.
Local news accounts for the bulk of an affiliate's revenue and station's say they would do better with an earlier start.
Moreover, affiliates want to compete with independent stations, which generally air local newscasts at 10 p.m. 

While NBC says it has commissioned a feasibility study, the issue is already causing some concern.
The big question is what would happen to prime access slots, which come right before prime time.
Stations have contracts with such syndicators as King World Productions Inc. to air such shows as "Wheel of Fortune" and "Jeopardy]" directly before prime time.
If prime time were moved up, the stations would have to switch prime access to 6 p.m., which would in turn cut into early local newscasts. 

The move would be "extremely detrimental" for syndicators, says Dick Kurlander, vice president and director of programming at Petry Television, a station consultant.
Viewer levels are lower at 6 p.m. than at 7 p.m., so syndicators might get less money for their shows. 

So far, the movement seems to be confined to NBC affiliates.
Officials at CBS Inc. and Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said their stations haven't expressed an interest in moving prime time. 

Privately, NBC officials warn that the odds are slim for making such a drastic change.
And if there were to be a change, it would have to be announced by January, NBC officials say.
That's when stations begin buying syndicated shows for the following September. "They would have to know when prime time begins and ends," says one NBC official. 

David E. Henderson, president of Outlet Communications Inc., which owns two NBC affiliates, says his stations in Providence, R.I., and Columbus, Ohio, are conducting their own studies at his request to "determine what moving prime time to seven o'clock would mean for our ratings and revenues." 

"I'm interested in anything that keeps us competitive with the changing marketplace," Mr. Henderson says. "The needs of the audience in the 1950s are different for the audience in the 1990s and we better address a society where people are getting up earlier in order to compete in the business world." 

Some station managers say the possible cutback of early local news would be made up later in the evening. "We would have a one-hour {10:00} newscast," says Amy McCombs, general manager of KRON, the NBC affiliates in San Francisco. 

The network study, commissioned jointly by NBC and its affiliates, will be conducted by an outside research company.
It is supposed to answer life-style questions, such as whether an audience exists for prime-time shows at 7 p.m. 

Even Johnny Carson enters into the equation.
His contract with NBC guarantees that his "Tonight Show" is aired at either 11:30 p.m. on the East and West coasts, or 10:30 p.m. in the central time zone.
Some East or West coast stations might want to air Mr. Carson's talk show at 10:30 p.m. or 11 p.m. if they don't buy syndicated shows to follow their local news. 

An NBC spokeswoman says, "Any change would require regrouping with the Carson folks." 

