.START 

It was a politician's paradise.
Mark Johnston, a Republican, was running unopposed for mayor in the Saco, Maine, primary election Tuesday.
He lost. 

Under city-charter rules governing primaries, Mr. Johnston needed 255 votes -- equal to 5% of the votes cast in the last mayoral election -- to be placed on the Nov. 7 ballot.
He got 252 (253 after a recount.) 

Now the general election has become a nightmare for the 37-year-old owner of Vic & Whit's Sandwich Shop in Saco. "I don't know who I'm running against.
It could be no one; it could be the whole town," he says.
Because, technically, no one's running for mayor now, the 10,000 or so registered voters in this town of 17,000 can vote for any resident through write-in ballots -- as long as the candidates' names and addresses are correct. 

"I don't believe this," complains Mr. Johnston, "I thought I would be talking about some important issues facing this town," such as Saco's budget and waste-disposal problems. "Now I'm going to be going around telling people where I live and spelling my name for them." 

Mr. Johnston may be spared some worry as he mounts his four-week general-election campaign starting "the day after Columbus Day, which is a holiday." For the Democrats can't find an opposition candidate.
They haven't been able to find one for the past few months since the current mayor, Paul Janson, let it be known he wouldn't be seeking a second term.
The only Democrat who's expressed any interest at all, Mr. Janson says, is a pharmacist who works nights. "That won't work out too well," he adds, "since city council meetings are at night." Mr. Janson himself won't run because he has to tend to his sick wife. 

In retrospect, Mr. Johnston says he should have campaigned more heavily in the primary.
Instead he took it easy, he says, after personally collecting the 255 signatures needed to be placed on the primary ballot. "If all 255 had turned out, I would have won," he says, adding that it was a beautiful day in Saco last Tuesday. 

One who didn't show up at the polls was his brother, Dale, who, Mr. Johnston says, "was too busy working." On the day of the election, candidate Johnston reminded him to vote. "Ah," his brother said, "it's a shoo-in.
You're unopposed." 

