.START 

Hydro-Quebec, a big exporter of electricity to the northeastern U.S., is praying for rain. 

Five years of dry weather in northern Quebec have emptied the provincially owned utility's reservoirs and forced it to chop spot sales of surplus power to the U.S. and even to pull the plug on some Quebec industrial customers. 

Hydro-Quebec's reservoirs are less than half-full.
Even if the province gets its normal dose of rain this fall, the reservoirs could drop to as low as 15%-full by the time the winter is over, the usual low-water point for the year. 

"This is about the worst year in history," said Gilbert Neveu, a Hydro-Quebec planning executive. 

The low water levels won't stop Hydro-Quebec's current sales to the northeastern U.S. of "firm" power, specific amounts of electricity sold under contract.
Nor will the water shortage alter the utility's strategy of selling large amounts of "firm" power to the U.S. over the next 20 years.
That power will be supplied by new generators. 

However, the water shortage and increased demand in Quebec have ended sales of "surplus" power, electricity sold to other provinces and U.S. utilities when available. 

Last year Hydro-Quebec projected it would have 63 billion kilowatt-hours of surplus power for sale bewteen 1988 and 1993.
This spring the utility said it would have hardly any surplus power at all for sale.
One billion kilowatt-hours is about the amount used by a city of 50,000 in one year. 

This year the utility had planned to sell 3.2 billion kwh of surplus power but even that has proved to be too ambitious a goal.
Hydro-Quebec now says it will sell less than one billion kwh.
However, Hydro-Quebec will still be a net exporter of electricity in 1989.
It will sell about 10 billion kwh under existing firm contracts and will buy four billion kwh. 

U.S. utilities would buy more electricity from Hydro-Quebec if they could. "We're always looking for power," said a spokeswoman for Western Massachusetts Electric Co., Springfield, Mass., a Hydro-Quebec customer. 

The lack of rain has cost Hydro-Quebec a lot of money: about 300 million Canadian dollars (US$255 million) last year and probably about the same this year in extra costs and lost sales. 

In 1987 export sales brought in C$713 million.
This year the utility expects export sales of only C$318 million.
Total revenue for 1989 is expected to be about C$5.5 billion. 

Just meeting demand in Quebec this winter will take all of Hydro-Quebec's ingenuity.
It has fired up a thermal generating plant normally used only in peak periods and will run it full-time.
Hydro-Quebec also will buy electricity from neighboring utilities on a regular basis. 

But if a handful of small generating plants now under construction or being repaired don't start producing electricity as planned by December, Hydro-Quebec won't have any room to maneuver.
Hydro-Quebec officials said they'll be able to meet local demand this winter and insist the situation isn't critical.
But they won't rule out load-shedding or brownouts if the province gets hit with a bad cold spell. 

The low-water problem isn't confined to Quebec.
Manitoba Hydro has seen its export sales to other provinces and the U.S. drop to C$31 million in the year ended March 31, 1989, from C$113 million in the year ended March 31, 1987.
A Manitoba Hydro spokesman said water levels are now rising but points out that with annual revenue of just over C$600 million, the drop in export sales hurts. 

So far the water shortages aren't worrying the utilities' creditors or raising borrowing costs, but the situation hasn't escaped notice. "It's certainly a concern to us and we continue to monitor the situation," said Ihor Kots, a vice president of Canada Bond Rating Service Inc., Montreal. 

Canadian utilities are big borrowers and Hydro-Quebec, in particular, relies heavily on U.S. capital markets.
Its 10-year development plan calls for capital expenditures of C$48 billion to C$61 billion, most of which will be paid for with borrowed funds. 

