.START 

Your editorial concerning the proposed Americans With Disabilities Act ("The Lawyers' Employment Act," Sept. 11) not only failed to grasp the importance of enacting comprehensive civil-rights legislation for individuals with disabilities, but also contained several factual errors. 

For too long federal policy has provided massive financial resources for income-support programs to maintain individuals with disabilities in a state of dependency.
The new disability legislation, on the other hand, will promote the independence of people with disabilities to enable them to enter into the mainstream of American life.
By removing barriers to full participation by disabled individuals, the bill will have direct and tangible benefits for the economy.
The result will be more disabled people working, increased earnings, less dependence on the Social Security system, increased spending on consumer goods and increased tax revenues. 

This is not "loopy" legislation or a product of a "crabby philosophy," as you would have it.
The promotion of long-term economic growth and an end to the intolerable isolation of individuals with disabilities are goals that all Americans share.
In fashioning this legislation, the president has worked tirelessly and successfully with the Senate to ensure that these goals will be achieved without the negative effects you fear. 

I would like to correct the record on several points.
First, your editorial's prediction of a tidal wave of litigation resulting from the bill is based on a series of false premises.
Contrary to your assertion, plaintiffs will not be able to sue for punitive damages under the bill.
Rather, the authority to seek civil penalties is limited to violations of the public-accommodation part of the bill, is given only to the attorney general, and is limited to pattern or practice cases of general public importance.
As Sen. Robert Dole (R., Kan.) aptly stated on the Senate floor, attorneys will not be able to build careers out of lawsuits against public accommodations. 

Second, aware of the costs that litigation can impose on business, the administration held fast, during negotiations with the Senate, in its opposition to any provision that would create any additional monetary incentive for private litigation.
In fact, it is only in the employment area that any monetary relief is available, and that particular relief, in the form of back pay, has been available under other civil-rights employment statutes for the past 25 years. 

Third, you contend that litigation will also be fueled by the vagueness of concepts such as "reasonable" accommodation and "undue hardship." In fact, these terms, as well as most of the key language incorporated in the bill, are taken from federal laws prohibiting discrimination on the basis of handicap that have covered the federal government, its recipients and contractors for more than 15 years.
Broad portions of the private sector, therefore, are already familiar with these concepts and have not been unduly burdened by litigation or, for that matter, the costs of complying with these laws. 

Fourth, you apparently fail to understand why comprehensive legislation to ensure equal opportunity for individuals with disabilities is needed.
Good-faith efforts have not proved to be enough.
Congressional hearings on the legislation documented a litany of instances of discriminatory treatment against people with disabilities in our society and detailed the inadequacies of current federal and state laws to address this discrimination.
Two-thirds of all disabled Americans between the ages of 16 and 64 are not working and the overwhelming majority of these people say that they want to work. 

Dick Thornburgh 

Attorney General 

Washington 

