.START 

A federal jury here found two former owners of closely held Ramona Savings & Loan guilty of fraud and conspiracy that helped lead to the collapse of the institution in 1986. 

Defendant John L. Molinaro, 48 years old, was found guilty on 33 charges of bank fraud, conspiracy and falsifying the thrift's financial records, and Donald P. Mangano, Sr., 52, was found guilty on 31 counts.
The 11-week trial was the first criminal trial of top executives of a failed Southern California thrift. 

Mr. Molinaro faces up to 165 years in prison on all of the charges, and $8.3 million in fines.
Mr. Mangano faces 155 years and $7.8 million in fines.
Sentencing is set for Jan. 10.
Messrs.
Molinaro and Mangano have indicated they plan to appeal the decision.
Mr. Mangano is free on $150,000 bail, and Mr. Molinaro's bail has been revoked and he's been taken into custody, said Assistant U.S. Attorney Steven E. Zipperstein. 

"This is obviously a significant victory for the government," Mr. Zipperstein added. "It proves that jurors are able to understand and comprehend complex white-collar fraud cases." 

Mr. Molinaro, a former carpet salesman, and Mr. Mangano, a real estate developer, bought the one-branch thrift in Orange, Calif., for $4 million in 1984, and proceeded to take advantage of new thrift laws that encouraged investment in real estate, prosecutors claimed. 

At the crux of the government's case was Cherokee Village, a condominium project in Palm Springs, Calif., that Mr. Mangano's construction company built with $25 million of the thrift's assets. 

When the project flopped and federal regulators ordered the thrift to get rid of the development in 1985, three friends of the owners bought the condos with $29.4 million borrowed from Ramona, then turned the property back over to Mr. Mangano in a complicated transaction designed to take the property off the thrift's books.
The property was later transferred back to Ramona for $1 million, and the thrift booked the transaction as a purchase of 23 vacant acres in Palm Springs.
Ramona recorded a profit of more than $4 million on the bogus deals, the prosecution alleged.
The defense maintained that the transactions were done for tax and credit purposes. 

The thrift was finally seized by federal regulators in 1986, and it cost the government more than $65 million to pay off depositors and close the institution. 

Mr. Molinaro was arrested less than a year after the takeover for falsifying a passport and served nearly two years in federal prison.
Regulators have charged in civil actions that Mr. Molinaro transferred millions of dollars to the Cayman Islands, and have reportedly recovered about $3 million so far from accounts he set up in the Caribbean. 

