.START 

The Senate overwhelmingly approved a bill intended to bar flag desecration, after first adding language that could make the measure unconstitutional. 

The bill, approved 91-9, is designed to circumvent by statute a Supreme Court decision barring the punishment of a person who burns the U.S. flag as political protest.
The Senate debate had echoes of last year's presidential campaign, as well as omens for a second debate later this month on the contentious question of whether the Constitution should be amended to protect the flag. 

The House, which passed a slightly different bill last month, is expected to vote on the Senate-passed measure next week. 

Under the Senate-passed bill anyone who "knowingly mutilates, defaces, physically defiles, burns, maintains on the floor or ground, or tramples upon" a flag would be subject to an unspecified fine and a prison term of as long as one year. 

The phrase "physically defiles" was added in an amendment sponsored by Sen. Pete Wilson (R., Calif.), over the objections of Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Joseph Biden (D., Del.).
Mr. Biden argued that the word "defile" would require a judgment on the intent of someone who burns a flag, thus making the law vulnerable to a constitutional challenge. 

Sen. Biden's procedural effort to block the amendment failed, 69-31.
During that roll call, eight Southern and Border State Democrats initially voted to back Mr. Wilson.
When it became evident that the Californian would prevail, 10 other Democratic lawmakers switched their votes to support him.
Eventually, a total of 24 Democrats joined all 45 Republicans to side with Sen. Wilson against the Biden effort. 

The amendment itself was subsequently approved, 76-24. 

The strong support of Democratic lawmakers reflects their fear of being driven into the same corner that Michael Dukakis found himself in because of President Bush's use of patriotic values and the Pledge of Allegiance issue in last year's election. 

Lawmakers turned back, 53-47, an attempt by Senate GOP Leader Robert Dole of Kansas to exempt actions taken against a flag in private.
Sponsors believed this provision also would make the measure constitutionally vulnerable by suggesting the bill was aimed at curbing public demonstrations rather than physically protecting the flag. 

Some Democrats saw the Republican amendments as an effort to maintain the pressure for a constitutional amendment, favored by Mr. Bush. 

Already, Mr. Dole forced a one-day delay on the measure's passage, derailing the Democratic leadership's hopes of quickly sending the measure to the White House.
And yesterday afternoon, Rep. James Sensenbrenner (R., Wis.), a senior member of the House Judiciary Committee, blocked a House vote on the Senate-passed measure. 

Democrats hoped that a bill awaiting the president's signature would both pressure Mr. Bush to sign the measure into law and relieve pressure for a constitutional amendment. 

Yesterday's nine negative votes on final passage came from a coalition of conservatives, who argue that only a constitutional amendment can provide relief, and liberals, who don't think any response is necessary and view the measure as an intrusion on First Amendment rights to free speech. 

The House version doesn't include language to bar keeping a flag on the floor or ground.
On a voice vote, senators agreed to add the language in response to a Chicago conceptual art exhibit earlier this year in which a flag was displayed on the floor. 

Both versions also allow for the burning of soiled flags, the method suggested by federal law, and provide for speedy consideration of any constitutional challenge to the measure. 

Currently, federal law makes it a crime to "knowingly cast contempt" upon a flag by "publicly mutilating, defacing, defiling, burning or trampling upon it" and provides penalties of as long as a year imprisonment and a fine of as much as $1,000. 

In June, the Supreme Court threw out the conviction of a Texas man who set a flag afire during a 1984 demonstration.
The court said he was "engaging in political expression" that is protected by the First Amendment.
Proponents of the legislation hoped to avoid the court's objection by targeting an action rather than the intent behind it. 

