.START 

The Bush administration said it is tightening controls on the export of U.S. products that could be used to manufacture missiles and chemical weapons.
The move is designed at least in part to deter Congress from enacting even tougher measures. 

Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher, testifying before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said his department is "carefully reviewing" various types of export-applications in order to weed out ones that could make a "significant contribution to a missile development program." The effort is aimed at preventing proliferation of missiles capable of carrying nuclear or chemical warheads. 

Mr. Mosbacher also told the committee that the U.S. plans to tighten controls or impose new ones on 13 chemicals that could be used to make chemical weapons.
He didn't identify these chemicals, but he said some of them are widely available and commonly used for making commercial products such as paint thinners, emulsifiers and fertilizers. 

Separately, U.S. officials confirmed that the Bush administration is trying to dissuade the French government from allowing the transfer to Brazil of French technology for the construction of liquid-fuel rocket engines.
The officials said they are concerned the technology might be transferred to an unfriendly country and used there for building ballistic missiles. 

Marcilio Marques Moreira, Brazil's ambassador to Washington, said his country merely wants to gain technical experience in the construction of boosters to launch its own communications satellites.
Arianespace, a government-owned French firm offering satellite-launching service, is bidding for this business, while McDonnell Douglas Corp. and American Telephone & Telegraph Co. have submitted a competing bid, the envoy said. 

A French embassy spokesman acknowledged that his government is still discussing the issue with the Bush administration. "We have said that we will abide by our international obligations {to prevent proliferation of missile technology}," he said. "The exact nature of these obligations is the matter of discussion between our two governments." 

During his testimony, Mr. Mosbacher expressed the administration's opposition to a provision in the House-passed defense authorization bill that would deny Pentagon and other federal contracts to foreign companies that violate export-control laws adopted by seven nations that signed a 1987 accord called the Missile Technology Control Regime.
That pact doesn't have the force of a treaty, but it expresses the policy of each signatory to enforce strict controls on the sale of missile technology. 

The Commerce Department chief said the proposed sanctions would discourage further cooperation and intelligence-sharing among the signatories. 

A number of press reports have linked West German and Italian companies to missile development projects in Argentina and Egypt. 

Mr. Mosbacher said the U.S. hopes three other countries will agree to join the MTCR accord.
He didn't identify them, though.
The original MTCR signatories are the U.S., Britain, France, West Germany, Canada, Italy and Japan. 

In screening export license applications involving goods that could be used in missiles, the Commerce Department is scrutinizing the "nonproliferation credentials" of importing countries, the identities of actual buyers, and the applicability of the products involved to missile development, Mr. Mosbacher told the committee. 

The Commerce Department's efforts concerning chemical trade will be focused on preventing potential chemical-bomb ingredients from reaching Iran, Iraq, Syria and Libya, Mr. Mosbacher said.
Besides trying to block direct shipments of U.S.-made chemicals to those countries, the department will seek to prevent those countries from obtaining the chemicals through third countries, he added. 

--- Losses of $2 Billion in 1st Half Exceed Expectations ---- By Charles McCoy Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal .START 

The moribund thrifts rescued by the government in 1988 under long-term assistance agreements are losing money at an unexpectedly fast rate, driving up the potential costs of the thrift-rescue plan and adding more than $2 billion of previously undisclosed losses to the deficits reported by the industry in the first half of 1989.
Data from the Office of Thrift Supervision discloses for the first time that the government spent $1.9 billion to help offset continuing heavy operating losses in the first six months at many of the thrifts it bailed out in 1988.
The figure outstrips some estimates of the rate at which the government would have to keep pumping money into supposedly rescued thrifts and has surprised even some federal officials.
It isn't included in reports of the already huge $7.2 billion of losses by the thrift industry through June 30.
Furthermore, the data from which the $1.9 billion figure is drawn doesn't include results from a number of other thrifts supposedly rescued by the government in 1988, including several of the industry's biggest bleeders; that suggests that the government's actual first-half costs of providing ongoing assistance to the 1988 casualties went far beyond $1.9 billion.
The heavy continuing expenditures on past bailouts cast further doubt on the staggering $166 billion 10-year price tag the government has placed on its massive thrift bailout bill, passed in August.
The estimate allocates $39 billion for thrifts closed in 1988, $50 billion for thrifts expects to be closed in the next three years and $24 billion for thrifts that go broke after that.
The remainder is for debt interest.
On Tuesday, William Seidman, chairman of of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., questioned the adequacy of the $50 billion provided in the bill to merge or close S&Ls it now controls or expects to take over in the next three years. "All of this is simply laying the groundwork for Bailout Bill II," said Allan Bortel, a thrift anlayst with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in San Francisco. "The first one was just a down payment." The Federal Savings & Loan Insurance Corp. closed or merged 205 thrifts in 1988 and "stabilized" 18 others by changing management or otherwise attempting to temporarily stanch losses.
To attract potential buyers for the dead thrifts, FSLIC had to offer numerous inducements, from "yield-maintenance guarantees," which assure purchasers of a profitable spread on non-performing assets, to "capital coverage," which makes up for losses on asset sales.
The $1.9 billion figure contained in the Office of Thrift Supervision data reflects how much the government is having to dole out under such guarantees.
The government has estimated that the eventual cost of dealing with 1988 cases would be about $39 billion over 10 years.
However, about $20 billion of that was committed in 1988; the rest was supposed to be paid out through 1998 to help offset losses under yield-maintenance and capital-coverage agreements through 1998.
Thus, the rate at which the government is spending on those guarantees -- which works out to about $4 billion to $6 billion a year at the present pace -- indicates that "the government has underestimated, perhaps woefully, the amount that it's going to cost to deal with those losers," said one professional who represented several bidders for the 1988 failed thrifts.
James Barth, chief economist for the Office of Thrift Supervision, said the agency hasn't revised its estimate for the eventual cost of the 1988 rescues.
He also emphasized that changes in the economy and other unpredictable factors could reduce the eventual costs.
But he added that "these institutions are highly reliant on local and regional economic conditions, and the economic conditions in some areas are not coming back strongly." For example, he cited the still-ravaged real estate market in Texas, home to many of the sickliest of the 1988 thrifts. "At some of these institutions, we knew there were black holes, but we didn't know how dark they were and how deep," Mr. Barth said.
The thrift agency's data show profuse hemorrhaging at some rescued thrifts.
For example, American Federal Bank of Dallas, formed by combining 12 foundering Texas thrifts, had net income in the first half of 1989 of about $7 million, including government assistance.
Without government assistance, it would have had losses of $128.7 million.
New West Federal Savings & Loan, Stockton, Calif., had to have $317 million of federal aid just to bring its net income to zero.
Indeed, the figures suggest it's increasingly likely that the government will have to re-rescue some of the salvaged 1988 thrifts.
Rumors have been swirling for months that Dallas-based Southwest Savings might need another bailout, and its results won't quell them: In the first six months, it had a net loss of $66.7 million, despite $214 million of government assistance.
Thrift agency officials declined to comment on the possibility of a second bailout for Southwest.
Richard Park, Southwest's chief financial officer, said that while "you could always use more help," Southwest "has not at any time asked the government for additional assistance or had any discussions" with anyone regarding the matter.
Pelican Homestead & Savings, the model for the so-called Southwest Plan regulators dreamed up in 1988 to deal with the legions of dying thrifts in Texas and neighboring states, also appears to be unraveling.
It had losses of $25.5 million in the first half, on top of a $39.4 million loss for all of 1988.
Yet the thrift agency's numbers don't even include Pelican and other of the class of 1988's frailest members, indicating that the government's actual losses to date are understated.
Sunbelt Savings, a huge, reeling Dallas thrift, had about $3.75 billion of repossessed property and problem loans at the end of the second quarter, more than a third of its assets.
Yet it reported net income for the period of $829,000.
Analysts think it couldn't have done so without many millions of dollars of federal assistance.
Rick Michaels, Sunbelt's executive vice president, declined to disclose the amount of federal money it received, citing confidentiality agreements it has with regulators.
Several of the rescued 1988 thrifts are doing well -- perhaps too well, in the eyes of some.
Many Congressmen lambasted federal thrift officials during the debate over the thrift crisis for giving away too much in incentives to some of the investors in the 1988 transactions.
The Robert M. Bass Group's American Savings Bank of Stockton had net income of $73.8 million in the first half.
First Gibraltar of Houston, taken over by an investor group headed by Ronald Perelman, earned $80.5 million.
That places both thrifts among the five most profitable thrifts in the industry, with much higher returns on assets than the two biggest U.S. thrifts, Great Western Savings and Home Savings of America. --- Biggest Losers Among 1988 Thrifts Rescues (In millions of dollars) REPORTED LOSS/INCOME NET INCOME W/O FSLIC New West Federal (Stockton, Ca) $ 0 -$119.9 Southwest Savings (Dallas) - 9.2 - 119.0 United Savings (Houston) 14.7 - 16.8 First Gibraltar (Houston) 56.5 56.5 Guaranty Federal (Dallas) .5 - 70.4 American Federal (Dallas) 5.8 - 69.5 Franklin Federal (Austin, Texas) .8 - 47.2 Bluebonnet Savings (Dallas) .4 - 56.5 SECOND QUARTER NET REPORTED LOSS/INCOME NET INCOME W/O FSLIC New West Federal (Stockton, Ca) $ 0 -$198.1 Southwest Savings (Dallas) -57.6 - 161.7 United Savings (Houston) 5.6 - 158.3 First Gibraltar (Houston) 24.0 - 100.3 Guaranty Federal (Dallas) - 4.7 - 71.2 American Federal (Dallas) 1.3 - 62.9 Franklin Federal (Austin, Texas) .6 - 37.3 Bluebonnet Savings (Dallas) 16.1 - 11.2 

