.START 

"Some conservatives, including former President Reagan, have argued that many of the homeless are mentally disturbed people." 

-- The Associated Press 

This is a good moment to consider the homeless issue, insofar as Washington tomorrow is supposed to witness a large march for the homeless, whose sponsors and supporters include Mitch Snyder, the National Low-Income Housing Coalition, the National Association of Home Builders, the AFL-CIO and the International Union of Bricklayers and Allied Craftsmen. 

We imagine these sentimental types are among the "activists" who the AP says, "complain that the Reagan-Bush administrations cut the budget authority for federal housing assistance programs by 77% . . . and cite that as the principal reason for the growing numbers of people who sleep in bus stations, abandoned cars, cardboard boxes or on heat grates." 

There has been some talk of "occupying" the HUD building and a "lobbying siege" of Congress.
State and local chapters of the home builders are generously busing their members to the rally from as far away as Florida.
They know a good thing when they see it.
Their national lobbyists are quietly assisting with "briefings" on Capitol Hill urging support for big new federal subsidies, especially a multibillion-dollar boondoggle sponsored by Senators Alan Cranston and Al D'Amato.
Nothing new about using the poor to sell corporate welfare. 

For the TV editors who will be sending out crews to record this remarkable event there is still time to get hold of the September 8 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association and learn what the "principal cause" of the homeless problem really is. 

Eight doctors and specialists from the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, not previously known as a refuge for conservatives, have just reported their findings from an in-depth study of several hundred homeless people in Baltimore. 

Of the 203 given thorough psychiatric examinations, 91% of the men and 80% of the women displayed mental disorders, ranging through phobias, anxiety, schizophrenia, major depression, dementia and substance abuse.
Among the 203, 69% of the men and 38% of the women were probable or definite alcoholics.
Among the 85 men with alcohol problems, 32 had a major mental illness.
In the past year, 23% of the men and one-third of the women had been psychiatric inpatients.
Only a third of the men graduated from high school.
About 83% of the men had been arrested, and 60% of both men and women have never been married. 

Fuller Torrey, a Washington, D.C., psychiatrist (and no Reaganite conservative) who has written extensively on the deinstitutionalization of the mentally ill, has produced an analysis of the issue that is considerably more complex and subtle than anything that will be said or heard this weekend from Mitch Snyder and the home builders lobby. 

Dr. Torrey believes that most of the homeless are either mentally ill or largely alcoholics.
He thinks housing is a contributing problem but that many homeless could not live in housing "because they are so seriously mentally ill.
It is not simply a housing issue." He says the U.S. spent $3 billion to build 789 community mental-health centers, and that they were a "disaster"; instead of treating the seriously ill, most turned into psychotherapy and counseling centers. 

"The solutions," Dr. Torrey told a Washington conference last December, "are not spending more money; we are already spending $17 billion in federal and state money on care for the seriously mentally ill." He says, "The federal government does some things very well, but I do not think it funds human services very well at all." He instead proposes block grants to the states.
The Johns Hopkins team suggests improvements in community mental-health services. 

It is no doubt possible for reasonable people to debate the efficacy and costs of block grants, community-based clinics, or support services for families that are falling apart and headed for the sidewalk.
But the real needs of the tragic people lying on the streets of New York, Washington and San Francisco have almost nothing to do with Mitch Snyder's self-promotion, the construction industry's cynicism or the sob-wallow of Hollywood plutocrats that will be on display in Washington this weekend. 

We know what causes the distress of at least two-thirds of the people on the streets.
They are either mentally sick or alcoholic.
The Hopkins study confirms what many have long suspected.
But if "the homeless" continue to be marketed to the public as they are now, the most likely result is that they and their torment will stay right where they are. 

