.START 

A dozen years ago I visited a friend in a neighborhood that had better remain nameless.
After a little conversation, he stood up and said, "Come on, I want to show you something." Smiling, he led me to his backyard and pointed, with seeming pride, to what I thought were weeds. 

"Marijuana," he said, "first-class stuff." I tried to appear nonchalant but steered the conversation away from his garden as soon as possible. 

That's the sum of my exposure to the drug business, so perhaps I'm not qualified to take part in the legalization debate spurred by Milton Friedman on these pages.
But it's too tempting to resist. 

At the start I should confess that I've always liked Mr. Friedman's main argument for legalization: It would reduce drastically the number of innocent victims, notably those who are robbed by addicts to raise money for their high-cost habits.
But the Hoover Institution economist recognizes that the argument can't stop there.
Once drugs are legalized, he says, they would be treated in much the same way as alcohol and tobacco.
Alcohol is a drug, and so is nicotine, a key element in tobacco. 

If drugs are legalized, there surely will have to be regulation.
In the interest of uniformity, a large part of it is likely to be federal.
A prime aim, as Mr. Friedman says, will be to prevent sales to minors. 

That won't be easy.
In a National Bureau of Economic Research study (Working Paper 3082), Michael Grossman of the City University of New York notes that, in the case of alcohol, "Underage youths can obtain alcohol from their older siblings or friends.
In addition, they can purchase fake identification cards or buy alcohol in stores that do not demand proof of age." (The Grossman paper, it should be noted, deals solely with alcohol and tobacco.) 

Alcohol and tobacco consumption by minors is especially worrisome because habits formed early are likely to persist.
Research indicates that, in the case of cigarettes, people who don't start smoking before the age of 21 seldom start at all. 

Because age limits can be evaded, Mr. Grossman suggests that substantial health benefits might accrue to increases in federal excise taxes on alcohol and cigarettes.
But there are problems.
The government has raised the tax on whiskey and similar drinks much more than the tax on beer, which is often minors' drink of choice.
If the amount of alcohol in beer were taxed as much as the alcohol in liquor, and the beer tax were raised to offset the inflation since 1951, the beer tax would be at least eight times its current level. 

Such a huge tax increase, Mr. Grossman recognizes, raises the threat of bootleg beer.
It's also doubtful that politicians would ever approve such a huge beer-tax boost.
Beer has long been known as the poor man's drink, and Congress has always been much more leery of taxing it than taxing the key ingredients of martinis and the like. 

In a backhanded way, Milton Friedman raises yet another objection to high excise taxes.
He notes that the current market in bootleg liquor stems in part from the high federal excise taxes.
At some level, of course, high prices could encourage alcohol or drug addicts to steal to finance purchases. 

Mr. Grossman cites studies by Gary Becker, a University of Chicago student of the economics of crime.
Two decades ago, Mr. Becker showed that the optimal way for a society to deter offenses is by a system of severe and fairly certain punishments.
Mr. Grossman suggests that society might want to combine a stronger enforcement program covering alcohol and cigarettes with a higher excise tax. 

Despite the complications, the empirical evidence that Mr. Grossman has assembled is impressive.
He cites a 1982 study that examined variations in death rates from cirrhosis of the liver, a standard measure of excessive alcohol use, among the states as well as variations in per-capita consumption of distilled spirits.
The study found that the state excise tax has a negative and statistically significant effect on the cirrhosis death rate.
Moreover, a $1 increase per gallon in the state excise tax lowers the death rate by almost the same percentage as it lowers per-capita consumption (5.4% vs. 7.2%). 

The experience with cigarettes is a mixed bag.
The efforts to deter minors from smoking are less energetic than those on alcohol, presumably because an individual who limits his bad habits to smoking isn't as likely to climb into a car and kill someone on the highway.
Slowly, but apparently steadily, the publicity about the health effects of cigarettes seems to be cutting per-capita consumption. 

One nice aspect of the anti-cigarette campaign is that it is, in effect, largely financed by the tobacco industry.
Tobacco companies can continue running ads only if the ads include a clear warning of the dangers of responding to such advertising.
If and when drugs are legalized, Mr. Friedman would like to launch an effective educational campaign on the personal costs of drug use -- "not necessarily conducted, I might add, by government." 

Whoever the legal producers of drugs might be, it's hard to imagine them volunteering to start out selling people on not using their products.
Advertising privileges gradually have been taken away from the tobacco industry, once among the biggest of all advertisers.
Of course, a responsibility for educational ads could be part of the deal of drug legalization. 

The more you think about the way we handle alcohol and tobacco now, the more you realize that we don't do it very well.
As Mr. Friedman said, perfection is not for this world.
But it seems to me that there is ample reason to expand the sort of research that Mr. Grossman, Mr. Becker and others have been doing.
I wouldn't even mind if the government financed some of it.
Perhaps this wouldn't lead to drug legalization, but maybe we would be doing a better job of managing alcohol and tobacco. 

In case you're wondering about my friend and his marijuana patch, he told me at lunch recently that he had cut it down.
He told me that, I might add, after his third martini. 

