.START 

If, as Soviet Foreign Minister Edouard Shevardnadze has promised at U.S. insistence, the Soviet Union actually dismantles the huge ABM radar near Krasnoyarsk, it will have eliminated the most undeniable violation of the U.S.-Soviet ABM treaty of 1972.
But U.S. officials, by focusing on Krasnoyarsk, have succeeded only in averting America's eyes from the much more important whole of which Krasnoyarsk was just a part. 

They have ignored hugely threatening events because those events happened to occur very much within the letter of the ABM treaty.
They have cried wolf. 

The primary long-term objective of the Americans who negotiated the ABM treaty between 1969 and 1972 was to eliminate the five, later six, "Hen House" radars then (as now) on the periphery of the Soviet Union, all more capable than our best ABM radars, and to keep others from being built.
The Soviets said "nyet," so the U.S. agreed to language allowing the Soviets to build whatever radars they wanted, so long as they were on the periphery of the country, and oriented outward. 

But putting battle management radars on the periphery does not necessarily degrade their performance.
The large phased array radars in the planned American ABM system of the late 1960s were to be on the periphery (Boston, North Dakota, Montana, etc.) The ABM treaty's language on big radars was a placebo to assure the U.S. Senate that these devices had been limited.
In fact, the U.S. negotiators had simply translated their hopes that the Soviets might limit themselves into a conviction that they would. 

Instead, the treaty language served to screen the coming Soviet buildup.
The Hen House network was modernized.
Then, during the 1970s and early '80s, the U.S. noticed that, first at Pechora, then at Lyaki, Mishelevka, Olenegorsk, and Sary-Shagan, the Soviets were building radars hundreds of times more powerful than our best ABM radars.
Absent the ABM treaty, the U.S. government would have been obliged to note that a massive anti-missile system was being built.
But all five of these new "Pechora class" radars were allowed by the ABM treaty.
To denounce them, U.S. officials would have had to denounce their own previous judgment.
As a consequence, they also would have obliged themselves to devise a new, and more somber American approach.
But the U.S. government proved incapable either of self-criticism or of policy innovation. 

Then in 1983 came the discovery of a sixth "Pechora class" radar near the Siberian city Krasnoyarsk -- 2,000 miles away from the border it faced.
This was a violation.
Ironically, given its orientation to the Bering Straits, one of the less likely places from which missiles might come, the Krasnoyarsk radar was probably the least militarily significant of the six, and obviously much less significant than the six taken as a whole.
But the U.S. government chose to make a big deal about it, and it alone.
And while the U.S. government was giving the impression that Krasnoyarsk was the problem, U.S. intelligence discovered three more Pechora-class radars, at Mukachevo, Baranovichi, and Skrunda in the vital northwest missile corridor.
These nine radars, plus the six old Hen House radars, provide double, and usually triple, coverage of all approaches to the Soviet Union through the most capable radars available to mankind.
The only radar gap on the map of the Soviet Union faces such missile powers as the Central African Republic. 

This network is backed up by the newly modernized Moscow ABM Complex.
This is specifically allowed by the ABM treaty.
Its SH-11 high-altitude interceptors fired from underground launchers already incorporate SDI technology stolen from the U.S.
They cover much of European Russia.
The Soviets also are producing the SA-12 mobile ABM, allowed by the ABM treaty because it is dual-purpose.
Finally, the Soviet Union is producing a host of other rapidly deployable ABM components, and squirreling them away who knows where.
The ABM treaty says nothing about production. 

As the Soviets no doubt foresaw, some in Washington are taking the prospective demise of Krasnoyarsk to mean that the Soviet Union is rededicating itself to the purposes of the ABM treaty.
The administration is moving toward signing a new START treaty, while Congress rushes to dismantle those few steps the U.S. has taken in recent years away from the strategic conception behind the ABM treaty: the SDI anti-missile program, the highly accurate Trident II submarine-launched missile that is designed to threaten Soviet silos, and the programs for basing U.S. missiles on roads and rails instead of in vulnerable silos. 

Clearly, the real problem is not Krasnoyarsk, nor Soviet compliance or noncompliance with the language of arms control treaties, but the determination of American policy makers to behave according to their own vision of the ABM treaty, hesitating to build even the things that they concede that the U.S., like the Soviet Union, has the right to build, while the Soviet Union has built everything it could under the treaty, and then some. 

If Krasnoyarsk disappears, the loss to the Soviet ABM system will be marginal.
By no stretch of the imagination will the Soviet Union be as defenseless against ballistic missiles as the U.S. is.
In no way will the development and production of Soviet anti-missile devices be slowed.
On the contrary, American reactions to the dismantling of Krasnoyarsk are sure to raise the marginal effectiveness of every piece of Soviet ABM equipment.
The principal reaction, a renewed U.S. commitment to the ABM treaty, is a guarantee that the U.S. will build nothing to interfere with a disarming first strike by Soviet missiles. 

For example, the acceptance of the START treaty by the U.S. would mean that the distribution of U.S. strategic forces would shrink from about 2,000 "aim points" to perhaps 400, and that the ratio of Soviet counterforce warheads to American targets would rise from the present 3.5 to 1 to perhaps as many as 10 to 1.
That means far fewer American warheads might be expected to survive a Soviet first strike.
That, in turn, means that the Soviet ABM system would have a much much easier job to do, and a much increased chance of doing it successfully. 

The Soviets are selling the Krasnoyarsk radar at a very good price.
The cost to them might be even lower if -- and this is likely -- they relocate the radar to northern Kamchatka.
There it would fully comply with the ABM treaty while making even timelier transmission of data to local ABM sites in the interior. 

Mr. Codevilla is a research fellow at Stanford University's Hoover Institution. 

