.START 

What kind of a baseball season was it?
A remarkable one, of course.
They all are. 

The Chicago Cubs won a divisional championship and the New York Yankees didn't.
Nolan Ryan of the Texas Rangers became the first Major League pitcher to pass the 5,000 mark in career strike-outs.
The Boston Red Sox's Wade Boggs recorded 200 hits for the seventh straight season, something neither Pete Rose nor Ty Cobb could manage.
Tom Lasorda lost weight.
Commissioner A. Bartlett Giamatti banished Rose from the game for life for gambling, then died of a heart attack a week later. 

It was a remarkable season in other ways, too.
Here are some of them: 

Most-Remarkable Opening Day -- While the Chicago White Sox were opening at home against Oakland on April 14, a fan fell out of the right-field bleachers (he was unhurt), electrical power went off in the eighth inning, knocking out the scoreboard and trapping Acting Mayor Eugene Sawyer in an elevator, and bids on the team's new stadium came in $30 million above estimates.
The Sox committed three errors and lost, 7-4. 

Most-Remarkable Game -- The Los Angeles Dodgers and Houston Astros played for seven hours and 14 minutes on June 3 and 4 in Houston, finishing at 2:50 a.m.
It was the longest night game in National League history.
The Dodgers used nine regular pitchers plus third baseman Jeff Hamilton, who took the 5-4 loss.
The next afternoon, the two teams played 13 innings before Houston won again. 

Next-Most-Remarkable Game -- All 27 outs by the Philadelphia Phillies in a June 25 contest at New York were accomplished without a Mets' fielding assist, tying a 44-year-old record.
Met pitchers struck out 13, the Phils hit 12 fly balls, and two batters grounded out to the first baseman, unassisted, in a 5-1 Mets win. 

Most-Remarkable Inning -- The Cincinnati Reds scored 14 runs on a record 16 hits in the first inning of an Aug. 3 home game against Houston.
The last two batters in the frame were retired. 

Most-Remarkable Move by an Owner -- Reds' owner Marge Schott agreed to toss a coin with outfielder Kal Daniels over a $25,000 salary difference.
She called heads, the coin came up tails. 

Most-Remarkable Series of Moves by a Team's Management -- By August, only five players who were on the Yankees' 1988 opening-day roster were still with the club. 

Most-Remarkable Performance by a Hitter -- Toronto's Nelson Liriano broke up no-hitters with ninth-inning hits against Texas's Ryan on April 23 and California's Kirk McCaskill on April 28.
On April 30, he got his team's first hit off the Angels' Mike Witt, a fifth-inning single. 

Most-Remarkable Hitting Performance by a Team -- On June 24, the Cleveland Indians got six hits against the Rangers at Texas.
All were home runs in a 7-3 Indians win. 

Most-Remarkable Performance by a Pitcher -- Cubs' reliever Mitch ("Wild Thing") Williams walked two batters, hit two others, threw a wild pitch and balked, all without permitting a run in the seventh inning of a May 21 game against Cincinnati.
He began the inning by getting Todd Benzinger to fly out.
He hit Jeff Reed, but picked him off first base.
He hit Lenny Harris and allowed him to take second on a wild pitch.
Then he walked Rick Mahler, balked the runners to second and third, and walked Chris Sabo to load the bases.
A fly ball by Joel Youngblood ended the inning. 

Next-Most-Remarkable Performance by a Pitcher -- John Wockenfuss, the manager of the Detroit Tigers' minor league team at Toledo, the Mud Hens, pitched five shutout innings against the parent club in an exhibition game May 11.
As a player, Wockenfuss was a catcher. 

Most-Remarkable Fielding Performance -- The Cubs and San Diego Padres committed 11 errors -- six by the Padres -- in an April 29 game at Chicago.
The crowd booed when the official scorer credited a Cub with a hit in the seventh inning on a grounder that bounced off the mitt of a Padre infielder. 

Most-Remarkable Move by a Manager -- Philadelphia manager Nick Leyva removed John Kruk from a Sept. 4 home game against Pittsburgh because Kruk cursed loudly while running out an infield grounder.
Philly players had been warned against using profanity on the field. 

Most-Remarkable Injury -- Toronto pitcher David Wells needed five stitches to close a cut he suffered when he put his pitching hand through a bathroom window while sleepwalking. 

Most-Remarkable Performance by the Fans -- They elected to the All-Star game Philadelphia third baseman Mike Schmidt, who'd retired, and Oakland outfielder Jose Canseco, who'd missed the entire season to that point because of injuries. 

Most-Remarkable Performance by a Division -- On May 23, with more than one-fourth of the season gone, all seven teams in the American League East had won-lost records under .500. 

Most-Remarkable Home Run -- The Cubs' Andre Dawson got a homer in a Sept. 25 game at Montreal even though Expo center fielder Dave Martinez clearly caught Dawson's line drive.
After the catch Martinez fell, injuring his shoulder, and allowed the ball to trickle from his glove as he lay writhing.
This violated a little-known rule saying that, to make a successful catch, a fielder must release the ball "voluntarily." 

Most-Remarkable Move by an Umpire -- Ken Kaiser ejected Milwaukee's Terry Francona after Francona had received an intentional walk.
Kaiser objected to a remark made by Francona concerning a previous play. 

Most-Remarkable Dining Performance -- Seven Dodgers devoured some $150 worth of food as guests of the owner of a Cincinnati ribs restaurant, then left without leaving a tip. 

Most-Remarkable Tournament -- The championship game of the first international baseball tourney held in the Soviet Union ended when officials refused to allow teams from the University of Miami and Japan's Tokai University to continue playing after they'd tied, 5-5, after nine innings. 

Most-Remarkable Quote -- Outfielder Mel Hall, traded from Cleveland to the Yankees, was asked if he thought he'd ever wear pin stripes. "Yeah," he replied. "In prison." 

