.START 

While watching the television news recently, Brazilians were struck dumb by the image of a vacationer in Bermuda shorts being menaced by the populace at a tranquil beach resort in the picturesque south of the country.
The police had to step in to prevent the terrified individual from being lynched.
The uprising was caused because the man -- a high-echelon public servant -- was caught red-handed using a vehicle from his agency for his summer vacation. 

Using public means to indulge in leisure used to be a relatively safe practice for the powerful members of the bureaucratic aristocracy, as elegantly appointed Lear jets or even flashy DC-10s leased by the presidency were commonly used for this purpose.
Until now. 

Among the various blocks of protected interests in Brazil none is larger or more powerful than the bureaucratic aristocracy.
The entire federal budget is used just to meet this elite clique's payroll, leaving not a penny available for maintenance or new investments in the country's undermined infrastructure.
All Brazilians have left to show for this wasteful expenditure is a Babylonian inflation rate of more than 30% a month. 

Taking this into account, it's not difficult to understand why the polls favor 39-year-old Fernando Collor de Mello, running as an ardent anti-statist, in the Nov. 15 presidential election.
His platform is based on the premise that only by selling inefficient state companies to the private sector, and by restraining the private patrons of government subsidies, will Brazil be able to become a truly developed country. 

Trailing Mr. Collor by a wide margin is the old-time socialist Leonel Brizola.
Mr. Brizola has gained on Mr. Collor quite recently.
However, this is primarily due to Mr. Brizola's changing his rhetoric to include a newfound disdain for state-run enterprises and bureaucrats.
In fact, Mr. Brizola -- who as governor of Rio de Janeiro did little else but encourage the growth of the state -- is now attacking Mr. Collor for having engaged in pork-barrel politics when he was governor of a small state in northeast Brazil.
Nevertheless, it is unlikely that Mr. Brizola can catch up with Mr. Collor's still-commanding lead before the general election. (A runoff in December -- which will take place if no candidate wins a majority -- also will likely favor Mr. Collor, unless there is some dramatic change of events.) 

Athletic and good-looking, Mr. Collor began receiving media attention two years ago when, as governor of Alagoas, he led a crusade against civil servants who earned a small fortune for their light work.
He initiated several successful lawsuits that established ceilings on the gains of those bureaucrats he nicknamed "maharajahs." 

But he didn't stop with the bureaucrats.
He started to push against the powerful owners of alcohol mills who had been using their political influence to withhold interest payments to the state bank.
Agreements for collection were finally reached despite the constant threats that were made against his life, presumably by mill owners.
Following that local campaign, Mr. Collor positioned himself as an ardent opponent of Jose Sarney, the current populist president. 

There was a time in Brazil when campaigning against the state could spell the end of one's political career.
As recently as 1986, President Sarney was able to garner support from the entire media for an anti-inflationary plan that consisted primarily of rigid price controls.
Serious attempts to cut government expenses and monetary growth were not considered.
The economy was turned upside down and, as usual, consumers and producers ended up suffering while the protected interests maintained their privileges.
But the voters fell for the temporary illusion of success. 

During the short period when inflation was being repressed artificially by price controls, Mr. Sarney gained the status of a statesman; public-opinion polls showed a popularity rating of 95%.
Using the support of the whole media, the president successfully played to old-style populist notions with floutingly public arrests of merchants (including myself) who were blamed for the massive inflation built during his government.
Due to what today is recognized as political flimflam, his party won the majority of seats in Congress. 

Just as the illusion of the government's economic manipulations began to disintegrate, accusations of corruption in Mr. Sarney's cabinet came to the fore.
This has led political experts to say that Mr. Sarney is electing the next president due to his own unpopularity.
But this is only partially true. 

People in Brazil have become aware that big government is the sore spot of the Brazilian economy, and they are demanding a halt to job handouts and general corruption.
It is these demands to which candidates from the left and the right are responding.
Their proclamations to privatize government companies, dismiss millions of public servants and jail corrupt officials are non-ideological, calculated responses to the reality of a system caving in on itself.
Whether the politicians' true intentions are being expressed, the voting public is beginning to clarify the problem.
It is starting to understand the nature of the Brazilian economy's major problem: the triad allegiance of politicians and bureaucrats supported by a cast of favored "entrepreneurs." 

It is the influence of this latter group in particular that is the most pernicious and yet that which will be most difficult to eliminate through the "power of the vote." What must be discussed -- beyond the convenient rhetoric about being "anti-state" and "pro-market" -- is how to dismantle state-supported capitalism, instituted by Getulio Vargas in the 1940s and synthesized by its strongest supporters during the military rule. 

Correctly defined by Webster's as "a state {like fascist Italy} in which political and economic power is vested in an organization of corporations," corporativism is the dirty secret behind Brazil's failure.
As just one of thousands of examples: Domestic automobile companies receive protectionist favors from the state, but the resulting built-in taxes currently add 52% to the base price of a standard car, a premium few can afford. 

The beauty of Brazilian corporativism is that political alliances can be made among socialists and capitalists who share the mutual goal of maintaining their protected interests.
But the naked truth of the corporativists' empire is that while it has been terribly successful at dividing up riches, it has created no wealth.
And as the country has become more and more decapitalized, the weakness of the system is now exposed for all to see.
Even the corporativists themselves now realize that they've been playing a dead-end game; they're now demanding real competition. 

One danger that Brazil faces is the tendency of the voting public to believe that all its problems will be solved by electing a new president.
The image of the white knight jousting with the oppressive tyranny of bureaucrats, oligarchs and politicians is tempting.
And who knows?
Maybe this white knight will be Brazil's next president.
On the other hand, Brazilians may end up missing Mr. Sarney's mismanagement.
But one thing is certain: Only with democratic tools and by knowing its real enemies will Brazilians be able to clean house on a national level. 

Mr. Maksoud is a Brazilian hotelier. 

