.START 

Awarding the Nobel Peace Prize to the Dalai Lama sends an encouraging message far beyond the borders of Tibet -- where yesterday people defied martial law to celebrate in the streets.
For years the 54-year-old Dalai Lama has tried to alert the world to the suffering inflicted on Tibet by China's communist government.
Since setting up his exile base in India in 1959 he has relentlessly sought a peaceful way to achieve self-government for Tibet.
For too long, few listened. 

Tibet's spiritual leader richly deserves this recognition, and it takes nothing away to note that he has had some help these past few years in winning today's praise.
The world is listening now because millions of people in both the Soviet and Chinese communist blocs have been broadcasting similar distress calls and parsing democratic philosophy for solutions.
This week brings the spectacle of tens of thousands of East Germans rushing to board the freedom trains to the West.
The people of Poland, Hungary, the Soviet Central Asian Republics, Afghanistan and Russia itself have all forced their way onto the world stage this past year with their desperate need to be rid of communist rule and become free to govern themselves. 

For such people, everywhere, the Dalai Lama's Nobel Peace Prize must surely come as a sign that the world is at last hearing their message.
The Nobel Prize committee made clear that it had China's Tiananmen Square uprising chiefly in mind as a backdrop to the Dalai Lama's insistence on freedom for his own people.
Millions of brave Chinese briefly took control of Beijing and their countrymen rose up in cities nationwide to demand democracy and -- quite specifically -- an end to Communist Party dictatorship.
It took a massacre by the Chinese army to stop them. 

At a press conference yesterday the Norwegian Nobel committee chairman, Egil Aarvik, was asked if this award to the Dalai Lama might be viewed by democrats in China as a sign of support for their efforts as well. "The committee wouldn't have anything against them interpreting it like that," replied Mr. Aarvik. "If I was a Chinese student, I would be fully in support of the decision." 

Indeed, to the list of those who, like the Dalai Lama, stand as symbols of those who struggle everywhere for freedom, we'd add the names of some who vanished into the Chinese gulag this spring: Liu Xiaobo, a young Chinese scholar arrested in Beijing June 6, who gave up his studies at Columbia University to help lead the Tiananmen protests.
For this he may face a death sentence.
Wang Dan, one of the Tiananmen student leaders arrested this summer, whose fate since then has not been officially disclosed.
The "Chinese Sakharov," Fang Lizhi, and his wife, who would face arrest and possible execution should they try to leave the American Embassy in Beijing where they sought asylum just after the massacre.
Wei Jingsheng, jailed in 1979, still serving a 15-year sentence after he said publicly in China that without democracy there could be no modernization.
The list makes a mockery of yesterday's reaction from a Chinese Embassy official in Oslo who said this year's Nobel choice has "hurt the Chinese people's feelings." 

The Dalai Lama, it should be emphasized, is both the leader of his people and a profoundly spiritual person.
He has always counseled nonviolence, despite the agonies of Tibet, where the Chinese military occupation murdered one-sixth of the population and destroyed thousands of Buddhist monasteries.
He is serene in his belief that his causes will be vindicated by history.
The Tiananmen Square repression is a temporary byway, he told a group of editors during his recent trip to New York, "it has to be." He is not concerned if eventual peace for his land and freedom for his people, he added, have to wait until after his own lifetime. 

Yet the same spiritual and historical vision sees clearly that the travail of his own people is part of a larger struggle.
In an interview with the Journal earlier this year, he was blunt on the point that his fight is with a decrepit ideology. "All nations that practice Marxism have failed to achieve their goals," he said. "They have emphasized the hatred motivation -- the class struggle -- instead of compassion.
As a result everything they do is based on destruction." 

This year the Nobel committee has served the world wisely.
When the Dalai Lama comes calling, he will more likely get the attentive audience he needs, and deserves. 

