.START 

As East Germans battle police to scramble aboard "freedom trains" bound West, the message seems clear: Many here are desperate to desert this hard-line Communist state and move across what's left of the Iron Curtain. 

But talk to a few East Germans standing here before the Brandenburg Gate, more than any other structure a symbol of Germany's division, and another picture emerges.
Yes, East Germany has problems, they say.
And, yes, its leaders aren't solving them. 

But is that reason enough to leave?
Or, more importantly, is the answer a merger of their country into a single capitalistic German state? 

"Never.
Talk of reunification is pure illusion," says one man from Leipzig, in his 40s, who says he isn't affiliated with the Communist party. "I've talked to many people about this.
We want to live better lives but not under a capitalistic system." Standing next to him, his attractive wife interjects: "There's much that we don't like (about life in East Germany).
But it's our home, and we will remain here." 

With no opinion polls to guide the way, gauging the feelings of the East German public is a difficult task.
But interviews with dozens of East Germans in recent months suggest that today's riveting, desperate scenes of refugees provide only a partial picture of East German opinion. 

For all their troubles, many -- perhaps most -- East Germans still prefer to live in a nation separate from West Germany.
They'd like an open border, friendly relations, more freedoms and different leaders.
But they aren't eager to see their state disappear into a larger Germany, and they prefer one which retains many socialist policies. 

In effect, they seem to yearn for a modern, softer version of the former Prussia, which roughly coincides with today's East Germany and was independent until Bismarck unified the various German states in 1871.
One reason is that it's easier to find a true believer in socialism here than perhaps anywhere else in Eastern Europe.
And while many now decry the kind of communism they've got, they still admire the theory while also fearing what life would be like under capitalism.
They see capitalism as possibly threatening the comfortable system that guarantees their jobs, low-cost housing and free health care and education. 

One indication: of the estimated 200,000 East Germans who vacationed in Hungary this summer, the vast majority returned.
And some who stayed in East Germany now seem resentful of those who left, saying it was mainly greed that prompted the others to go. 

Standing in a deserted street in East Berlin, a woman in her late 20s points to several empty apartments. "You see these houses," she says. "The people all left.
They had everything but they left it behind -- just to get more." 

Throughout this city, effects of the departure of so many of their countrymen to West Germany in the last month -- an estimated 50,000 and counting -- are noticeable: shops with signs that read "temporarily closed," hospitals without doctors, empty workbenches in factories. 

Back at the Brandenburg Gate, where the construction of the Berlin Wall began on a hot August morning in 1961, a barrel-chested man who works in a brewery remembers an even earlier event -- June 17, 1953, the day Soviet tanks put down the last popular uprising in East Germany.
Hundreds died, and much property was destroyed.
The man, who was 17 at the time, worries that history might repeat itself. 

"If people want to leave they should be able to," he says. "But what's going on now is really a threat to our state.
The government has to do something about it.
I don't want shooting in the streets again, and I support anything they have to do to avoid that." 

As for German reunification, he says, "We can live with one another but as one nation, no.
I don't accept that." 

Those views run against the West's conventional wisdom.
In effect, Western leaders and diplomats, particularly those in West Germany who are legally bound to seek German reunification, believe that East Germany has no national identity at all.
That's why the West suddenly assumes reunification has become a practical matter that might be settled before long, rather than an abstraction to be debated into the distant future. 

If East Germany's aging and repressive leaders ever stepped aside and opened up the borders, those Westerners say, the nation's days would be numbered.
It may have been divided from the West for 40 years, but its citizens would opt for the same society as their West German counterparts if they were given a choice. 

That's clearly true for those who battled police yesterday in Dresden and elsewhere, and probably for others.
But among the thousands who have left, there are also a few who made a mad dash for the exit mostly out of fear that the door was about to be permanently closed. 

"I'm not sure why I left," confesses Wolfgang Schmidt, a 38-year-old machinist from Dresden.
Three weeks ago, Mr. Schmidt drove nonstop for 16 hours through Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Austria, abandoning nearly all of his possessions. "I really wasn't unhappy over there," he says, "but I figured that if I ever wanted to get out, the opportunity might not be there again." 

(See related story: "Nation's Leaders to Remain By-the-Book Socialists Even as Thousands Flee" -- WSJ Oct. 6, 1989) 

