.START 

Commercial and industrial loan volume in the U.S. is expected to grow a brisk 9.2% next year to $349 billion, according to a forecast by Loan Pricing Corp. 

The projected increase is surprising, since it is higher than forecasts for growth in the nation's Gross National Product next year and greater than commercial loan growth in any of the prior four years.
In 1988, commercial loan volume grew 7.2%, and estimates are that it will grow 7.6% this year. 

Richard Bennett, senior economist for Loan Pricing, said, "People are going to need credit.
We believe the economy has still got another year of growth in it." 

Loan Pricing, a private firm that sells data on the commercial loan market, cited higher interest rates on junk bonds as one factor that is causing more borrowers to turn to short-term bank loans.
The well-publicized troubles of some large issuers of high-yield corporate bonds have sent interest rates for such issues climbing to new highs relative to government debt. 

Mr. Bennett said, "{Junk} bonds are becoming less and less of a way of financing." 

Another factor causing businesses to borrow more from banks is a further squeeze on their cash flow.
Declining after-tax profits, higher corporate interest payments and moderating spending by consumers will retard growth in businesses' cash flow in 1990, according to the forecast. 

Furthermore, Loan Pricing said that the declining rate in business failures should also help to prop up loan demand next year. 

Loan Pricing said it expects to see no growth in the commercial and industrial loan portfolios of the ten or so New York and Chicago money center banks.
That reflects the fact that the money center banks are constrained in their growth due to higher capital requirements. 

Instead of holding new loans in their portfolios, the money center banks are originating and selling the loans to other foreign and domestic banks and investors. "The money centers are more oriented toward selling loans," said Mr. Bennett. "Numbers for originations would be a different story." 

Non-money center banks in the New York federal reserve district and banks in the Dallas and Richmond, Va., federal reserve districts are expected to see the greatest spurt in commercial loans, 15.4%, 15.5% and 15.7%, respectively. 

The slowest loan growth, 6.9%, is forecast for the Boston federal reserve district, followed by Philadelphia's 9.4% and Kansas City's 9.5%. 

Forecasts for commercial loan growth in other federal reserve districts are: Atlanta, 10.1%; Cleveland, 12.9%; Chicago, 12.8%; St. Louis, 10.6%; Minneapolis, 12.2%; and San Francisco, 12.1%. 

