.START 

For a high-powered government panel investigating how to invigorate Japanese industry, the recommendation sounded frivolous: Manufacturers should sponsor television dramas and movies that glorify engineers. 

But the proposal, contained in a report to the Ministry of International Trade and Industry in June, was completely serious. 

After years of attracting Japan's brightest engineering and science graduates, industry is suddenly being left out in the cold.
University graduates are seeking lucrative jobs at brokerage houses and banks. 

Japan's manufacturers are concerned that they may lose their competitiveness if they can't attract the next generation of researchers and engineers.
And industrial companies are accusing financial institutions of jeopardizing Japan's economy by raising the salary stakes for new employees. 

Eiji Suzuki, president of the Japan Federation of Employers Associations and chairman of Mitsubishi Chemical Industries Ltd., says: "This kind of warp in the distribution of human resources could cause a decline in {Japan's} international competitiveness in the near future." 

Japanese industry already is facing pressure overseas from lower-cost producers of many goods.
Wage costs have risen rapidly in recent years.
While management has been able to take advantage of weak labor unions to keep salary demands in check, the prospect of an expensive conflict over engineers and scientists is a cause for concern. 

Indeed, the MITI report says there is a need to combat the trendy media image of such highly paid white-collar workers as foreign-exchange dealers. 

According to Japan's Labor Ministry, the average monthly salary for employees at financial companies is about 18% higher than all manufacturing workers, and customary twice-a-year bonuses are nearly double. 

Financial institutions say they need the mathematical skills of engineers to help develop new products.
An official at Daiwa Securities Co. says "it has become impossible to design new products without mathematical ability, with the introduction of futures and options trading." 

Yukihiro Hirano, an executive of the government's Science and Technology Agency, says that this year only 135 graduates from the technology department of Tokyo University chose jobs with manufacturing companies, compared with 165 in 1988 and 222 in 1985.
Last year, 75 graduates from the same departments joined banks, insurance companies and brokerage firms, compared with 16 five years ago. 

Johsen Takahashi, an economist with Mitsubishi Research Institute, says it has become unfashionable to do the "dirty and hard" work associated with manufacturing.
In the past decade, he says, "the idea that the era of manufacturing goods is over has infiltrated into people's minds." 

For many young people, financial-services jobs also allow them to keep open broader career choices.
Yasuo Naganawa joined Mitsubishi Bank last year after graduating from the department of industrial engineering and management of the Tokyo Institute of Technology.
These days he works on currency options and swaps. "I didn't know what area I was good in," he says, "but I knew that if I had chosen an engineering job, my range of choices would be limited.
I didn't like it." 

Takao Kokubu, a senior at Waseda University's department of electronics and communications engineering, will start work next April with a Japanese trading company. "I don't want to engage in research at a laboratory.
A research job is boring.
I want to do a job in which I deal with people," he explains.
Moreover, Mr. Kokubu says the difference in salary was too much to ignore. 

Keidanren, the Federation of Business Associations, has proposed that the government encourage an increase in the number of science and engineering graduates. 

Takuma Yamamoto, president of Fujitsu Ltd. and chairman of a Keidanren subcommittee investigating the problem, predicted that manufacturers will begin making up the wage gap.
But he also deplores the "money worship" among young people that he feels has caused the problem. 

