.START 

It seems like a preposterous quest: taking a modeling agency international -- out of Medford, Ore. 

But Medford's Christiev Carothers Agency is finding work for its models in Paris, Tokyo, Milan and Athens. 

While many small businesses dream of foreign ventures and decide they are too far from the action, the Medford agency has turned its remote location into an international asset.
It has found a way to tap a growing demand for the "rural American look." Many Americans don't know this demand exists.
But the fashion sophisticates of Europe and Japan have decided you can never have too much rustic Americana, and the Medford area has a large supply. 

"The big look now is old, worn blue jeans, a big man's shirt and hair that looks like you just finished pitching a bale of hay," says Christiev Carothers, owner of the agency and modeling school. "That's what they've been wearing here for years." 

Besides, she adds: "The sun rarely shines here, so people have great skin." In contrast, Southern California is so sunny that "at 18, they look 22," she laments. 

For decades, European and Japanese fashion magazines have sought American models, partly for variety.
But Ms. Carothers says even she was "surprised at how much demand there was overseas for the wholesome rural American look." 

Ms. Carothers, a former model in Los Angeles married to a Medford stock broker, started her agency in her home two years ago, then hung her shingle in a local shopping mall.
She says nobody can make a living modeling in Medford, a town of 45,000, but clients see the school and the shopping-mall fashion shows there as a springboard. 

To put the school and agency "on the map," Ms. Carothers took several of her clients to the International Modeling and Talent Association convention in Los Angeles last January.
Talent scouts for foreign modeling agencies use such conventions to recruit American models. "The girls saw all those glamour queens and wondered what they were doing there.
But they were so natural, I knew there would be a demand." Sure enough, contracts to work overseas came forth in Los Angeles and at a similar convention in New York. 

Among those chosen was Kristen Gosset, daughter of an Oregon farmer.
Her portfolio includes a photo of herself posing with her prize-winning steer.
A Paris agency liked the look and signed the 15-year-old 4-H Club member for work in Milan.
Her mother accompanied her, and she posed for two Italian magazine covers, Ms. Carothers says. 

With 50 students in her school and 25 working models in her agency, Ms. Carothers says she has sent three to Tokyo and five to Europe so far. "I've gotten letters from Tokyo asking for more girls," she says. "The fresher and the more American the models look, the more work they get." 

