.START 

Consuming a lot of calcium may not prevent hip fractures in older people, a British study concluded. 

The report, in this week's British Medical Journal, found physical activity offers greater protection than dietary calcium.
The finding will reignite a protracted controversy over whether increased calcium intake helps avoid osteoporosis.
The bone-loss disease is a leading cause of hip fractures in the elderly, especially for women. 

Hip fractures in the elderly cost the U.S. more than $6 billion a year and cost Britain an estimated #300 million ($480.5 million) a year.
Sales of calcium supplements have surged and sagged since 1984 amid a welter of conflicting evidence about the health benefits of gulping extra calcium. 

The investigation of 1,419 British men and women showed "no evidence that the risk of fracture increased with declining dietary calcium," concluded a team of epidemiologists at England's Southampton General Hospital.
The result seems to contradict a major U.S. study reported last November.
In tracking 957 men and women aged 50 to 79 for 14 years, California scientists found those who later broke their hips had consumed less calcium than those who didn't.
The study boosted sagging U.S. sales of calcium supplements. 

But the California research was flawed, the British Medical Journal authors argued.
With the latest report, doctors now may downplay the importance of calcium for older individuals while seeking greater calcium consumption among women in their 20s and 30s. 

"The critical consumption of calcium, especially in women, is in the younger age groups before menopause," said Kurt Isselbacher, professor of medicine at Harvard University Medical School.
Calcium supplement makers incorrectly have promoted their products for all age groups, he added, citing the new British study. "To give {calcium} to you at age 50 is really missing the boat. . . . It is a bit late." 

Dr. Isselbacher is vice chairman of the U.S. National Academy of Science's Food and Nutrition Board, which sets recommended daily allowances for nutrients.
On Oct. 24, the board will announce a revision in its recommended daily allowance of 800 milligrams of calcium for adults.
Dr. Isselbacher indicated the board will urge a higher intake for younger women. 

Some endocrinologists have advocated raising the overall recommended allowance to 1,000 milligrams a day -- the equivalent of three daily helpings of dairy products, the main dietary source of calcium.
The calcium fad began in 1984 after a U.S. National Institutes of Health report urged women to consume between 1,000 milligrams and 1,500 milligrams a day.
Women are more prone to develop osteoporosis because after menopause, the loss of natural estrogen hormones seems to speed the loss of bone mass. 

For the British study, investigators tracked 1,419 men and women 15 years after a 1973-74 initial screening in which they were asked about their outdoor activities and they kept dietary records for seven days. 

Forty-four participants subsequently fractured their hips.
Calcium intake didn't influence their chances of suffering hip fractures, even after excluding other possible explanations such as smoking and weight, according to the report.
But the least active patients, especially housebound ones, ran as much as a five times greater risk of breaking their hips. 

Older Britons consume more calcium than Americans -- which may explain the disparity between the U.K. and U.S. studies, suggested Cyrus Cooper, a Southampton General Hospital epidemiologist who was one of the report's six authors.
Among the hip fracture patients, men's average calcium intake was 870 milligrams a day, while women consumed an average of 730 milligrams a day -- more than twice the levels seen in the California study. 

"Until you get to a very low level of calcium, you don't have to worry" about the need for calcium supplements, Dr. Cooper said. "If {the elderly} have two dairy portions a day, they don't need to pop calcium." 

But on average, Americans aged 65 to 74 consume only slightly less calcium a day than their British cousins -- 698 milligrams for men and 542 milligrams for women, according to the U.S. Food and Nutrition Board.
So, Dr. Isselbacher suggested, "I doubt {the new report} will end the debate" over calcium. 

