.START 

When a sales slump threatened to close the gear-box factory where he worked, plant manager Antonio Esteban sought a remedy in plant medicine. 

Taking his inspiration from childhood memories of plant lore, he started packing and marketing the herbs that grew wild in the sun-parched countryside of northern Spain.
Nine years later, what started as a sideline to his main job has grown into a business with more than 100 employees and annual revenue of several million dollars.
His company, Soria Natural SA, has become an entrepreneurial success story and one of the area's leading employers. 

Today, peppermint, sage, wormwood and other herb plants wave outside the factory where Mr. Esteban once supervised production of engine and steering units for clients such as International Harvester Co. and Allis-Chalmers Corp. of the U.S. Inside, employees using modern processing equipment turn out several hundred product lines of medicinal herbs, mixed plant essences and dietary products. 

To some, herbal remedies smell of quackery.
At the least, they're more difficult to administer in precise quantities than pharmaceuticals, and in some cases they can be dangerous.
In the U.S., investigators recently warned of the perils of illicitly imported herbal medicines laced with prescription drugs and potentially harmful substances such as lead and cadmium. 

And yet, despite widespread skepticism, specialists concede that herbal remedies can be effective in treating some health problems. "There are active principles in a number of plants," says Pedro Lorenzo, a professor of pharmaceutical science at the Madrid University School of Medicine. 

Miguel Ignacio Sanchez Castellanos, a practitioner of herbal medicine in Madrid, says that medicinal plant products have many applications and that herbal doctors can "treat many types of illnesses, particularly in cases where conventional medicine has failed." 

Whatever the case, public interest in herbal medicine is rising.
In recent years, total sales of medicinal herb products in Spain have been increasing at annual rates of 14% to 15%, estimates Juan Rubio, product manager at another medicinal herb company, Dietisa SA. 

In this expanding market, most participants are fairly small.
Of more than 100 companies producing herbal products in Spain, Dietisa, owned by Rhone-Poulenc SA of France, is the biggest, followed by a family-owned company called Casa Santiveri SA. 

Soria Natural, though still well behind them, is rapidly catching up.
Mr. Esteban says he expects revenue this year of 850 million pesetas ($7.1 million), up 30% from last year and more than three times 1987's level.
Profits are coming in at 20% of revenue. 

From modest beginnings in a tile-roofed shed on the outskirts of Soria, his company has come far.
Back in the early 1980s, Spain was in the midst of a recession and competition from rival firms was intense.
In addition to waging price warfare, "they tried to prevent their retailers from stocking our products," Mr. Esteban recalls. "Shop owners often had to keep them under the counter." 

While the gear-box factory kept going, Mr. Esteban and his partners worked an eight-hour day until lunch-time and went about their plants business till late at night and on weekends.
When the gear-box factory finally closed in 1984, Soria Natural was still only a small-time operation, and Mr. Esteban had to mortgage his apartment to keep it going.
But the trio had ambitious plans for growth. 

In 1986, Soria Natural branched out into honey and related products.
Last year, it relocated north of Soria on the banks of the Duero River. 

Using loans and re-invested profits, Mr. Esteban spent P350 million on processing and packaging machinery.
Hiring new employees, including an export director trained in herbal medicine, he set about extending his national sales network. 

Today, in addition to health-food stores and pharmacies, that network includes 46 independently owned specialty stores identified by the company's own dog-rose emblem.
Alongside herb medicines, these boutiques sell Soria Natural cosmetics and beauty products.
Abroad, the company is selling in Portugal, France, West Germany, Chile and Venezuela and is looking for new outlets in other countries, including the 

Further expansion plans include the purchase of high-tech scientific equipment for mineral and molecular analysis and the development of new product lines, including high-vitamin germinated cereal products and baby foods made from naturally farmed livestock. 

But despite the modern technology, most of the company's products are based on recipes from Mr. Esteban's grandparents, amateur herbal doctors who provided plant remedies for friends and neighbors in their native Extremadura in western Spain. 

Part of Soria Natural's success seems to result from its efforts to ensure quality in its products.
Pesticides and chemical fertilizers are strictly avoided. 

The company hasn't yet paid a dividend, and Mr. Esteban, who owns 80% of the company, and his two partners, who each own 10%, draw only modest salaries.
But that's part of the secret of the company's success, Mr. Esteban says. "We've re-invested every peseta of profits," he explains. "That's what has allowed this company to forge ahead." 

In addition to salary, there are other compensations.
Working in the open air at his new profession, says Mr. Martinez, tugging at a taragon root in a field near Soria Natural's factory, "isn't really like work.
It's more a way of life." 

