.START 

When the Supreme Court upheld Missouri's abortion restrictions in July, some experts said the justices were inviting a broader legal challenge to abortion. 

In a federal courtroom in New Orleans today, the state of Louisiana and the city's district attorney will accept the invitation. 

Louisiana Attorney General William Guste and Orleans Parish District Attorney Harry Connick have asked a federal court to allow them to resume criminal prosecution of doctors who perform abortions, and of doctors and clinics that advertise abortion services. 

The case is the first major legal sequel to the Missouri ruling.
In the Missouri case, five of the nine Supreme Court justices expressed varying degrees of dissatisfaction with the 1973 Roe vs.
Wade decision that recognized a constitutional right to abortion; but the majority stopped short of directly reconsidering the right to abortion.
Justice Sandra O'Connor explained in her separate opinion: "There will be time enough to re-examine Roe" when it's essential to the outcome of a future case. 

Louisiana officials hope that time has come.
Enforcement of the state's laws was blocked by a federal court injunction in 1976 based on the Roe vs.
Wade decision.
But the Louisiana Legislature never repealed the laws, leaving them on the books in case the state got the chance to apply them again. 

Just days after the Missouri ruling, the Louisiana Legislature passed a resolution urging the state's district attorneys to enforce the criminal abortion laws "to the fullest extent permitted" by the Constitution. 

But rather than begin immediately arresting doctors who perform abortions, Mr. Connick, and later Mr. Guste, asked a federal court to lift the injunction and declare the Louisiana abortion laws valid.
The Supreme Court gave the states more leeway in the Missouri ruling, they argue. 

If they succeed, the effect would be to outlaw most of the roughly 15,000 abortions performed each year in Louisiana, imposing up to a 10-year prison sentence on doctors convicted of performing abortions. "I think abortion doctors would close up shop, leave town or get into some other line of work," says John Baker, a professor at Louisiana State University Law Center, who is handling the case for Mr. Connick. 

Rachael Pine, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union's Reproductive Freedom Project in New York, will argue against any change in the injunction. "There can be no argument that Roe was overturned," she says.
Moreover, she criticizes state officials for trying to revive old laws that were invalidated, instead of having the Legislature vote on new laws.
This is using the courts to "circumvent . . . the democratic processes," she says. 

The case will be argued this morning before a special three-judge, federal district court.
When the injunctions were issued in 1976, the three judges handling the case were appointed by President Johnson.
Today, the three judges will be appointees of President Reagan. 

There is some dispute as to how the criminal laws would be enforced if the injunction is lifted.
Attorney General Guste says the law applies only to doctors performing abortions, not to women having the procedure, and that it includes an exception for abortions that are necessary to save the mother's life.
But the ACLU's Ms. Pine argues that the wording of the state's law itself doesn't limit prosecutions to doctors or make an exception for abortions when the mother's life is at risk. 

Just how and when the Louisiana case will be resolved is uncertain.
The three-judge court may decide the case on narrow grounds involving the procedure for issuing or changing injunctions, without directly addressing the abortion issues, or it may address the broader question of the current status of abortion law. 

In either case, the Louisiana law is almost certain to find its way to the Supreme Court in the near future. 

The need for a speedy answer may be the only point on which the two sides agree. "This has created chaos down there," says Ms. Pine. "There is real fear in the community of abortion patients, doctors and clinics." 

