.START 

The stock market rally slowed, but bond prices jumped on the stronger U.S. dollar. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average edged up 2.47 points to 2773.56, a third consecutive record.
That brought the gain this week to more than 80 points, or nearly 3%. 

The heavy action was in the transportation sector.
Spurred by Donald Trump's $120-a-share bid for AMR, the parent of American Airlines, the Dow Jones Transportation Average rocketed up 31.65 points to 1498.76. 

Stock market analysts said the surprise rally that began Monday cooled a bit yesterday as some money managers began to suspect that prices had risen too far, too fast.
Big gains in the airline industry were offset by profit-taking in other sectors.
International Business Machines, which rallied briefly Wednesday, slumped again yesterday, although other technology stocks posted gains. 

Now experts are divided on where the market goes from here.
The uncertain economic environment and the likelihood that third-quarter earnings will be disappointing in coming weeks are the key points that bears make in predicting a downturn.
But others look for the Federal Reserve to ease short-term interest rates soon, giving stocks another upward boost. 

The possibility of the Fed easing helped spur bond prices sharply higher.
The Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond climbed about a point, or $10 for each $1,000 face amount.
Bond traders said speculation is growing that the Fed will ease as part of a grand strategy to force the dollar lower.
The U.S. currency dropped briefly yesterday after West Germany's Bundesbank announced it was pushing interest rates up a full percentage point, but quickly recovered and moved higher. 

The central banks of the industrialized nations have been trying for nearly two weeks to drive the dollar lower through coordinated intervention.
One of the few weapons remaining in the central banks' arsenal is a U.S. rate cut.
Higher rates abroad and lower rates here tend to make the dollar less attractive to foreign investors. 

But most analysts contend that the Fed won't willingly lower U.S. rates unless it has more evidence the nation's economy is slowing.
Today's release of September employment data could provide that evidence, although the consensus of economists is that the economy created 182,000 non-farm jobs in September while the unemployment rate remained unchanged at 5.2%.
If the estimates are on target they probably won't be enough to persuade the Fed to move. 

In major market activity yesterday: 

Stock prices posted modest gains in moderate trading.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 177.9 million shares.
Declining issues on the Big Board barely outpaced gainers, 743 to 741. 

Bond prices were up sharply.
The yield on the Treasury's benchmark 30-year bond slipped to 8.07%. 

