.START 

Sir James Goldsmith said he intends to launch a new bid for B.A.T Industries PLC if his plan to sell the conglomerate's Farmers Group insurance unit to France's Axa Midi Assurances is cleared by state regulators. 

In a statement released in Los Angeles, the Anglo-French financier said his bidding vehicle, Hoylake Investments Ltd., intends "to make a new offer for B.A.T . . . once we have received clearance from the U.S. insurance commissioners." 

Hoylake last week dropped its #13.35 billion ($21.38 billion) hostile B.A.T bid after it received an extension under British takeover rules to bid again within 21 days of receiving U.S. clearance. 

Sir James previously hasn't been so categorical about his intent to make a new proposal for B.A.T, which recently announced a sweeping restructuring program to fend off his aggressive bid.
In an interview last week, he indicated Hoylake would consider bidding again for B.A.T once the conglomerate's series of asset disposals -- which will leave it a tobacco and financial-services company -- is complete.
B.A.T intends to sell U.S. retailing properties -- including Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field -- and spin off paper and U.K. retailing businesses, as part of the restructuring. 

Yesterday's more categorical statement could have been prompted by fears the state insurance regulators would cease their reviews of the Hoylake transaction because its bid for B.A.T technically no longer is pending.
By saying he intends to mount a new offensive, Sir James may be ensuring that his efforts to secure approval can't be ignored.
And if he receives approval, he can always reconsider his plans.
A B.A.T spokesman said the regulatory process "is likely to take some time," and clearance isn't inevitable. 

As previously reported, Hoylake needs approval from many Western state regulators for a change in control at Farmers.
After initial problems, Sir James filed federal suits in nine states seeking to remove the state insurance regulators' jurisdiction over the bid.
Sir James has lost the early rounds of the federal actions. 

In the statement, Sir James said the federal suits were being withdrawn at the request of Claude Bebear, Axa's chairman. "He said that Axa Midi had to work and live with each of the nine state insurance commissioners, and he did not want to begin that relationship in court," Sir James said. 

A spokesman for B.A.T said Sir James's decision to drop the lawsuits is "a clear admission of defeat, since he's lost seven out of the seven suits that have been heard." A federal court in Illinois yesterday became the seventh to reject Sir James's request for a preliminary injunction preventing state insurance regulators from reviewing his bid.
The spokesman added that the withdrawal of the suits will allow the insurance regulators "to focus on the true issues at hand as to whether Hoylake or Axa Midi are suitable owners" of Farmers. 

As to Sir James's plans for a new bid, the B.A.T spokesman said, "It appears as if Goldsmith is once again threatening to make a real offer.
If and when one is made, we will respond in the appropriate manner and in due course." Meanwhile, B.A.T said it plans to forge ahead with its restructuring, which will "ensure that it is B.A.T's shareholders, and not financial manipulators, who receive the maximum benefit of the company's underlying value," the spokesman added. 

David J. Jefferson in Los Angeles contributed to this article. 

