.START 

Program trading is "ruining" the stock market for 60% of individual investors, and 58% of stockbrokers feel the same way, an American Stock Exchange-sponsored survey found. 

Nearly as many investors agree with the statement that "buying stock today is like gambling." And maybe because of such skepticism, fewer investors (36%) plan soon to increase their activity in the market than their stockbrokers think; 71% of brokers believe they will. 

One of the Amex's conclusions: The media should be more positive about the market. 

The securities industry is naturally getting antsy over the fact that so many individual investors continue to shun the stock market, nearly two years after Black Monday.
The results of the Amex survey -- done by telephone in August and September with 500 small investors and 100 stockbrokers -- emphasize how wary investors remain.
A hundred members of the media, mostly television and radio personnel, also were surveyed by pollster Research & Forecasts Inc. 

Among other things, 57% of investors agreed that "stockbrokers mainly care about large investors." In a surprising display of candor, the same percentage of stockbrokers agreed with the statement. 

But at a news conference, at which it tried to put a positive spin on the survey results, the exchange emphasized other findings.
For example, "only 28%" of investors surveyed say they lost confidence in the stock market since the October 1987 market crash, despite the finding that 68% of the media and 81% of stockbrokers believe investors have lost their confidence. "The 1987 market crash did not shake the public investors' confidence in the stock market as most people perceived," the Amex maintained. 

The study concluded boldly that the 1987 crash is "ancient history in investors' minds and investors expect the media to present a more positive image of the stock market." But none of the survey's questions and answers indicated such an expectation on the part of the investors. 

In fact, the survey results correlate with previous studies done by the media and by brokerage firms themselves, in which investors have shown remarkable distrust of Wall Street and such innovations as program trading.
Nicholas J. Tortorello, chairman of Research & Forecasts, conceded that the 500 small investors surveyed were "active" investors, and thus not so pessimistic as to have dropped out altogether. 

If the investors surveyed weren't thrilled with Wall Street, they didn't love the business press, either.
Only 62% agreed that "investment information in the media is reliable and credible," and 34% disagreed.
Stockbrokers were even more skeptical, by 56% to 44%.
Mr. Tortorello said bad stock-picking advice in the media probably accounts for all the dissatisfaction. 

Investors said interest-bearing investments such as U.S. Treasury securities, municipal bonds and corporate bonds are the best investment today (44%).
Next came real estate (27%), then stocks (24%). 

One survey result shouldn't surprise Wall Street, which has been hungrily awaiting the return of the small investor since the 1987 crash.
Asked whether they considered themselves buyers or sellers of stocks, or "just sitting," 61% of the investors picked sitting. 

There was one last finding that the American exchange, which has given up prestige to the Nasdaq over-the-counter system over the years, didn't talk much about at the news conference.
When investors were asked if they wanted to learn more about the New York Stock Exchange, Nasdaq or the Amex, the fewest percentage picked the Amex.
Shrugged Amex President Kenneth R. Liebler: "Obviously it shows the survey wasn't doctored." 

Two findings from a survey of 500 small investors and 100 stockbrokers: 

Program trading is ruining the stock market for the individual investor. 

Stockbrokers mainly care about large investors. 

*Don't know/no answer 

Source: American Stock Exchange 

