.START 

When Robert Gates talks, Mikhail Gorbachev listens.
He doesn't always like what he hears, but he listens. 

Mr. Gates is a longtime U.S. Sovietologist who now is President Bush's deputy national security adviser.
A relatively low-profile official at home, Mr. Gates was amazed to discover on a May visit to the Kremlin that Mr. Gorbachev was thoroughly familiar with his speeches analyzing the enormous obstacles imperiling Gorbachev-era reforms. 

And while critics at home chide Mr. Gates for being overly skeptical in gauging the chances that Mr. Gorbachev's reforms will succeed, he insists Kremlin leaders themselves actually share much of his analysis. "Without getting specific, when I was in Moscow I was told by senior Soviets that my appraisal of the problems they face was a pretty accurate one," says the silver-haired former deputy director of Central Intelligence. 

The fact that the Soviets are tuned in to Mr. Gates underscores the important behind-the-scenes role he is assuming in the Bush administration -- a role that is likely to grow as the administration heads toward a strategic-arms treaty and a superpower summit.
Mr. Gates has spent much of his career dissecting twists and turns in the Soviet system, and now he is perhaps the administration's main Soviet analyst. 

Within the White House, he is regarded as National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft's "alter ego" and recently was promoted to the highest internal staff rank.
He often is one of a handful of top aides invited into the Oval Office for the informal sessions at which President Bush likes to make sensitive foreign-policy decisions. 

"When we're in there, there are five or six of us, and Gates tends to be part of that group," says White House Chief of Staff John Sununu.
Indeed, when five officials stepped into the president's office Tuesday afternoon to brief him on a coup attempt in Panama, Mr. Gates was among them. 

When Secretary of State James Baker met Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze in Wyoming two weeks ago, Mr. Gates sat at Mr. Baker's side.
Progress there propelled U.S.-Soviet relations to center stage: The superpowers agreed on a summit meeting, likely to be held around May, between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gorbachev.
Both sides say there's a good chance by then they will finish an historic treaty to cut strategic arsenals in half. 

As a result, there will be a new focus in coming months on the administration's system for making East-West policy decisions, a system in which the dapper, good-natured Mr. Gates is an important cog.
Thus, a look at Mr. Gates helps illustrate the approach the Bush team will be taking -- an approach that some Democrats recently have branded as either too timid or too hard-line. 

"I prefer to think of myself as a realist in terms of what's going on inside the Soviet Union," Mr. Gates says. "But I think there are also some very important opportunities for the United States that we should be moving on, and I think we're doing that." 

Mr. Gates, 46 years old, is a native Kansan who developed a deep interest in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union in college.
He joined the Central Intelligence Agency as an analyst in 1966, later spent five years on assignment to the National Security Council staff and eventually became deputy director of the CIA. 

When CIA director William Casey became fatally ill in 1987, President Reagan nominated Mr. Gates to replace him.
But the nomination was later withdrawn when it was imperiled by lingering congressional anger over the CIA's role in the Iran-Contra affair. 

Despite his long interest in the Soviet Union, Mr. Gates couldn't actually visit the country until this year, when he left the intelligence business and moved into his new role as Mr. Scowcroft's deputy.
In this job, Mr. Gates filters all paper work churned out by the foreign-policy bureaucracy before it reaches Mr. Scowcroft.
And he heads an obscure but important group in the administration called the Deputies Committee, a panel of top aides at the State Department, Pentagon, CIA and the Joint Chiefs of Staff that debates important national-security decisions. 

Mr. Gates, a dedicated jogger who often rises before dawn to do his running, has adopted an open and genial style with other staffers that contrasts with the stealthy image normally associated with a former intelligence officer.
And on Soviet affairs, Mr. Gates and Mr. Scowcroft seem to complement each other: While Mr. Scowcroft likes to discuss the complexities of arms-control issues, Mr. Gates prefers talking about the sweep of Soviet and Russian history and politics. 

In essence, Mr. Gates says that while all top administration aides are in "harmony" in hoping Mr. Gorbachev's reforms succeed, history raises doubts about how deep or lasting changes in Moscow actually will be.
In an April speech, for instance, Mr. Gates asserted that "for 70 years we repeatedly have seen a system in crisis proclaim reform and turn to the West for help, while the essential features of their system at the end of the day remain unchanged." 

In particular, Mr. Gates says Mr. Gorbachev faces breathtaking problems in overcoming centuries of Russian reliance on the state as the source of all economic life. "I see the contrast between what has happened in the political arena in the Soviet Union and the economic problems, which seem to get only worse," Mr. Gates says in an interview.
Because of the obstacles, he adds, "there already have been significant tactical retreats on the economic side.
Significant elements of economic reform have essentially been put off indefinitely." 

Yet through it all, Mr. Gates maintains, Soviet strategic modernization continues. 

"If I have a difference, it's not really with people inside the administration but some people outside the administration who believe that, somehow, the United States can make a significant difference in terms of Gorbachev's success in carrying out these reforms," he says. "Whether reform succeeds or not depends almost entirely on internal decisions and structural changes in the Soviet Union." Mr. Gates says the U.S. is offering what limited help it can by fostering good superpower relations, which enhance Mr. Gorbachev's stature, and by proposing deep conventional-arms cuts, which offer tangible economic relief. 

Privately, Mr. Gates is known to calculate that Mr. Gorbachev is shrewd enough to survive even if all his reforms don't, and to believe that cautious analysis is necessary to offset unrealistic euphoria about changes in Moscow.
Still, critics wonder whether Mr. Gates, like others in the Bush administration, is so skeptical that openings for improvement will be missed. 

"He seems rather extremely cautious," says Jeremy Hough, a prominent Sovietologist at Duke University. 

Yet even analysts who don't share all his views generally respect Mr. Gates's arguments. "I'm quite impressed with Bob Gates," says Dimitri Simes, a Soviet analyst at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. "There is enough justification, looking at Russian history, for Bob Gates's caution." 

