.START 

Is the other shoe dropping at Harcourt Brace Jovanovich? 

Last week, the Orlando, Fla.-based company announced that it would sell its theme parks for $1.1 billion, much less than analysts had projected.
Its stock has since slumped to 9 5/8 from a high this summer of 18 5/8. 

Now analysts say its main continuing business, publishing, may disappoint as well. 

Wall Street had been projecting that Harcourt's operating profit from publishing would surge this year as much as 25% from the $143 million recorded for 1988.
Analysts had looked forward to big orders in states such as California, which were said to be preparing large-scale purchases for public schools. 

But in the past month or so the outlook has darkened.
Oppenheimer's Joseph Frazzano, for instance, has lowered his estimate of Harcourt's 1989 publishing profit by a cool 33%, to $120 million from $180 million.
Harcourt, which generally is tight-lipped, didn't return telephone calls.
However, Mr. Frazzano says his estimate is based on conversations with the publisher. 

Raymond James's Bert Boksen also says he thinks HBJ's publishing profit will be "well under" his previous estimate of $177 million.
Quoting from a recent Boksen report urging clients to sell the stock: "states, particularly California, have been very demanding regarding curriculum and marketing support.
Expenses (of publishers) are higher than earlier expected throughout the industry.
Also . . . early indications are that HBJ may be losing market share in its sell-through in California." 

Given Harcourt's balance sheet, it can ill afford a slump in its basic business.
The company has negative net worth -- that is, its liabilities exceed assets -- as a result of a $2.9 billion recapitalization engineered in 1987 to fend off a hostile takeover bid by Britain's Robert Maxwell. 

Harcourt has said it plans to use the proceeds from its theme park sale to reduce debt, probably at banks.
But based on its June 30 disclosures, that would still leave it with $1.8 billion of debt. 

Even bears on Harcourt say the company's junk bonds, over the long term, are probably secure.
But short-sellers, who are hoping to profit from a drop in Harcourt stock, say the company is so under water from debt that its common stock has little value.
Short-sellers borrow stock and sell it on the expectation that they will be able to return less costly shares to the lender. 

Mr. Frazzano says Harcourt's total cash flow from publishing this year (adding depreciation to earnings and subtracting capital spending) will be roughly $140 million.
And, he says, Harcourt's insurance unit should provide the parent with an additional $20 million in cash.
Deducting corporate overhead of $20 million would leave cash flow of $140 million. 

Bears say Harcourt's cash annual interest bill is about $155 million.
Bulls say the figure is $130 million.
Either way, there isn't much breathing room.
And those figures don't include interest on more than $600 million in zero-coupon bonds and pay-in-kind bonds (with interest paid in the form of additional securities).
Harcourt will start paying cash interest on those in several years. 

An official at First Boston, which structured Harcourt's recapitalization, says that "after applying the proceeds of the park sale, HBJ should have no problem meeting its interest and principal payments." He adds that HBJ's future looks rosy. 

And Mr. Frazzano is recommending the stock.
He says the big profits in publishing that he was expecting this year will arrive in 1990.
Nonetheless, when asked if analysts have aimed too high on Harcourt, he replies that "so far, the fundamentals haven't worked out." 

Elizabeth Bramwell, an analyst for Gabelli Securities, says "the results are disappointing" for textbook marketers across the board. "Textbook spending is discretionary.
A lot of towns are tightfisted," she says. "It's a fascinating national problem." It's also a fascinating problem for Gabelli Securities. "We own this stock throughout the organization," Ms. Bramwell notes.
In her defense, she says she has liked the stock since 1985, so over the long term she is still ahead.
And schools can only defer spending for so long, she says.
Old textbooks "are going to wear out," she notes. 

According to First Boston, Harcourt was pleased with the price it got for its theme parks.
But previously, it had emphasized that it wouldn't need to sell them.
Mr. Boksen says he expects to see more asset sales-of HBJ's insurance unit and perhaps of some of its publishing lines -- even if publishing rebounds. 

