.START 

Rhone-Poulenc S.A. is planning a novel $300 million equity offering to U.S. and international investors to help fund its current spate of acquisitions. 

The French state-owned chemical company was expected to file late yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission for permission to offer as many as 3.5 million shares in a new class of nonvoting equity.
The transaction would widen Rhone-Poulenc's equity base between 5% and 10%, providing it an indicated market capitalization of about $4 billion, people familiar with the company said.
An announcement about the transaction is expected as early as this morning in Paris. 

Rhone-Poulenc is one of about a dozen big French state-owned companies whose government-dominated shareholding structure has left it hungry for new capital to fund acquisitions.
Rhone-Poulenc, France's largest chemical and drug company, is led by Chairman Jean-Rene Fourtou and is among the most financially aggressive of the pack, which also includes Pechiney S.A. and several big banks. 

If the offering succeeds, the new class of equity could become attractive to other French state-owned issuers, and the market could perhaps exceed $1 billion in the next few years, European financial sources said.
The offering, half of which is targeted at U.S. investors, also may widen the U.S. market for French equity. 

The instrument is nonvoting equity with rights to dividends and warrants on additional equity in Rhone-Poulenc.
Clearance of the offering, after debate within the French government, signals the French administration is increasingly willing to allow state-owned companies new ways to tap the international capital markets for funds, at a time when the national government is reluctant to spend more tax revenue to finance industrial acquisitions. 

The issue will help fund Rhone-Poulenc's aggressive acquisition program.
In the past few years, the once-bloated chemicals company has become more focused on pharmaceuticals and specialty chemicals, and has aggressively built its businesses in the U.S. and Britain.
In recent years in the U.S., Rhone-Poulenc has bought Union Carbide Corp. 's agriculture-chemicals activities, two Monsanto Co. subsidiaries and a unit of Stauffer Chemical Co. 

It currently is in the midst of more than $1.3 billion in pending acquisitions.
Yesterday, it agreed to buy a unit from the Miles Inc. division of Bayer AG, the big German chemical company.
The price wasn't disclosed. 

