.START 

The prices of some corn futures contracts rose amid signs that the Soviet Union isn't ending its buying spree of U.S. farm goods anytime soon. 

Before the open of trading yesterday, the U.S. government confirmed that the Soviet Union had bought another 200,000 metric tons of U.S. corn.
And after the close of trading, the Agriculture Department disclosed that the Soviets had bought an additional 400,000 metric tons, bringing confirmed Soviet purchases so far this week to 2.6 million metric tons of U.S. corn. 

In trading on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday, the corn contract for December delivery rose 4.25 cents to settle at $2.4325 a bushel. 

The announcements reinforced speculation that the purchases are part of a wave of Soviet corn purchases that might reach five million metric tons before it is over. 

The speculation about more Soviet purchases was fanned yesterday as some major grain exporters began aggressively buying corn futures contracts, which sometimes indicates that they have sold corn for foreign shipment.
By buying futures contracts, an exporter can protect itself from swings in the price of corn it must collect to meet its commitments overseas. 

The buying of futures contracts by exporters was heavy enough to push up corn prices despite the strong downward pressure that is exerted during the harvest, which is when many grain handlers sell futures contracts to hedge the corn they are buying from farmers. 

Speculation about more Soviet purchases is also being fueled by reports that some big grain exporters are beginning to allow the money-strapped Soviet trade officials to buy grain on short-term credit.
Such a move is rare, but not unprecedented.
With the money it generates from its oil and gold, the Soviet Union usually buys U.S. crops for cash. 

There are widespread reports, however, that this year the Soviet Union is running out of hard currency for grain imports in part because of the cost of a new program to boost internal wheat production.
The unusual program rewards Soviet farmers whom exceed certain production goals. 

Indeed, some U.S. traders were worried last month that the Soviet Union, which is probably the largest buyer of U.S. crops, might not be able to afford much from the U.S. anytime soon.
The Soviets spent about $3 billion for the year ended Sept. 30 to buy 21.7 million metric tons of U.S. crops. 

According to U.S. trade sources, Soviet officials have been quietly lobbying the grain companies to allow the Soviet Union to import crops on credit until early 1990. 

Richard Loewy, president of AgResource Co., Chicago, said there are reports that the Soviet Union might have been granted as much as $1 billion of 90-day to 120-day credit by some grain companies. 

Officials of several U.S. grain companies wouldn't comment on the reports. 

U.S. grain companies aren't restricted from offering credit to the Soviets even though the U.S. government is.
The 1974 Jackson-Vanick amendment blocks the White House from giving the Soviet Union direct aid such as credits or the preferential treatment that would come with the trading status of Most Favored Nation. 

Momentum has been building in Washington to waive the Soviet restrictions, but it isn't likely to happen soon.
The Soviet Union most likely would have to first ease its tight controls on emigration to win the support in Congress needed to overturn the amendment. 

In other commodity markets yesterday: 

ENERGY: Petroleum futures weakened further, continuing a correction in the oil market rally of recent days.
Heating oil prices fell sharply in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
The November fuel contract was down 1.08 cents a gallon to settle at 57.91 cents.
But gasoline was blamed for leading oil markets lower even though it fell less than heating oil.
Unleaded gasoline for November delivery declined 0.44 cent a gallon to settle at 54.97 cents.
Crude oil futures also declined, pushing West Texas Intermediate for November delivery below $20 a barrel.
It finished at $19.96 a barrel, down 19 cents.
Traders cited technical reasons and new bearish fundamentals for the declines.
A correction had been anticipated after the recent runup, and the bearish news included a report by the U.S. Department of Energy that confirmed earlier industry statistics on a rise in U.S. gasoline inventories.
That led to new worries about an apparent drop in demand.
Also contributing to the selloff was a report from a Malaysia meeting of oil exporters which aren't members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
According to the report, representatives of the non-OPEC group said they wouldn't discuss output curbs.
But the exporters hadn't been expected to resume cuts announced early this year only for the second quarter. 

COPPER: Futures prices rose on the likelihood that a long-lasting major Canadian mine strike will continue.
The December contract rose 1.05 cents a pound to $1.2865.
The strike at Highland Valley mine in British Columbia entered its 90th day.
An analyst said no new talks are scheduled and "negotiations and feelings have reached a new low point." The company's chief negotiator said there were no plans to resume the talks to resolve the strike, according to a news service report, the analyst said.
The company is still waiting for some sign from the union to solve the deadlock over the contracting out of work, the analyst said.
The union, in turn, called for a boycott of lead and zinc products by Cominco, a big Canadian natural resources company that owns 50% of Highland Valley, according to the analyst.
Another analyst said Japan is heavily dependent on both Highland Valley and the Bougainville mine in Papua New Guinea, which is also shut down, for a major share of its copper concentrate needs. "This has been known for a long time, but now the situation may be coming to a head," he said. "Japan has been worried about obtaining supplies and now it is thought to be buying more aggressively.
Whether it's just to cover needs or represents new orders isn't known, but increased demand for copper while major disruptions exist could push prices to life-of-contract highs." A big copper purchase scheduled by the U.S. Mint later this month hasn't drawn much attention among traders, the analyst added, but it will exert further upward pressure on prices. 

SUGAR: Futures prices eased on a projection that the world production this season will fall less short of demand than last season.
The March contract declined 0.27 cent to 14.10 cents.
F.O. Licht, the West German sugar statistical firm, said that world sugar production in the 1989-90 season that began Sept. 1 will fall short of consumption by 48,000 tons.
This was sharply narrower than the 2.6 million-ton deficit in 1988-89.
The reason: a projected 3.8% increase in production from 1988-89, the report said.
The Licht report overshadowed two developments that otherwise might have lifted prices a bit.
One was that India had reportedly bought an estimated 20,000 tons of refined sugar and that it might be seeking to buy as much as a total of 200,000 tons, according to an analyst.
The other was that the futures market has acquired a stronger technical tone, he said.
Open interest figures released by the Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange showed an increase of 3,420 contracts, raising the total open interest for sugar to 156,806 contracts.
Analysts interpreted the increase as indicating that new buying entered the market Wednesday, when prices rose strongly.
Open interest is the number of contracts that have to be either nullified by an opposite trade or fulfilled by delivery of the commodity. 

