.START 

Investor Carl Icahn, as expected, raised his stake in USX Corp. to 13.06% from 11.4%, putting pressure on the company to further restructure or face a possible takeover. 

In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing late yesterday, Mr. Icahn said his investment group bought an additional 4.25 million shares of USX this week, for $155.2 million, increasing his holdings to 33.6 million shares.
Mr. Icahn, who has been sitting on his USX holdings for three years, made his latest moves after USX put on the block its reserves from Texas Oil & Gas, valued at more than $1 billion. 

In his filing, he said he won't accept greenmail or any buy-out that would give him a higher price than would be available to other USX holders.
Mr. Icahn noted that he doesn't believe USX's market price reflects the value of the company's assets and businesses.
He said he is studying the feasibility of a buy-out or combination for USX. 

His investment group, he said, intends to "closely monitor" all developments and to communicate with management about the possibility "of a meaningful restructuring that would substantially enhance shareholder value." Mr. Icahn has long advocated and apparently continues to support breaking off USX's steel division. 

One possible scenario is a "business combination." Mr. Icahn said his investment group is currently discussing the possibility of such a combination "with persons who may be interested in participating with (Icahn) and persons who may be interested in providing financing with respect to the proposal." 

Mr. Icahn's additional stake was financed through a combination of capital funds and borrowings arranged by Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., Lewco Securities Corp. and Rodman & Renshaw Inc. 

Mr. Icahn declined to comment on the filing, as did USX.
The filing does state that the investor may acquire additional shares in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions or by tender offer.
However, he hasn't yet determined whether to make a proposal regarding a "business combination," the filing said.
But he may "consult with other concerned stockholders . . . and may consider engaging in the solicitation of proxies to elect their nominees as directors." 

During the past week, stock of USX has surged on heavy volume amid reports that Mr. Icahn was raising his stake.
The volume surge followed closely on news that USX was putting its oil and gas reserves of Texas Oil & Gas on the block.
The reserves were valued by analysts at more than $1 billion. 

In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, USX shares closed at $38.375, down 37.5 cents, on volume of four million shares. 

Despite Mr. Icahn's contentions, some analysts consider USX fully valued at anywhere from $35 a share to $40 a share.
They note that the company has huge liabilities, including $5.8 billion in debt and that the market for steel is softening after a two-year high. 

"At this point the stock is pretty close to its full value," contends Lysle Brinker, a vice president with John S. Herold Inc., a Greenwich, Conn., oil and gas consultant and appraisal company.
He valued USX at about $35 a share, based on total tangible assets of about $18.1 billion.
Others, however, say the stock could be valued at as much as $60 a share if the company were broken up.
USX currently has 257 million common shares outstanding. 

Some analysts said Mr. Icahn may be seeking to force the Pittsburgh steel and energy company to buy back his stake, perhaps in a Dutch auction.
In such a case, Mr. Icahn would tender his shares, perhaps at a point below market value that would still reap him huge profits.
It would also meet his demands that he not receive a better deal than other shareholders.
And it would prevent the drastic drop in stock value that would occur if Mr. Icahn sought to unload his shares on the open market. 

Mr. Icahn has been acquiring USX for the past three years and made a $7.19 billion, or $31-a-share, offer for the company in 1986.
But he abandoned the effort after USX redeemed a series of guaranteed notes that he said boosted the cost of a bid.
An offer today at $50 a share would cost about $12.9 billion. 

Mr. Icahn's demands for further restructuring put USX's new chairman, Charles A. Corry, in a difficult position.
He has already stated that the proceeds from the sale of Texas Oil & Gas reserves would be used to pay down debt and buy back shares, which should enhance shareholder value.
It isn't clear what other moves he'd have to make to satisfy Mr. Icahn. 

Separately, the United Steelworkers said it has asked USX to re-open the current labor contract, which expires Jan. 31, 1991, and begin renegotiating, among others, new wage increases, bonuses and restoration of past concessions.
USX was unavailable for comment on the request. 

