.START 

Once, chicken magnate Frank Perdue flaunted what he did right: "It takes a tough man to make a tender chicken," his ads boasted.
Nothing has changed about Perdue Farms Inc. 's chickens, but something has changed in its attitude.
Today, Mr. Perdue begs customers to tell him where he's going wrong: "Don't just sit there," he tells viewers. "Come on -- let me have it.
I can take it." 

Perdue and many other companies are out to turn customer service -- a subject of relentless complaint in recent years -- into a marketing opportunity.
They are scrambling to find out what's on their customers' minds, even if it's bad news -- an approach consultants label "customer focus" or "getting close to the customer." And they're trying to act on what they learn. 

But it's still easier to talk about serving the customer than to do it. "Better than 50% {of companies} are saying they have to get closer to their customers, while only 5% to 10% are doing the work it takes to get there," says Thomas Arenberg of Arthur Andersen & Co. in Milwaukee. 

A growing number of companies, however, are backing up their assertions with actions.
In the past year, Motorola Corp. gave its 250 top executives beepers to keep them in touch with customers around the clock; CUNA Mutual Insurance Group of Madison, Wis., changed some claims-processing procedures after senior executives were required to spend two weeks working for some top customers. 

"Customer satisfaction is the No. 1 thing that drives market share," says David Kearns, chief executive of Xerox Corp. "The customer is the reason we exist." Last year, says Mr. Kearns, Xerox for the first time refused to bolster sagging profits by cutting customer service -- and indeed improved response time on repair calls. 

In a recent survey by Forum Corp., a Boston consulting company, 86% of 611 Fortune 500 senior executives polled named "quality of customer service" as "extremely important" to their company and a higher priority than 10 other items, including productivity and company reputation.
That's up from 68% who cited customer service as "extremely important" in 1986, Forum says. 

The reason for the new emphasis is simple: Companies increasingly are finding that bad service costs customers.
Seven of 10 customers who switch from one company to a competitor cite poor service -- not price or quality -- as the reason, Forum surveys found.
Good service, on the other hand, boosts revenue: Harvey N. Shycon Consultants, a marketing consulting company in Waltham, Mass., figures that a 1% increase in customer service -- in such measurable areas as reliability of delivery and time needed to fill orders -- can increase sales by the same amount. 

Many companies struggle with service because they haven't effectively tracked customer satisfaction.
Traditional market-research departments, which gathered information on trends, demographics or market segments, didn't determine whether customers actually got what they wanted. "A printout will tell you what color customers are buying, but not what color they asked for {that} you didn't have," says an official of Limited Inc., the specialty retailer. 

For years, GTE Corp. 's telephone operations rigorously sampled customers to find out how happy they were with the company's service.
Then, in 1984, GTE started a program of focus groups, personal interviewing and statistical analysis to find out if it was asking the right questions.
In many cases, it wasn't. 

The company had stressed things like the appearance of its employees and the importance of being a full-service provider.
Instead, says Michael English, a GTE quality official, customers "wanted reliability in an emergency situation, they wanted better maintenance hours.
They wanted higher reliability of transmission quality." 

Sometimes, customer responses can be misleading.
John A. Goodman, president of TARP, a consulting firm in Washington, cites customer statements that friendly service in a bank is important.
A more detailed survey, however, found that while unfriendly service alienated customers, courtesy alone didn't satisfy them. 

To try to find out what pleased one group of customers -- retail buyers -- Harvey Shycon of Harvey N. Shycon Consultants used statistical analysis to correlate different kinds of service with changes in purchases.
He found that while manufacturers presumed buyers favored high-profit-margin products, the buyers really wanted reliability. "They like suppliers who don't cause them problems, don't short ship and don't ship late, and they tend to favor such suppliers." 

Companies also are trying to wrest customer service from low-level, untrained personnel.
In Philadelphia, Fidelity Bank raised the average annual salary of its 100 customer-service representatives 58% to $19,000 and authorized them to resolve problems involving sums up to $1,000; before, they had to get a supervisor's approval to resolve any problem involving money.
A survey taken after Fidelity made that change and centralized its customer-service operation found over 90% of customers would recommend the bank to a friend, up from 65% previously. 

One of the first places companies look to improve service is response time.
When Motorola was supplying microprocessors for Steve Jobs's new Next computer, George Fisher, president and chief executive of the Schaumburg, Ill., company, made a point of returning Mr. Jobs's frequent calls within five to 10 minutes. "We showed we not only could help him, but we were really interested in his business," Mr. Fisher says.
The company's executives have been required since last year to carry pagers and meet similar standards. 

Many companies are trying to find better ways of translating information about customer problems into changes in how they do things.
A computer system at Fidelity Bank tracks customer complaints and tries to establish a cause.
The system recently flagged a programming error, since corrected, that was producing incorrect service charges. 

One CUNA Mutual executive, after a stint watching a customer try to get a claim processed, cut the number of steps involved to 20 from 39.
Another executive realized that having to recite policy numbers when calling the company alienated customers; now CUNA uses last names or Social Security numbers to identify at least some policyholders. 

"The most competitive companies are trying to anticipate what their customers want before they ever write a check," says Diane Hessan, a Forum senior vice president. 

For manufacturers, customer focus involves nothing less than producing better products faster at cheaper cost. "User-friendly isn't enough anymore," says Arthur Andersen's Mr. Arenberg. "You've got to be user-inviting" with error-free products and delivery systems. 

In the past 18 months, Corning Inc. has sent teams to big customers to find glitches that annoy them.
On one visit, a team found that chips in ceramic products, which the company had blamed on shippers, were actually caused in production.
Corning solved the problem, pleasing the customer and saving itself costs. "It had been expensive, because the customer had been charging us" for the breakage, says David B. Luther, Corning's corporate director of quality. 

Xerox last year delayed the release of a copier until it was good enough to meet customer standards for paper jamming.
In the past, says the company's Mr. Kearns, Xerox would have rolled out the new model anyway because it jammed less often than competitors' machines. 

GenCorp Inc. 's automotive division has overhauled the way it designs and makes such products as automobile sealing systems.
Previously, General Motors Corp., its biggest customer, would design on its own the sheet-metal frame for GenCorp's sealing system.
But over the past year, engineers at the two companies have worked side by side designing parts that fit together. "It used to be nearly impossible to get our seals to fit GM's sheet metal -- and the consumer ended up with noisy, leaking cars," says Marvin Isles, president of GenCorp's automotive unit.
But working together, "we've been able to significantly improve quality and also reduce costs." 

