.START 

are they what the future holds?
To 'read up' on an area of geography or history and then be clever and cool about it -- is this all that the post-modern novelist can do?" It was Michel Tournier who prompted this complaint from John Updike in a recent New Yorker, but he might equally have been throwing his hands up over Julian Barnes, one of the brightest stars of modern British fiction. 

"The History of the World in 10 1/2 Chapters" (Knopf, 307 pages, $18.95) is a collection of research-heavy "fabulations" -- the sort of work in which a character explains, "You keep a few true facts and spin a new story around them." Dispensing with the concerns that preoccupy most novelists, such as characterization and plot, Mr. Barnes relies on linkages of themes and images to hold together the (sometimes invented) letters, essays, documents, short stories and dream sequence that make up his "History." The style, which can be anything from scholarly to slangy-confidential, is given coherence by Mr. Barnes's relentlessly ironic tone; while he is deadly serious, he would prefer you not to think so -- laughs count for at least as much as truth. 

Accordingly, this fabulous history begins with a raucous account of the voyage on Noah's Ark told by a stowaway woodworm.
Later chapters include a hijacking by Arab terrorists that reduces a splendidly smarmy tour guide to a moral worm, and a medieval court case that charged some bestioles (woodworms again) with blasphemy for having gnawed through a bishop's throne, hurling the prelate "against his will into a state of imbecility." An outstanding chapter on Gericault's painting "The Raft of the Medusa" pits an impressive art-historical exegesis against the facts of the historic shipwreck to illuminate competing perceptions of history: The archives say that there were survivors; Gericault's sailors are unmistakably doomed.
Which version is the more believable, the more true? 

These 10 1/2 chapters are beefy with big themes: the moral ambiguity of nearly every situation; the elucidations and obfuscations of art; love, truth, immortality; and, of course, history itself, which Mr. Barnes describes as "voices echoing in the dark; images that burn for a few centuries and fade; stories, old stories that sometimes seem to overlap; strange links, impertinent connections." Mr. Barnes's history does not proceed like Marx's, from tragedy to farce, but from myth to reality.
Being able to imagine something is the first condition, almost a guarantee, of its coming true. 

Getting all this in has taken a great deal of careful planning and sometimes the echoes between chapters seem strained.
It is perhaps because of its excessively prominent bone structure, unfleshed by characterization or story line, that the novel, despite its bold themes and inventiveness, remains strangely inert.
One longs in "The History of the World" for a spontaneity that might conceal its architecture. 

Mr. Barnes's cross-referencing tactic extends to other books, most conspicuously books by Martin Amis and Redmond O'Hanlon. (Is this post-modernism?
Pastiche?
Plain old-fashioned plagiarism?) But Mr. Barnes is not, in cribbing from his friends, trying to get away with anything.
One of the excitements of his work is that it has with great panache pointed a way out of the drawing-room coziness of English letters: no time for in-jokes in that job. 

The best section of the novel is "Parenthesis," a disquisition on love, which, Mr. Barnes tantalizingly proposes, is the opposite of history.
He tools along a scenic route littered with portentous facts ("The heart is the first organ to develop in the human embryo; in a child, the heart is proportionately much larger than in an adult; after death the heart assumes the shape of a pyramid").
He gives us fantastic etymology, and a biology lesson that occasions some particularly aerobic writing: Cutting into a sheep's heart "we stroked the silky Rue de Rivoli lining, poked our fingers into exit wounds.
The veins were stretch elastic, the arteries chunky squid.
A post-mortal blood clot lay like a burgundy slug in the left ventricle.
We frequently lost our way in this compacted meat." 

But after all this pump and flex, the author turns and, like the lone face in the crowd of a painting which is that of the painter, gazes directly at us. "Love won't change the history of the world," he says. "But it will teach us to stand up to history, to ignore its chin-out strut.
I don't accept your terms, love says; sorry, you don't impress." 

The novelist who dispenses rather than reveals lapidary insights should be irritating (or, when his truth is so bland, embarrassing).
But after so much "compacted meat" this comes like a plate of steamed vegetables, simple and good.
Gone for the moment, is the coldness of the post-modern approach, which invariably suggests that we are incapable of genuine experience and can only parody and plagiarize (even ourselves).
In this half-chapter, Mr. Barnes distances himself from the implications of that approach, while using it to dazzling effect. 

Ms. Fonseca is the NB editor at the Times Literary Supplement in London. 

