.START 

MCI Communications Corp. and Gannett Co. are testing a system to deliver condensed reports from USA Today via facsimile machines, a move that likely will accelerate news media use of this technology to reach readers and promote publications. 

Both companies said that while no decisions have been made to offer the service to the public, they are excited because the service could go a long way toward satisfying readers' increasing demand for instant information.
Moreover, the notion of sending specially tailored information by fax machines could become a powerful marketing tool for many companies outside the media business. 

"You're essentially looking at getting tomorrow's news today," said Wesley O'Brien, director of MCI's fax products. "With the explosion of fax machines in offices, executives and business managers have an advantage with information sent directly to them." MCI estimates that more than 3.5 million fax machines are in use and that number is growing at an annual rate of 60% to 70%. 

For USA Today, MCI is developing two delivery systems.
One would send out a USA Today summary a day before the paper is published.
The other would use an 800 or 900 number to provide select information.
A reader would call the number from a facsimile machine, and punch in codes on the telephone pad that correspond with specific topics such as national news, business or sports.
The reports would be pulled from a USA Today computer and would be transmitted, via the fax machine, to the reader. 

The newspaper already offers customers with personal computers a selection of five reports called USA Today Decisionline.
The tests have been done using faxed versions of those reports. 

Phil Fuhrer, vice president of Gannett News Media, said that the fax service would be "an extension to the newspaper that could expand its reach" much like its sports or weather hotlines. 

Other communications companies, such as Times Mirror Co., the New York Times Co., McGraw-Hill Inc. and Dow Jones & Co., are interested in pursuing fascimile-machine delivery of information.
Some trade publications and at least one other newspaper, Times Mirror's Hartford Courant, a daily in Hartford, Conn., have been using fax machines with some success to deliver entire publications or summaries of top news stories. 

"The reception, so far, has been good," said Bill Williams, associate publisher of the Hartford Courant, which offers for $600 a year a daily summary of 40 to 50 stories that will appear in the next day's paper. "It's too early to tell the long-range implications, but we're optimistic," he said. 

Other publishers, however, have found a lukewarm response to fax delivery.
Paul Warren of Warren Publishing Inc. in Washington, D.C., and president of the Newsletter Association, said that fax delivery "is not a revolution in the making," because the vast majority of readers are quite comfortable with traditional distribution methods.
Warren Publishing offers its Communications Daily via fax machine, but even in the high-tech communications industry, the fax version has been a tough sell. 

Mr. O'Brien of MCI said the technology could have wide applications outside of the news business.
For example, he said, catalog retailers or supply companies could use an 800 or 900 number and fax system to deliver information on products.
Beyond that, he said, information-service companies, brokerage houses or others that operate data bases are beginning to use fax services and voice-response technology to offer custom-tailored information. 

