.START 

A House-Senate conference reached agreement on major provisions of a $44 billion agriculture bill for fiscal 1990 after backing away from any judgment on whether the Food and Drug Administration should ban a widely used food-color additive shown to cause tumors in animals. 

The bill would provide an estimated $4.2 billion for reimbursements to the Commodity Credit Corp., and negotiators preserved a $770 million cap that Midwestern senators had proposed to remove from an export-subsidy program important to wheat and barley interests. 

Among major nutrition programs, the measure assumes a program level of nearly $861 million for shipments of surplus commodities abroad under PL-480.
An estimated $2.13 billion, or a 10% increase from last year, is appropriated for the WIC nutrition program for women and children, and food stamp funding would grow to about $15.7 billion in the fiscal year that began Sunday. 

The dispute over FDA policy stems from an effort by Western growers and canners to win an extended postponement of any decision to ban Red No. 3, a dye used in a broad range of food products but best known as the ingredient that keeps maraschino cherries red in fruit cocktail.
Large doses of the additive have been shown to cause thyroid tumors in rats, but despite legal pressure from consumer groups, the FDA has repeatedly stalled any action and is divided over the true health hazards. 

The pending agriculture bill funds the FDA budget and has become a vehicle for both sides to intercede in the process.
A report accompanying the House version called for a further industry-financed study and implicitly warned the FDA to await the results before making any decision restricting the current uses of the dye.
Senate opponents countered yesterday with language urging the FDA to proceed "solely" under standards set in the current law, and the conflicting directions may only reinforce the bureaucratic and legal muddle. 

"If I were the FDA, I would be totally confused," said Sen. Wyche Fowler (D., Ga.), who sought -- without success -- to have the House conferees vote on the record on the nettlesome issue. "We will have another day." 

While stepping away from this fight, negotiators found it harder to part with funds for favored projects at home.
The underlying bill provides an estimated $592 million for the Agricultural Research Service and is laced with parochial interests.
The talks abruptly ended last night when the Senate insisted on preserving a $1.1 million Extension Service grant for an Arkansas-based program to provide technical information to farmers seeking to reduce their dependence on chemical fertilizers. 

The fight pits House Appropriations Committee Chairman Jamie Whitten (D., Miss.) against Sen. Dale Bumpers (D., Ark.), two self-styled populists divided by age and competing visions of how to direct agriculture and rural development.
Repeatedly in the conference, the elder Mr. Whitten talked down high-tech initiatives promoted by Mr. Bumpers and younger allies, and when the Mississippian refused to sustain the Arkansas project, Mr. Bumpers forced a vote adjourning the conference until this morning. 

The action came as a separate House-Senate conference approved a $156.8 billion bill for the departments of Labor, Education and Health and Human Services, including $16.7 billion in advance payments toward fiscal years beyond 1990.
Federal aid for low-income, elementary public school students would be sharply increased, but negotiators were forced to tighten restrictions on higher-education programs. 

Pell grants, which are for low-income college and trade-school students, would be denied to less-than-half-time students, affecting an estimated 150,000 to 160,000 recipients.
Education Department studies indicate those affected will be largely older, often women, students at community colleges, and the decision represents a reversal of a recent decision to expand the benefits to more part-time students. 

The conference chose not to impose a second restriction, demanding a high school degree or its equivalent to qualify for Pell grants.
However, this proposal could be resurrected this year as the pressure increases to find savings to offset still undetermined increases in funding for anti-drug programs. 

The budget pressure forces competition even within the allocation of funds to assist refugees coming to the U.S. Despite the evidence of increased pressure for assistance, the total funding, $369.8 million, represents a modest cut from last year.
Moreover, the mix of appropriations provides significantly less for cash and medical assistance -- important to Asians coming to the West Coast -- and more for voluntary groups that are crucial to Soviet Jews and have a strong voice in Congress. 

