.START 

K mart Corp., blaming its price cuts on thousands of items, said it expects to report a third consecutive quarter of lower earnings. 

The discount retailer, based in Troy, Mich., wouldn't say how much it expects earnings to fall below last year's $126.1 million, or 63 cents a share, in the fiscal third quarter ending Oct. 25. 

But analysts reduced their third-quarter estimates to as little as 50 cents to 55 cents a share, and some said they expect K mart's earnings to continue to be squeezed through the critical Christmas shopping season. "We're looking for a pickup in sales, but we're still expecting gross margins to be under pressure," said Margo McGlade of PaineWebber Inc, adding, "It's a joyless prosperity." 

In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, K mart shares fell 75 cents to close at $39. 

In a news release, Joseph E. Antonini, K mart's chairman and chief executive officer, defended the decision to cut prices on 5,000 name-brand items this year as the "proper long-term strategy" for the company. "In order to provide the best competitive pricing, we had to make these adjustments -- and we did," a spokesman added. "During the period when these adjustments are made, it's obviously affecting our gross margins." 

But some analysts said K mart's troubles might be deeper than a simple profit squeeze.
Sales at K mart stores open at least a year, the analysts pointed out, have been rising at a slower rate than those of major competitors such as Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the Target discount store unit of Dayton Hudson Corp. and the Venture unit of May Department Stores Co.
For September, as an example, K mart reported a same-store sales increase of 3%, compared with jumps of 16% at Wal-Mart, 10% at Target and 7.7% at Venture. 

"The question" at a closed-door meeting K mart is scheduled to hold today with analysts "will be: Why aren't we seeing better improvement in sales?" said L. Wayne Hood of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. Mr. Hood suggested that K mart hasn't kept items in stock as well as its competitors and that its stores sometimes appear sloppy.
Robert Buchanan of A.G. Edwards Inc. in St. Louis added that K mart's service isn't as good as that of its best competitors and its selection of merchandise doesn't match Wal-Mart's in some departments. 

The analysts also questioned how good a job K mart is doing explaining its new pricing approach to consumers.
K mart's own marketing vice president, Michael Wellman, conceded in a recent interview that signs proclaiming "Very Important Prices" in K mart stores have "not conveyed the message as succinctly as we wanted to." 

The K mart spokesman, however, insisted that "the consumer has responded to our pricing and that is reflected in higher unit sales." He said September sales totals were on plan. "When you lower your prices on items such as this," the spokesman added, "it not only has an impact on your gross margins, but it also has an impact on your sales." 

But Ms. McGlade of PaineWebber said the impact is "clearly worse than expected." K mart, she said, is "encouraging customers to buy a lot of low-margin consumables like health and beauty aids and soda pop at the expense of some of the slower moving, higher profit items." 

For the first half of its fiscal year, K mart posted a 16% drop in net income to $239.1 million, or 1.19 a share. 

