.START 

A number of major consumer magazines plan advertising rate increases for 1990 that are among the heftiest in recent years. 

The increases, ranging between 7% and 9%, are likely to spur another round of acrimonious rate negotiations between magazine publishers and agencies and clients.
Magazine publishers traditionally choose the fall to set advertising rates for the coming year, coinciding with media-spending decisions by marketers and their advertising agencies. 

The publishers, faced with higher prices for paper and other cost increases, are looking to advertisers to pick up at least part of the tab.
News Corp. 's TV Guide will raise its rates by 7.9%, while keeping its circulation rate base at 15.8 million; a color page in the magazine will be $112,900.
Following a third-quarter rate increase of 3.5%, Time Warner Inc. 's Sports Illustrated rates will jump 7.5%, making a color page $113,220.
Time Warner's People will increase its rates by 7%, with a color page going for $83,460. 

"Time and others are saying our cost of doing business has gone up and we sympathize with those pressures," said Paul DuCharme, director of print media at Grey Advertising. "The problem is we are never really sure where the revenues lie in a magazine, and what margins they are operating under." 

Several agency media directors said they are not surprised by the large rate increases because rates have been on a steady rise in recent years.
According to Standard Rate & Data Service, leading consumer magazines with circulation of one million or more increased rates an average of 7% in 1989.
The average increase in ad rates was only 5% in 1988 and just 2% in 1987.
By comparison, average increases in ad rates for newspapers and trade magazines have remained constant at about 7% in recent years. 

Nancy Smith, director of media services for Young & Rubicam, said the rate increases reflect real cost increases for publishers in most cases. "Some magazines are taking advantage of the situation, building in artificially high rates, but you don't know which ones," said Ms. Smith. "We have to understand the costs a magazine faces, so that when we go in to negotiate, we ask for what is justifiable." 

Some publishers are also spreading out big increases by raising rates semi-annually, rather than once in the fall. "Publishers are trying to soften the blow especially if they have a large increase," said Mr. DuCharme. "But it catches us when our media budgets are frozen -- they have already been set for the year." 

Possibly the most closely watched ad-rate announcements will come from the country's two leading weekly news magazines, Time Warner's Time and Washington Post Co. 's Newsweek.
Newsweek Publisher Howard Smith said he expects to announce a 5% to 7% increase this month. 

Time executives said they are not ready to make public their rates for 1990, but sources close to the magazine said they expect a rate increase. 

Last year, Time magazine surprised industry observers when it cut its circulation rate base by 300,000, to 4.3 million, and for the second year in a row chose not to increase ad rates in 1989.
The move eliminated some of the high cost of wooing new subscribers, but the lower circulation guarantee means ad rates are now effectively about 6% higher per paid reader. 

