.START 

The battle for control of National Heritage Inc. has left the company low on cash, forcing its board to reconsider its dividend, Hugh C. Shurtleff, chairman and president, said. 

Mr. Shurtleff said National Heritage's previous management spent more than $1.5 million on an unsuccessful effort to spin off two units to shareholders and its failed battle to keep Southmark Corp. from taking control, draining the firm's cash. 

"We're meeting our payroll, meeting our obligations and that sort of thing, but our cash is tight," he said in an interview. 

Mr. Shurtleff said National Heritage's board will meet next week to consider whether it should continue paying its dividend.
National Heritage cut its quarterly payout to five cents a share from nine cents earlier this year. 

Southmark, which owns 62.5% of National Heritage, last month replaced the board of the manager of nursing homes and retirement centers through shareholder consents after a contentious fight.
But National Heritage's management argued that the new board couldn't control the subsidiaries scheduled to be spun off to shareholders and moved to elect its own directors for the subsidiaries. 

In response, the Southmark-sponsored board last week ousted National Heritage's management, named Mr. Shurtleff as president and physically took control of the company by sending its appointed executives to run National Heritage's office. 

Mr. Shurtleff said he spent last week trying to reassure vendors that business at the approximately 200 nursing homes and 40 retirement centers would continue as usual.
Now, he said, the company is trying to get a handle on its financial situation. 

One team has been assigned to help complete the company's financial report for the year ended June 30.
Mr. Shurtleff, saying it's too soon to estimate results, said he hopes to have the audited results completed within two weeks.
Last week, National Heritage requested a 15-day extension for filing the financial data, which was due Sept. 30. 

Mr. Shurtleff said another team has been asked to assess National Heritage's cash position and project its future cash flow.
That group also will study the company's practice of handling the cash from nursing home operations from a Louisiana office.
Mr. Shurtleff said the process is slow and National Heritage often can't close its books on a given period for up to 60 days after the period has ended.
Most service businesses can complete their books within three weeks after a period has ended, he said. 

Southmark is operating under bankruptcy proceedings and has its own troubles.
But while it is exercising more control over National Heritage, Mr. Shurtleff, a retired business executive who is a Southmark director, disputes critics' contention that Southmark will act for its own good rather than for the good of National Heritage shareholders.
He said his efforts will be focused on ensuring that the company's nursing homes and retirement centers are well-run and that National Heritage's operations are financially sound. 

