.START 

A group led by Joseph L. Lanier Jr., former chairman of West Point-Pepperell Inc., definitively agreed to an all-cash acquisition of Dan River Inc. in a move widely lauded as a big plus for the privately owned textile maker. 

Mr. Lanier, a fourth-generation textile executive who was forced out of West-Point Pepperell when Farley Inc. succeeded in a hostile bid for the textile company in February, will become chief executive officer of the Danville, Va.-based Dan River. 

The parties wouldn't disclose the sale price, and industry analysts said it would be difficult to calculate without detailed knowledge of Dan River's latest year's results. 

According to a member of the buy-out group, Dan River has annual sales of about $400 million.
That includes about $300 million evenly split between home fashions, including sheeting and bedding, and apparel fabrics, such as cotton shirt material; $75 million in carpet operations; and $25 million in specialty chemical manufacturing. 

Analysts said the Lanier group will bring two key elements to Dan River: a savvy team of seasoned textile managers with industry contacts and the capital to rapidly increase expenditures to speed modernization of its plants. 

The buy-out group includes other former top brass from West Point-Pepperell, including Barry F. Shea, who was its treasurer; Richard L. Williams, a former group vice president in charge of home-fashion operations; and Mr. Lanier's son, Joseph L. Lanier III, who headed its Cluett, Peabody & Co. unit. 

Dan River, which was taken private in a leveraged buy-out by management and employees in 1983 to fend off a takeover by Carl Icahn, has since been carrying a heavy debt burden.
It had planned a public offering in late 1987, but abandoned it in light of the stock market crash. 

Mr. Shea, the former West Point treasurer, said, "Our plans call for a capital expenditure two to three times more than they've been spending in the past." He declined to say what Dan River has been spending.
When asked whether Dan River might now go public, Mr. Shea said that while he "wouldn't count out going public to raise capital, we have no plans to do so right away." He added that the bitter experience of a hostile takeover by Farley has left his group with a strong preference to operate as a private company. 

Industry analysts said the Lanier group's strategy would likely be to focus on Dan River's home-furnishing segment and to accent brand-name sales. "Joe Lanier believes strongly in value-added products and wants to sell recognized trade names," said James S. Grien, a vice president with Prudential-Bache Capital Funding in Atlanta. 

