.START 

The battle between Europe's free-traders and its protectionists -- until now centered on such mundane items as photocopiers, banking services and automobiles -- is finally getting serious.
And it could hit the U.S. where it hurts. 

Right in the airwaves. 

Fueled by growing resentment in some quarters against the success across Europe of such U.S. imports as "Dallas," "Dynasty," and "Miami Vice," Europe has started a crusade to boost the production of its own programs -- aided by growing government subsidies.
And if such increased production doesn't displace the U.S. shows, some Americans fear, Europe might someday impose numerical quotas that could sharply curtail U.S. television and movie exports.
Already, some U.S. producers are trying to line up European partners and establish production ventures that wouldn't be subject to quotas. 

U.S. fears about the future course of European TV have centered mainly on the quota issue.
Special Trade Representative Carla Hills and U.S. movie industry officials have long railed against French proposals to require that 60% of programming in each European Community nation be made in Europe.
Earlier this week, the 12-country EC adopted a directive aimed at destroying the internal rules and barriers that have long hampered the showing of, say, French television shows in Britain, or German shows in Greece.
The directive also contained a watered-down quota clause, requiring only that a majority of shows be European "where practicable." 

Nonetheless, Jack Valenti, president and chief executive officer of the Motion Picture Association of America called the move "a step backward in time" and claimed the EC had "said no to competition and viewers' choice, and yes to trade barriers." Mrs. Hills's office said it didn't like even the vaguely worded quota clause and may protest it as an unfair trade practice before the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
U.S. lawyers who follow such matters say the wording could still allow individual countries -- like France -- to enforce strict quotas and doesn't preclude the EC from raising the barriers later. 

"I don't think the sky has fallen, and I don't think we should send in the Marines because of this directive," says Robert Bruce, a partner in the law firm Debevoise & Plimpton in Washington. "But I'm also not sure that the directive will really open up the European broadcasting market.
The proof of the pudding will be what comes next, how each country interprets the rules." 

A separate issue -- that of government money to aid European producers and writers -- isn't yet a trans-Atlantic problem, but with French President Francois Mitterrand pledging $150 million in French aid next year, and EC Commission President Jacques Delors pledging $275 million in EC money over the next five years, some Americans worry that subsidized European shows could one day gain a price advantage over non-subsidized U.S. productions.
Now, however, U.S. shows are cheap in Europe, because most of their production costs are paid for by the U.S. network or cable channel customer. 

The fuss -- which will continue for years -- is over both art and money.
The U.S. runs an estimated trade surplus of $2.5 billion a year in entertainment products, and last year sold $1.8 billion of television shows and movies to the EC.
In TV and movies, the U.S. is to Europe as Japan is to the U.S. in cars and electronic equipment.
For American industry and government officials, laboring under huge trade deficits, this is a trade issue of foremost importance. 

But Europeans, especially the French, see this U.S. dominance not only as an economic burden, but as "cultural imperialism" that should be violently resisted by the newly confident, united Europe. "We can't any longer be invaded by programs from abroad, which threaten to submerge us," says Jean-Michel Gaillard, the new head of France's Antenne 2 state-owned TV network.
Mr. Delors talks of what's shown on TV as being a social problem, not a trade problem -- "it's too important." Mr. Mitterrand calls television Europe's "cultural cement." 

American producers -- most of whom are loath to refer to their products as "culture" -- say U.S. series may be popular with European broadcasters because they are cheap, but they stay on the air because European viewers like them.
They also point out that viewers in all European countries like their own local shows even better. "Over the last 15 years, the most popular shows in all countries have been those produced locally," says Michael Garin, senior managing director of the New York investment bank Furman Selz Inc. "America's genius is its ability to make U.S. programs the second most popular in every foreign market." 

But if a fast-growing European production industry makes more shows that its home viewers want, the "Dallas" and "Dynasty" era may come to an end.
To hedge their bets, some U.S. producers have quietly moved into Europe to try to establish co-production agreements or jointly owned companies with European producers.
The aim is to marry American marketing expertise and finance with European ideas, to produce shows in Europe aimed at European viewers.
Industry lawyers say such productions almost certainly would qualify as European under any quota system. 

Capital Cities/ABC Video Enterprises Inc., for example, recently bought a sizable minority interest in Telemunchen, a West German production company, and is believed to be looking at similar investments in France and Spain.
Herb Granath, president of the Capital Cities/ABC Inc. unit, says programs the joint ventures eventually produce in Europe will be shown mainly there, but that specialized American cable channels, though probably not the networks, might pick up some of the shows. 

Mr. Granath says he's ready to work "within the framework" of the new EC directive and doesn't think quotas will pose a serious problem.
Broadcasters say only about 22% of European programming is American, and given the proliferation of new over-the-air and satellite channels in Europe, the U.S. industry couldn't produce enough material to fill even a strictly enforced 50% quota. 

"Nobody likes quotas," says Michael Gardner, a telecommunications specialist and partner in the law firm of Aiken, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld in Washington. "But given the language {of the directive} and the exploding demand for programming, in five or 10 years it may be irrelevant." 

In some cases the new EC directive would actually ease more stringent existing quotas.
Britain, for instance, has effectively limited U.S. shows to only 14% of the air time on British Broadcasting Corp. and independent channels.
If the U.K., as expected, adopts the EC standards, that quota couldn't be lower than 50%. 

Some American producers smell even more profit in an even partly deregulated Europe, though probably no longer simply from selling old U.S. series.
Patrick Cox, an official of NBC Europe, a London-based unit of General Electric Co., says NBC is actively looking for European production partnerships. "Europe represents an enormously growing market potential," he says. "The key thing is for the networks to position themselves to participate." 

European producers are likely to be receptive. "We've never managed to make good, solid, assembly-line series like the U.S. does," says David Webster, a former BBC executive now at a Washington think tank. "We have a great deal to learn from the Americans." 

Mr. Cox says NBC, which established the London office in June, hasn't made any investments in Europe but is talking to several potential partners.
The network is prepared to take its technology across the Atlantic to help produce European shows. "The European TV market is the last big market to develop in the world that will allow companies to grow to world-class, American or Japanese size," Mr. Cox says. 

