.START 

The Philippines, announcing a final agreement on its latest debt-financing package, said it expects to get nearly $1 billion in new funds from its foreign bankers and hopes to buy back between $1.2 billion and $1.4 billion of existing loans at a "substantial discount." 

President Corazon Aquino's office presented the final terms of the 1989-90 restructuring package on Sunday, five days after Philippine officials and commercial-bank representatives resumed talks. 

In mid-August, the Philippines reached a preliminary agreement with its bankers, making it the second country after Mexico to do so under a debt-reduction umbrella proposed by U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.
The Philippines, owing a total of about $28 billion in foreign debt, is Asia's most troubled debtor. 

The Philippine government said the buy-back of loans from foreign creditors would be equivalent to almost 20% of the $7.3 billion currently owed foreign banks in medium and long-term loans. 

Manila bankers expect funds to purchase the debt will come from the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and possibly the Japanese government. 

The amount of interest saved through the buy-back could reach as much as $100 million a year. 

After last month's preliminary agreement, Central Bank of the Philippines Gov. Jose Fernandez said the government expected to offer a buy-back rate similar to the discount offered by banks in recent months for Philippine debt.
That paper has been trading at a 48% to 49% discount. 

The Philippine agreement is based on banks being able to voluntarily choose between subscribing to new loans or offering their existing debt to the government for repurchase.
The government said its estimate of the amount of new funds it expects to receive is based on "preliminary market testing" by the country's 12-bank advisory committee. 

Assistance to the Philippines will come almost entirely from its larger creditors.
According to the announcement, the Philippines' "major commercial-bank lenders" will provide 90% of the new money. 

