.START 

Regarding your Aug. 31 editorial "Drugs: Why Not?": The drug war was lost before it began.
In a free society, people get what they want.
And what many of them want are drugs. 

I was a teen-ager during the last years of Prohibition.
In those days pushers were gangsters, and the drug of choice was booze.
Same problems, same old story: bribing government officials, paying off police, killing innocent people, etc. History is repeating itself. 

The same issue of your paper had an article on government use of the military against the import of drugs.
What a laugh.
What a waste of taxpayers' money.
The plan is doomed to failure.
People get what they want -- drugs. 

With profits of 4,000% from field to user, nothing will stop the flow.
One day a mule driver in Colombia, next day a multimillionaire.
Little kids make several hundred dollars a day in inner cities pushing what people want -- drugs. 

Two drugs causing most of our trouble today are tobacco and alcohol.
Consider this: More than 400,000 deaths annually from smoking-related diseases.
Untold thousands of deaths, misery and illness from alcohol. 

The answer to our drug problem?
Put all drugs on the shelves of the local liquor store; there's one on almost any corner of any city.
Tax them, inspect them, guarantee dosages, ensure purity, and then use the profits from legitimate sales to educate the public to their dangers. 

Byron E. Dillon 

Downey, Calif. 

You claim that the poor are capable of governing themselves. 

How about the people who aren't poor?
Are they capable of governing themselves?
Did those involved in the HUD, S&L and insider-trading scandals govern themselves? 

Every culture has institutions that people look up to for leadership and guidance.
Some of the people this society rewards and looks up to have been CPAs, lawyers, managers of our banks, managers of the S&Ls, investment bankers and managers of brokerage houses.
We also have looked up to the institutions that regulate and govern these individuals.
Did they govern themselves properly? 

How can you editorialize that the poor can govern themselves?
The poor do not read the Journal -- those who do read the Journal apparently cannot govern themselves. 

Ray Stahl Port Angeles, Wash. 

You assert an interesting premise, i.e., "Instead of blaming foreigners and drugs for the drug problem, Mr. Bush could be the first President to hold drug users responsible for their immoral behavior." Agreed.
You err, however, when you interpret the logical methodology for the implementation of this philosophy to be stricter enforcement. 

If drug use is as onerous as you imply, is not the user's self-inflicted devastation a sufficient punishment?
And what if such self-destruction does not provide a satisfactory deterrent; does it make sense to try to find a jail sentence cruel enough to impede one's urge to use drugs? 

This nation's neurotic obsession with saving drug users from themselves by use of force is a far greater threat to everyone's life, liberty and pursuit of happiness than any Colombian drug lord profiteering from the black market our government has created. 

Randy Young 

Santa Ana, Calif. 

Let me get this straight.
You write, "It is simply ridiculous to say that people are incapable of governing themselves." And at the same time you advocate having government make decisions for people by "forcing users into treatment programs and dealers into boot camps." So make up your mind.
Are people responsible for their own lives or not? 

David R. Henderson 

Pacific Grove, Calif. 

