.START 

The tax bill approved by the House Ways and Means Committee last week, which would end tax benefits for certain securities, didn't include special treatment for a pending $3.35 billion tender offer for American Medical International Inc. 

IMA Holdings Corp., an investment group that includes the Pritzker family of Chicago and First Boston Corp., had hoped that its $28-a-share offer for the Beverly Hills, Calif.-based hospital chain would be exempted from the proposed new rules. 

"The clarification IMA sought was not forthcoming.
IMA will now seek clarification from the Senate," said an IMA spokeswoman. 

The committee's refusal to grandfather the IMA offer, on top of the recent price drop in the high-yield securities market, has fueled doubts that the transaction can be financed on its original terms, analysts said. "The offer was generous in the first place, and it's looking richer all the time," said John Hindelong, an analyst at Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette. 

That view was reflected in the stock market Friday, as American Medical slid $1.25 to $22.125 on turnover of about 1.5 million shares in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The shares have slipped more than $4 since the acquisition agreement was reached in July, and the offer has been extended three times.
It is now set to expire on Sept. 

First Boston, which has agreed to invest $100 million of its own funds, and is arranging $713 million in subordinated debt financing for the deal, has already been hurt by weakened conditions in the junk-bond market, analysts said. 

The investment banking concern had to withdraw a bond offering for Ohio Mattress Co. last month because of lack of investor interest.
And First Boston is believed to hold a large stake in the depressed bonds of Campeau Corp., the cash-starved retailing giant. 

While analysts say that First Boston has too much prestige riding on the American Medical purchase to abandon it, they worry that the price will have to be lowered. "The question I'm hearing, that I don't have an answer for, is whether that would mean that American Medical would have to reopen the bidding," said Margo L. Vignola, an analyst at Salomon Brothers Inc. 

The IMA offer topped proposals made by several rival bidders for the hospital company, including a group formed by M. Lee Pearce.
Dr. Pearce, a Miami physician, sold his 10% stake -- or about seven million shares -- for a net price of $26.375 each shortly after the IMA agreement was announced. 

