.START 

U.S. auto makers, in a mood of caution, are planning to build fewer cars in this year's fourth quarter than in any last quarter since the recession-plagued final period of 1982. 

While a shift toward van and light-truck production accounts for some of the drop in car assembly, the factory schedules nonetheless indicate that the economy's "soft landing" hasn't yet erased fears of a slump in Detroit. "The other side of a soft landing is a soft recovery," said Mary Ann Keller, an auto industry analyst with Furman Selz Mager Dietz & Birney in New York. "We haven't created the pent-up demand," necessary for a sales boom, she added. 

The Big Three's cautious year-end production plans sharply contrast with the aggressive production schedules they set and mostly kept earlier this year, despite criticism by analysts that those schedules were unwarranted.
Meanwhile, foreign-based U.S. auto makers are continuing their trend of boosting car production. 

The U.S. operations of Japanese auto makers continue to account for a growing portion of U.S. car production.
Plants owned by foreign auto makers or operated as joint ventures with U.S. companies plan to build 312,609 cars in the fourth quarter, or 18.3% of the total, up from 205,875 cars, or 10.9% of the total a year ago. 

Overbuilding earlier in the year caused auto makers to trim their bulging inventories of vehicles by sponsoring aggressive sales promotions, including cash rebates to consumers.
That helped reduce inventories but, analysts say, it also prompted consumers who were considering purchasing later in the year to do so before then.
The effect will be fewer car and truck sales in the coming months.
Consumers also will be slow to purchase the 1990 models because some of the models carry the sharpest price rises in recent years. 

Auto inventories remained high at the end of August, even though sales for the month were 13% higher than a year ago because of unusually high rebates.
The Big Three auto makers ended last month with 98,000 more cars than they did a year ago.
Industrywide, inventories were up 13.6% at the end of August, to 685,365 cars, according to Ward's Automotive Reports, an industry trade publication. 

Industry sources say the nine domestic car makers plan to build 1,705,283 cars in the fourth quarter, down 10.1% from the 1,897,462 cars they built last year.
That's the lowest industrywide fourth quarter production level since 1982, when U.S. auto makers assembled 1,203,260 cars. 

Here are what industry sources say auto makers will build during the fourth quarter: 

Ford has scaled back third-quarter car production by 22,669 vehicles since a month ago. "We're trying to help dealers adjust their inventory levels," a Ford spokesman said.
Nevertheless the auto maker plans to run several of its truck plants on overtime in the fourth quarter. 

Here are the industry forecasts for third-quarter output: 

