.START 

A senior International Business Machines Corp. executive told analysts here that the strength shown by IBM's U.S. operations in the second quarter continued through August. 

Terry Lautenbach, general manager of the computer giant's U.S. operations, also told the Montgomery Securities conference that the company's U.S. revenue will increase this year compared to last year's level.
It would be the first time since 1985 that the U.S. revenue has shown growth for a full year.
Mr. Lautenbach added, however, that the growth is "not as rapid as we would like." 

Although IBM's second-quarter results showed the first significant revenue growth in its U.S. operations in years, some securities analysts had speculated that IBM pulled out all the stops to make that happen and that it wouldn't be able to sustain that pace.
So Mr. Lautenbach's statements should allay some of those concerns. 

"To hear the U.S. is good is very encouraging," said Jay Stevens, an analyst at Dean Witter. 

Mr. Lautenbach said the Armonk, N.Y., company still faces problems that are making its U.S. operations grow more slowly than IBM's operations in Europe and Japan.
He said these difficulties include "problems getting new products out the door," relatively slow growth in software and a need to further increase the time that IBM's marketing force spends in the field. 

In addition, the bulk of IBM's third-quarter business is typically done in September, so the real test will be what happens this month. 

Dan Mandresh, an analyst at Merrill Lynch, also cautioned that there are numerous other factors involved.
He said that, for instance, if the dollar's value stays unchanged through year end, the dollar will be 17% higher against the yen in the fourth quarter compared with its level in the year-ago period.
That would mean a corresponding reduction in the value of IBM's overseas earnings when they are translated into dollars. 

Some analysts have, in fact, expressed caution in recent days about the outlook for IBM's second half because of concern that the dollar's strength may hurt fourth-quarter results even more than previously projected. 

