.START 

Texas's biggest thrift-fraud case, encompassing a five-year investigation and a six-month trial, ended last week with a hung jury and an unhappy lesson for prosecutors. 

The prosecutors had gambled that a jury could follow a web of alleged thrift-fraud on the part of seven defendants through an 88-count indictment.
But the jurors' failure to reach a unanimous verdict on even one of the 352 questions before them confirmed the government's long-held doubts about bringing massive conspiracy and racketeering cases against numerous defendants. 

"We'll be very sparing in bringing {more of these} large and complex cases," said U.S. Attorney Marvin Collins of Dallas, whose office originated the case. 

The indictment, issued almost two years ago, accused real estate developers David "Danny" Faulkner and James Toler of conspiring with former thrift executives Spencer H. Blain Jr. and Paul Arlin Jensen to defraud five thrifts of more than $166 million through fraudulent loans for condominium developments along Interstate 30 east of Dallas.
Two real estate appraisers and a condominium salesman were also charged in the case. 

The size and complexity of the case has made it an Edsel among Texas thrift-fraud cases.
Prosecutors currently pursuing the perpetrators of Texas's savings and loan crisis are going for indictments against one to three defendants on charges that don't require educating a jury about the fine points of real estate appraisals and thrift disclosure statements. 

Several recent indictments obtained by the Dallas Bank Fraud Task Force have charged former thrift executives with misapplying their institutions' funds by reimbursing employees for political contributions to well-known members of Congress.
In another case, task force prosecutors won the conviction of a former president of Vernon Savings & Loan Association who was charged with using thrift funds to pay for female companions for his colleagues and the state savings and loan commissioner. 

"You always look for something easier to present and more appealing to a jury," Mr. Collins said. 

Defense lawyers say they too prefer the less-complicated cases because of the burden a lengthy trial places on their clients.
Sitting through a six-month trial as a defendant is "punishment as severe or more severe than being in the penitentiary itself," said defense lawyer Robert E. Davis of Dallas. 

But the prosecutors' trend toward bringing more succinct cases with a scandalous edge to them worries some defense lawyers.
Abbe David Lowell of Washington, D.C., said allowing prosecutors to pick and choose among the charges in a bank-fraud case provides "an enormous amount of power" for the government lawyers to target a suspect and then select a crime to prosecute. 

"If a person is accused of bank fraud, let him be tried for that," said Mr. Lowell, who successfully defended Texas thrift owner Thomas M. Gaubert against charges that he misled the officers of an Iowa thrift about his interest in a real estate deal they were financing.
Prosecutors in that case didn't touch on Mr. Gaubert's fund-raising efforts on behalf of former U.S. House Speaker Jim Wright and other Democrats. 

Tales of political glad-handing and extravagant spending were part of the case that ended in a mistrial last week, but they were nearly obscured by more tedious testimony from the government's 120 witnesses.
The defendants' lawyers, who are expected to ask U.S. District Judge Sam Cummings to order an acquittal of the defendants, didn't present any witnesses. 

The case "absolutely" will be retried, said lead prosecutor Terry Hart.
Mr. Collins, the Dallas U.S. attorney, agreed. 

"Whatever the expense, and it's been large, it's unfortunately a drop in the bucket compared to the huge dollar losses these five institutions suffered," he said. "A retrial . . . is fully justified." 

