.START 

New American Shoe Co. filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code. 

The petition was filed in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Puerto Rico, where the Plainview, N.Y., company has manufacturing facilities. 

New American Shoe, a maker of discount casual and athletic shoes, was established in April 1988 under a plan of reorganization filed by Amfesco Industries Inc., a predecessor company that had a similar Chapter 11 proceeding, under which a company continues operations while working out a plan to pay debt. 

Robert Pollack, president of New American, said the company couldn't overcome the $21 million debt burden inherited from its predecessor. 

New American Shoe listed assets of $17 million and liabilities of $48 million, he said.
The largest creditors are Chemical Bank, a unit of Chemical Banking Corp.; Irving Trust Co., a unit of Bank of New York Corp.; Security Pacific Business Credit Inc., a unit of Security Pacific Corp., and ContiTrade Financial Services.
Only Security Pacific is a fully secured creditor, according to Mr. Pollack. 

Mr. Pollack said the company had negotiated since February with Chemical Bank, Irving Trust and Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, which collectively hold 30% of New American's stock, to reduce the debt burden to a level that could attract investors.
Those negotiations proved unsuccessful, Mr. Pollack said. 

Under the 1988 reorganization plan, Robert B. Campbell, New American Shoe's chairman, owned 55% of the company, while the three banks owned 30% and shareholders the rest.
Mr. Campbell's $20 million investment in the company had partly funded the reorganization plan. 

In a news release, the company said it had experienced severe financial problems almost from its inception.
Negotiations with potential investors and financial institutions about obtaining additional funding have been unsuccessful but are continuing, the release stated. 

According to New American Shoe, the Puerto Rican government has expressed interest in keeping the company's factories there operating, and has arranged for private and government financial institutions to discuss local investment possiblities with the company. 

