.START 

"Sweeney Todd" has been turned upside down for its revival at the Circle in the Square Theater.
And James Morgan has turned the theater itself almost inside out for this brilliant, small-scale production of the grisly musical with score by Stephen Sondheim and book by Hugh Wheeler. 

Mr. Morgan has taken the normally awkward, elongated Circle in the Square stage, surrounded on three sides by steeply banked seats, and made it an eminently playable version of 19th-century London's Fleet Street.
It is the sort of total environment that experimental-theater exponents of 20 years ago often dreamed of but rarely achieved. 

Surrounding the auditorium are worn rags hung on clotheslines bathed in red and orange lights; behind the rags are the windows of a hundred tenements with yellow light shining through dusty window panes.
At one end of the stage, smoke curls from a cluster of tilting brick chimneys, while the floor is covered with cobblestones.
Moreover, Mr. Morgan has arranged it so that the action flows smoothly from Sweeney's barber shop and Mrs. Lovett's pie shop at one end, to Judge Turpin's house at the other, with the teeming streets of London in between.
The result is that the audience feels completely drawn into the action, so much so that at one point, when a crazed Sweeney brandishes his polished razor toward members of the audience, many in the first row recoiled physically from his outstretched instrument. 

The director of this production, Susan H. Schulman, has accomplished an even more radical transformation by reducing the show from the operatic scale of its original staging in the Gershwin Theater in 1979 to a personal, chamber-music size.
The basic material she started with was complex even without the earlier precedent to work against. 

"Sweeney Todd" is based on a modern dramatic version by Christopher Bond of a 19th-century British popular legend.
Sweeney, a London barber, is exiled to a prison camp in Australia on a trumped-up charge by a wicked judge who covets his beautiful wife.
When Sweeney returns, he vows revenge, and is aided in his schemes by Mrs. Lovett, who makes meat pies and has always been in love with him. 

In the original production Harold Prince spread the story across a cavernous iron foundry.
Ms. Schulman looks through the other end of the telescope.
Partly this is due to size limitations: She originated "Sweeney" in the tiny 100-seat off-off-Broadway York Theater last spring.
But more importantly, she sees "Sweeney" as an intensely personal story. 

Instead of a demented Sweeney, actor Bob Gunton gives us a somber man suffering from injustice, who only gradually grows into an obsessive avenger.
Instead of a hard-edged, jocular Mrs. Lovett, we have in Beth Fowler a good-humored woman who is genuinely in love with Sweeney. 

Rather than the 26-piece orchestra in the original production, there are now two players sitting at synthesizers.
So effective, however, are the arrangements of musical director David Krane that the music fills the theater.
Also, the eerie sounds of the synthesizers successfully underscore the macabre material of the play.
In addition, this production is unmiked, so that for once we get the full-throated voices of the singers and not impersonal amplification. 

One result of this intimate, accessible "Sweeney Todd" is that we can focus closely on Stephen Sondheim's score.
He has long had a love-hate relationship with lyricism and the romantic.
He enjoys, for instance, a great gift for writing melodies, such as the haunting "Nothing's Going to Harm You," beautifully sung in this production by Eddie Korbich.
At the same time, Mr. Sondheim has always been fearful that the romantic would veer toward the sentimental.
The world, he clearly feels, is not a place of moonlight and roses, but harbors as well a great deal of ugliness and unhappiness.
In "Sweeney" he has found an ideal vehicle for both impulses.
The result is what may well be Mr. Sondheim's most intricate and glorious score. 

There is a tremendous amount of beauty in the piece.
Amid the squalor of Dickensian London Streets we find Sweeney's lovely daughter, Johanna (Gretchen Kingsley), held captive by the evil Judge Turpin (David Barron) and courted by a young sailor appropriately named Anthony Hope (Jim Walton).
A rhapsodic hymn to Johanna courses through the entire play. 

But the story of Sweeney also has more than its share of gruesomeness.
Sweeney, after all, slits the throats of countless people, and Ms. Schulman is not sparing of the blood that comes spurting out on each occasion.
And, as ever, Mrs. Lovett turns the victims into meat pies. 

Frequently Mr. Sondheim juxtaposes the show's comic and macabre elements.
There is a scene, for example, when young Anthony is on stage wandering the streets of London singing the praises of Johanna, who has been whisked away from him, while her offstage voice rings in his ear.
At the same time, Todd in his barber shop at the other end of the stage is singing wistfully about Johanna while he distractedly slits the throat of a customer and drops him casually through a chute to Mrs. Lovett's bake shop below.
The audience is simultaneously moved by the Johanna theme and horrified and amused by the murders. 

Finally, this "Sweeney Todd" is closer to us not only because of Ms. Schulman's physical production, but because of the 10 years that have intervened since the play was first done.
Unfortunately, with the great increase in drug-related crime and violence on our city streets, the metaphor of cannibalism in the play and the terrifying events on stage do not seem nearly as remote as we once thought them to be. 

