.START 

Canada's Atomic Energy Control Board deferred a decision on the proposed startup of the Darlington nuclear station, a nuclear-power plant on Lake Ontario, pending further safety studies. 

The delay could result in tight Ontario power supplies this winter, which would force the province to import high-priced electricity from neighboring U.S. states, Ontario Hydro warned.
The utility, which is owned by the Ontario provincial government, also said a delay would hurt its efforts to curb acid rain by replacing old pollution-causing power plants with new installations. 

The board said its staff needed more time to review the Darlington plant's safety measures, particularly the software of a new computer-controlled emergency shutdown system. 

Rene Levesque, president of the Atomic Energy Control Board, said the board was "very much aware of the considerable costs involved in a licensing delay for Darlington, but we must be satisfied that public and worker safety are assured." 

The Darlington plant is about 50 miles east of Toronto.
Its eventual planned output of 3,524,000 kilowatts would be enough power to meet the needs of most of metropolitan Toronto.
The plant, which is expected to cost about 12 billion Canadian dollars (US$10.13 billion) is to have four nuclear reactors.
Construction of one reactor has been completed, another is 75% complete, a third is 35% complete and the fourth is more than 15% complete. 

Ontario Hydro planned to start the Darlington station Oct. 10 and test it for two to three weeks at about 1% of capacity.
If tests were satisfactory, the utility planned to ask the board at its Nov. 2 meeting to let it to proceed to full operation. 

Mr. Levesque said it would take at least a month for the board's staff to complete a detailed review of the safety shutdown system and certain other aspects of reactor.
The board blamed Ontario Hydro for the delay, saying it only received some essential data from the utility in recent days. 

Ontario Hydro has experienced heavier than expected power demand because of Ontario's strong economic growth.
It has increased its electricity purchases from its neighboring provinces of Quebec and Manitoba and from Michigan. 

Canada's exports of electricity to the U.S. for the first six months of this year fell 35% from a year earlier to 11.55 billion kilowatt hours.
Canada's imports of U.S. electricity during the same period rose 61% to 4.99 billion kilowatt hours. 

