.START 

Time Warner Inc. said it will create its first trade magazine by spinning off a physicians' version of its 50%-owned bimonthly consumer health and fitness magazine, Hippocrates. 

Time Inc. Magazine, the wholly owned subsidiary of Time Warner, said that, starting with its January 1990 issue, the consumer version of Hippocrates will change its name to In Health magazine.
The company will publish Hippocrates as a more specialized trade magazine directed at physicians and drawing primarily pharmaceutical advertising.
Both will be monthly by 1991. 

Time Warner owns a 50% share of the Sausalito, Calif.-based Hippocrates, and has an option to buy the other half in 1991.
Three-year-old Hippocrates is one of several Time Warner publishing joint ventures, but it is the first magazine joint venture that has produced a spinoff publication. 

The creation of Hippocrates as a trade magazine is a move by Time Warner to cash in on the lucrative pharmaceutical advertising market.
According to Medical Marketing & Media, a trade publication, in 1988 medical advertising in trade magazines totaled $550 million, of which pharmaceutical ads represented $400 million.
The consumer market for prescription drugs is estimated at $50 billion. 

Pharmaceutical advertising by product is barred by federal law in consumer magazines, though Hippocrates and other consumer magazines are allowed to carry corporate-image ads from the companies. 

Time has avoided trade-magazine publishing, considering it reliable but not as financially rewarding as consumer magazines.
Christopher Meigher, executive vice president and group publisher of Time magazines, said spinning off Hippocrates wasn't an indication Time Warner was making a wholesale move into trade magazines.
However, he said Time Warner could explore trade spinoffs of existing titles, such as a magazine for top financial executives derived from Time Warner's Money magazine. 

Although Hippocrates has won two National Magazine awards in two years, the name has generally been a difficult sell to a wide consumer audience.
Mr. Meigher said he is hoping to accelerate the circulation growth with the In Health name.
Hippocrates, subtitled "The magazine of health & medicine," has paid circulation of about 400,000, in addition to 125,000 copies sent free to doctors' waiting rooms. 

"You hate to mess with a success, but we think that with the name In Health we'll have greater success in developing circulation," said Mr. Meigher. "We can go further with that name than with Hippocrates.
In Health gives us more accessibility." 

In Health will have stiff competition from a group of more established health-related magazines, such as American Health Partners' American Health, Family Media Inc. 's Health, Rodale Press's Prevention, Conde Nast Publications' Self, and Weider Publications' Shape magazine. 

Hippocrates will carry largely pharmaceutical ads directed at 120,000 physicians -- including general and family practitioners, internists, and cardiologists -- who will receive it free.
The new Hippocrates will have editorial matter similar to In Health, but with some added features that address physicians' interests. 

"We found physicians were reading our magazine like crazy because it helped them keep up with patients," said Eric Schrier, Hippocrates' founder and editor. "We had a great franchise with the consumer, but we found we could expand it by using the Hippocrates name to attract doctors." 

