.START 

I enthusiastically recommend "The Nightmare Years" (which began last night and continues tonight through Wednesday, 8-10 p.m. and repeated 10 p.m.-midnight EDT, on Turner Network Television) for two reasons.
First, it tells one of the original true stories behind today's stock figure of the journalist hero -- that of William L. Shirer, the American newspaperman who covered Nazi Germany between 1934 and 1940, initially for Hearst's Universal News Service and subsequently for CBS Radio. 

And second, it tells the story well.
Unlike such monster miniseries as "War and Remembrance," "The Nightmare Years" does not plod steadily through the entire course of World War II, munching tons of advertising dollars and planting a heavy footprint on each and every key event.
Instead, it pulls off the delicate task of weaving history into individual experience without slighting either.
Of course, the hard work was already done by Mr. Shirer, whose best-selling memoirs form the basis of Ian Curteis's excellent script. 

Perhaps it was inevitable, coming from the Turner network, that this miniseries would employ the latest colorization techniques to insert tinted dramatic scenes -- with Sam Waterston playing Mr. Shirer -- into matching tinted documentary footage of such momentous occasions as the Nazi book burnings, the massive Nuremberg rallies, and the French surrender at Compiegne.
As we know from Woody Allen's "Zelig," however, the effect of such tricks is unavoidably comic. 

Much stronger are the sequences that employ old-fashioned film-making techniques such as good writing, acting, editing, directing and production design.
Every character is believably human -- from victims like Victor Schneider (Peter Whitman), a terrified Jewish art historian trying to save his family from the Gestapo; to perpetrators like Josef Goebbels (Kurtwood Smith), Hitler's fanatically loyal minister of propaganda.
Instead of the cartoon brutes populating most TV miniseries, the Nazis in this film display frightening intelligence and subtlety while bickering, plotting and rationalizing their evil deeds. 

Even more interesting are the bad guys who don't fit the cartoon Nazi mold at all.
The British actor Ronald Pickup is superb as Ernst "Putzi" Hanfsaengl, the Nazi foreign press chief whose thwarted bohemian instincts and half-baked Harvard education keep interfering with his ideological purity.
Equally intriguing is the fiercely egotistical Nazi film maker Helga Bauer (Frances Barber), a fictionalized version of the film maker Leni Riefenstahl. 

Such impressive villains might seem a tough act to follow, but the portrayals of Shirer, his charming Austrian wife, Tess (Marthe Keller), and the other good guys are equally compelling.
Pitted against Goebbels's overweening propaganda machine, a scrappy figure like Norman Ebbutt of the London Times (Peter Jeffrey) looks heroic even when shouting a drunken warning to an arriving delegation of befuddled Britons.
The same is true for the rest of the ragged crew of American and British reporters who balk at being spoon-fed lies.
This battle of individual wills succeeds in putting the global conflict between freedom and totalitarianism into a neat dramatic nutshell. 

Here is my only reservation.
One of the characters in "The Nightmare Years" seems to offer a brief for the absolute freedom of the press -- not only from totalitarian control, but also from any sort of restraint imposed either by private management or by democratic government.
The character is a fictionalized American reporter named Peter Butler (Chris Muncke), whose craven obedience to his employers (the Hearst empire) connects seamlessly with his mindless admiration of Hitler.
It's significant that Butler is the film's only real cartoon villain. 

It's possible that absolute freedom of the press matters a lot to Mr. Shirer, who left CBS in 1947 after a dispute with both Edward R. Murrow (a friend and colleague) and William S. Paley over Shirer's criticisms, on his weekly radio program, of President Truman's support of the Cold War.
It's also possible that absolute freedom of the press is the credo of another writer who worked on the script -- Bob Woodward of Watergate fame.
For both of these famous and committed journalists, "The Nightmare Years" seems to have been a labor of love.
And why shouldn't it be?
Those years of living dangerously in Berlin and Vienna were a golden age for their profession. 

Yet my reservation applies only to the character of Butler.
The miniseries shows Shirer visiting New York in 1935 and being aghast at the reactions of his old crony, Nicholas Roosevelt, a wealthy Republican businessman whose hatred for the Bolsheviks (not to mention for his cousin Franklin) blinds him to the frightening tidings about Hitler.
And in a later scene, we see Shirer chafing at the folly of being required by CBS to cover "human interest" stories like the Vienna Boys' Choir at the very moment of the Anschluss. 

But the film's Shirer never draws a facile parallel between these restraints and the Nazi campaign of mass thought control, or between the systematic hate-mongering of Goebbels and the caution -- or paralysis -- of news organizations and democratic governments on the brink of war.
Actually, given the rocky history of press freedoms during the Cold War, the film could have drawn more parallels than it does.
For example, it could have dramatized Murrow's famous remark (made in 1945) that he and his colleagues were going home "to fight the same kind of things we've been fighting here." 

In this era of polarized opinion about the power and prerogatives of the media, it's remarkable to see "The Nightmare Years" keep its priorities so straight.
In scenes like the one in which Shirer cooperates with a U.S. Naval Intelligence officer's request to do a little spying on the side, the film illustrates very clearly that the survival of press freedom depends on that of legitimately constituted government.
When confronted with a world-class liar like Goebbels, or (more recently) with the kind of people who thought nothing of whitewashing the blood from Tiananmen Square, it's heartening to know that a line still exists between journalistic pride and journalistic hubris. 

