.START 

To American advertising people, Gilbert Gross is the man who invented "the French disease." 

For years, established agencies in France derided Mr. Gross as a bargain-basement ad man who ruined client relationships.
They did all they could to stop him.
They failed.
Now the French disease is spreading to other European countries and, some believe, will eventually reach the U.S. 

Mr. Gross's idea is based on simple economics.
By buying huge quantities of ad space from newspapers, magazines, television and radio, he reasoned, he could demand discounts as high as 50%.
Then he could resell the space to clients in customized cut-rate packages -- and still make a huge profit. 

Over the past 20 years, Mr. Gross's success has been phenomenal.
Today, associates and industry insiders say, he controls 25% of the space and time sold in France and, through affiliates, more than 10% of the advertising market in West Germany and Spain. 

"Media-buying is becoming the creative frontier of advertising," says Peter Scott, chief executive of Britain's WCRS Group PLC, which is helping Mr. Gross extend his influence through Europe. "There is going to be a battleground in the marketplace." 

For the moment, media-buying hasn't reached the U.S., partly because lawyers here believe some of its forms may constitute price-fixing.
But U.S. agencies have banded together to form media-buying groups abroad, and some insiders believe the practice may ultimately spread to both the U.S. and Asia. 

This year, Omnicom Group Inc., together with WPP Group PLC's Ogilvy Group Inc. and J. Walter Thompson Co., joined together to form Paris-based Media Partnership.
Interpublic Group of Cos. has allied with the media-buying affiliate of France's Publicis SA. British firms, including Saatchi & Saatchi PLC, have created their own media-buying companies and alliances, and more are in the works. 

Fighting to stay ahead, Mr. Gross now is negotiating the acquisition of his company, Carat Holding SA, by London-based WCRS, which already owns 50% of the company.
Mr. Gross, his brother Francis and a few other associates would become WCRS's largest shareholders -- eventually acquiring as much as 29.9% of WCRS.
Both Gross brothers would also join the WCRS board. 

WCRS, in turn, is planning to sell a majority of its ad-agency business -- which includes Della Femina McNamee WCRS -- to Paris-based Eurocom, a move that would allow it to concentrate on the media-buying business.
WCRS's discussions with Eurocom may be concluded by late this week and would result in Eurocom raising its 20% stake in the ad business to 60% to 70%, say executives close to the discussions. 

Carat says that following its alliance with WCRS in April 1988, its European business has exploded.
This year, Carat officials expect their subsidiaries' and affiliates' bookings in five European countries outside France to quintuple to more than 11 billion francs ($1.7 billion) -- surpassing for the first time their total business within France. 

Mr. Gross, who is publicity-shy, wasn't available to be interviewed for this story, and closely held Carat won't disclose profits.
But trade publications claim his gross profit margins approach 10%, well above the industry norm. "We have made all our acquisitions without having to use outside funding," says Charles Hochman, who heads Carat International. "You can say that we make a good living." 

But when Mr. Gross started in 1969, he had to form his own company; the established players refused to back him.
Ad agencies were accustomed to buying media space themselves, customer by customer.
They wanted to keep the business.
They warned customers that the bargain-priced air time and magazine space would be second-class -- the leavings that couldn't be sold at normal prices.
And they said a go-between like Mr. Gross could ruin the secrecy of planned ad campaigns. 

"The idea was controversial for a long time, because clients and agencies were worried about strategic leaks," explains Barry Hill, Paris-based European vice president at McCann-Erickson. 

But many high-volume advertisers -- notably retail stores and food companies -- were willing to take the risk to cut prices.
Eventually, Mr. Gross's volume and discounts won out.
Even prestige clients decided that as long as Carat kept secret the contents of their planned campaigns, they could buy their time more cheaply through him and get the same media slots delivered by their agencies. "The agencies are like big hospitals: They treat all patients," says Mr. Hochman of Carat. "We are like surgeons who only treat injuries of the finger." 

Coca-Cola Co., for example, still uses McCann-Erickson to design ad campaigns, but it now hires Mr. Gross to buy French ad space and time.
Carat says its 1,200 other customers include Fiat S.p.
A., BSN SA, Gillette Co., Colgate-Palmolive Co. and Eastman Kodak Co. 

As his volume grew, newspapers, magazines and radio and TV stations began coming to Mr. Gross, begging him to include them in his packages and offering top display at even better discounts.
The process shook the world's ad agencies.
Beginning in France, the biggest threw in the towel and created their own bulk-buying groups. 

Carat's planned merger with WCRS comes as the bulk-buying boom seems to be taking off in other parts of Europe.
With the deregulation of radio and television, there has been a proliferation of new stations in France, West Germany, Britain and Spain.
They need advertisers, and the bulk buyers are ready.
Led by Carat, bulk buyers now have one-quarter of the Spanish ad market, and 15% in Britain and West Germany, says Mr. Scott of WCRS. 

Moreover, Mr. Scott says the growth of powerful, internationally expanding media groups -- Italy's Berlusconi, West Germany's Bertelsmann, Britain's Maxwell Communication -- means that media buyers also must be big and international. "The development of these all-powerful media groups is a trend that is going to put massive power in their hands, against the advertisers {Carat's clients}," says Mr. Scott. "That force has to be met with force." 

When will this business get to the U.S.? "Our ambitions go well beyond Europe," says Mr. Hochman.
But he doesn't have any immediate plans to move into the U.S.
And for now, U.S. ad people say, American customers remain leery of dealing with anything but individual ad agencies.
Furthermore, U.S. networks forbid customers from reselling air time after they have bought it.
But some Carat officials speculate that, as the U.S. networks suffer financial problems, even they might be lured by the idea of large-scale ad sales through middlemen like Mr. Gross. 

Circuit City Account 

Circuit City, a giant consumer electronics specialty retailer, awarded its $25 million account to J. Walter Thompson, New York. 

Greg Jones, the company's vice president of advertising, said a decision hadn't yet been reached, but people close to the review said the account had been awarded to the WPP Group unit.
The account had previously been handled by Admarketing, a Los Angeles agency, but the two agreed to part when there was a difference in the direction of the advertising, Mr. Jones said yesterday. 

The Richmond, Va., retailer, which has more than 120 stores nationwide, began the search earlier this year and initially considered 16 agencies.
Circuit City finally narrowed the search to just J. Walter Thompson and Young & Rubicam, both of which completed extensive creative speculative work for the pitch. 

Ad Notes. . . . 

NBC STUDY: In the latest example of a network aiming to demonstrate that more people watch TV than Nielsen ratings suggest, General Electric's NBC unit yesterday released a study showing TV reaches at least 96% of all college students during a typical school week.
Some TV executives say the college market is underreported because the Nielsen Television Index counts only in-home audiences, not dormitories on campuses.
In its study, NBC found that daytime serials reach nearly 47% of all students; late-night entertainment programming reaches more than 49% of all students. 

WHO'S NEWS: Stephen Harty, 37 years old, was named general manager of Ogilvy & Mather New York, a unit of WPP Group.
Mr. Harty succeeds Kenneth Caffrey, 51, who will devote full time to his continuing responsibilities as O&M's world-wide media director. 

