.START 

This week's revision of the European currency unit isn't likely to alter interest rates on ECU-denominated securities.
But neither will it ease the risks to ECU-based investments caused by West Germany's rising trade surpluses with its European Community partners. 

In recent years, those investments have carried low currency risk because of the European Monetary System's efforts to maintain steady exchange rates between most EC countries.
But unless the trade imbalances are addressed by other policy measures, a major realignment of European currencies may become inevitable. 

The basic makeup of the new ECU to include the Spanish peseta and Portuguese escudo was determined last June.
At that time, there was no significant adjustment in the relative exchange rates of the present members of the ECU bloc, and a deviation from that structure isn't expected when the revised ECU is fixed this week.
Thus, readjustments in ECU rates have likely already been made. 

"The change to the ECU was immediately discounted in the markets last June," says Andres Drobny, economist at Bankers Trust Co. "But the problems of imbalances between the countries remain.
Those imbalances are growing and the governments aren't responding." 

The ECU, which consists of all the currencies in the EC, was last revised in 1984 with the inclusion of the Greek drachma and will be revised again on Wednesday to include the currencies of Spain and Portugal, following their joining the EC in 1986. 

Each country's currency is given a weighting in the ECU, based on the size of the country's economy, trade levels and participation in the EC's financial-support mechanism.
The revised ECU gives West Germany the biggest weighting with 30.1 (out of a total 100), down from its previous weighting of 34.59.
France's new weighting will be 19.0 and the U.K.'s 13.0.
The Spanish peseta will enter at 7.94.
Measuring the performance of ECU securities against appropriate benchmarks is complicated by a lack of consistent government ECU-denominated issues over a whole range of maturities.
Many analysts construct theoretical ECU bond yields based on government bonds of each country in proportion to their ECU weighting.
But even that is imperfect because of differing liquidities and issuing practices by the various governments. 

Nevertheless, on the surface it would seem logical for ECU interest rates to be higher than would otherwise be the case because of higher inflation in Spain and Portugal. "With the inclusion of the peseta and escudo, there is apt to be a rise in both the short- and long-term interest rates since the share of so-called soft-currency or high interest countries in the currency basket will increase," according to a study of the ECU by UBS Phillips & Drew. 

According to that study, "the short-term ECU market interest rate after the incorporation of the Iberian currencies will be about 85 basis points above the synthetical ECU reference interest rate," which doesn't take the peseta and escudo into consideration. 

But Spain's decision in June to also join the EMS exchange-rate mechanism underscores that country's determination to reduce inflation by tying the peseta to a strong currency like the Deutsche mark and accepting the discipline of the Bundesbank. 

"Indeed, by 1992, it is highly likely that inflation will be fairly similar in most of the major EMS countries, prompted by the EC drive toward a common market and a common currency," says Jim O'Neill, economist at Swiss Bank Corp. 

As long as foreign-exchange rates between the various European currencies remain stable, then fluctuations in interest rates on ECU-denominated securities should respond mainly to the changing fortunes of yields in the constituent credit markets, with the greatest influence exerted by West Germany, France, the U.K. and Italy. 

But currency-market pressures caused by concerns over trade imbalances could destabilize the markets for ECU-denominated securities if a major realignment in European exchange rates emerges. 

That may occur if the U.S. dollar slumps against the mark.
As long as the strong dollar has made European goods competitive, then concerns in Europe about deficits with Germany have been on a back burner.
An economic slowdown in the U.S. that shrinks world trade, drives down the dollar and reduces Europe's competitveness would make those countries' deficits with Germany harder to ignore. 

