.START 

Frequent-flier programs are about to take another hit. 

In a surprise move, Hertz Corp. said it is dropping out of the programs, and other major car rental companies said they are considering following the industry leader.
The move further dilutes the value of these once lucrative programs; airlines and their hotel partners have been cutting back on awards and imposing new restrictions. 

"This is just going to make the programs even less attractive," said John Holland, publisher of the Business Flyer, a trade newsletter. "You used to be able to get a whole vacation package.
Now it's a lot less." 

Currently, most car rental companies and hotels have marketing agreements with airlines under which frequent fliers earn awards not only by flying but also by renting cars and staying in hotels.
The awards include free or discounted airline tickets, hotel stays and rental cars. 

But airlines started cutting back on the programs a few years ago because they were forced to give out too many free trips as the programs grew in popularity.
Hertz said it is having a similar problem.
It said the rate of growth of mileage points issued has doubled in each of the past two years.
The value of those redeemed awards topped $15 million last year.
In addition, Hertz said it paid $20 million in fees to airlines to participate in the programs. 

With such costs, there was "no payback" from the program, said Brian J. Kennedy, Hertz's executive vice president, marketing and sales. 

The New York company said that at year end it will drop its marketing agreements with Delta Air Lines, America West Airlines, Continental Airlines and Eastern Airlines.
Frequent fliers have until Dec. 31 to earn mileage from these carriers for Hertz coupons, and will have a year after that to use those coupons.
Hertz also plans to discontinue its other partnerships -- with American Airlines, United Airlines and USAir -- after Dec. 31.
The company wouldn't say when those partnerships will be discontinued, although it said it wouldn't be soon.
Hertz's decision surprised some airlines.
America West's agreement with Hertz had just gone into effect this month. "Obviously, senior management made a decision to abruptly do an about-face," said Michael Leonard, director of sales programs at America West, a regional carrier based in Phoenix, Ariz.
Still, most airlines said they would replace Hertz with another partner, or noted that they already have several car rental partners. 

But while some smaller car rental companies plan to stay in the programs, it is no longer clear what the majors will do.
Avis Inc. 's chairman, Joseph Vittoria, said the company is rethinking its plans and "isn't interested in picking up what they {Hertz} discard." Budget Rent a Car Corp. said it is evaluating its options and a spokesman for National Car Rental System Inc. said it is "studying the implications" of Hertz's plans. 

Analysts said Hertz's decision to abandon frequent-flier partnerships is part of an effort among most major car rental companies to cut costs.
Many of these companies carry heavy debt because of buy-outs in the past few years.
What's more, the car rental business hasn't been strong this year because high air fares cut down on airport customers. 

