.START 

While President Bush continues to hedge on whether and when to restore full ties with China, other prominent Americans are rushing back in -- including the president's brother. 

Prescott Bush, on a business swing through Asia, spent the weekend in Beijing meeting with officials and potential partners for several China-investment deals. 

The visit comes at a time of continuing uncertainty in U.S.-China business relations.
Some U.S. businessmen have hesitated to return to China or pursue new deals so soon after the June 4 massacre in Beijing, when troops opened fire and killed hundreds, perhaps thousands, of unarmed pro-democracy demonstrators. 

Indeed, Bush administration policies continue to frustrate some U.S. business interests, both directly and indirectly.
A continued arms-sales embargo has cost U.S. companies millions in export sales.
And continuing State Department travel warnings indirectly send the message to businessmen that it still isn't business as usual. 

Nonetheless, the president's brother believes this is a good time to be in China. 

"We aren't a bunch of carrion birds coming to pick the carcass," Mr. Bush says. "But there are big opportunities in China, and America can't afford to be shut out.
We don't want to lose the market to the Japanese, the Germans or anyone else." 

Mr. Bush chafes at suggestions, frequently raised by the media, that he is taking advantage of his relationship with the president to further his business interests. "There's no conflict of interest," he says, referring to his involvement in China. "This is something that has been going on for years." But, he concedes: "It doesn't hurt that my brother is the president of the United States." 

Mr. Bush is representing Asset Management, International Financing & Settlement Ltd., a financial-services company that is trying to line up several investment projects in China, including a wood-processing venture and a satellite-linked computer data base network.
Mr. Bush is a senior adviser to the company. 

Mr. Bush also will travel this week to Shanghai, where he is helping to build an $18 million joint-venture deluxe country club for expatriate residents.
Mr. Bush has a 30% stake in the project, which, when completed, will include an 18-hole golf course, 12 tennis courts and other facilities. 

While in Shanghai, Mr. Bush also will discuss plans to construct a $20 million town-house complex for foreign residents.
He expects to take a 50% stake in that project. 

In addition to Mr. Bush, other politically well-connected Americans are on their way to China.
High-ranking U.S. officials still won't visit, but former officials are showing little hesitation in renewing old friendships in China. 

Alexander Haig Jr., secretary of state under President Reagan and currently chairman of Worldwide Associates Inc., will give the keynote address Oct. 2 to a conference marking the 10th anniversary of China International Trust & Investment Corp., or Citic, a state-owned multinational.
Many top Chinese government leaders will be on hand. 

A number of U.S. businessmen are boycotting the event -- which coincides with China's national day celebration Oct. 1 -- in light of events here in June.
Citic is disappointed with the level of U.S. participation. 

Henry Kissinger, who has opposed sanctions against China and who has extensive business interests of his own in China, turned down an invitation to speak at the event. (Citic got Mr. Haig to replace him.) But Mr. Kissinger will be in China in November, when he plans to hold private meetings with Chinese officials. 

Another old friend of China, Richard Nixon, plans to visit before the end of the year.
Word of the separate Kissinger and Nixon visits has been manipulated by the official Chinese media in an attempt to show people here and abroad that it's business as usual in China. 

