.START 

Panhandle Eastern Corp. said it agreed to sell its downtown real estate for about $400 million to JMB Realty Corp. of Chicago, capping off more than $2.4 billion of asset disposals. 

Panhandle inherited the real estate -- including three office buildings, a shopping mall and a hotel -- from Texas Eastern Corp., which Panhandle acquired earlier this year for $3.22 billion.
Since then, Panhandle, a large natural-gas pipeline company, has been selling off assets to reduce debt.
The largest single asset shed was a package of North Sea oil properties that went for $961 million. 

"We're done with the big-ticket items," Panhandle Chairman Robert D. Hunsucker said in an interview following announcement of the real-estate sale. "We've got some other things to sell but not of that magnitude." 

Mr. Hunsucker said Panhandle plans to sell by year end smaller assets he valued at about $150 million -- the largest of which is a 50,000-barrel-a-day oil refinery.
He expects that sale to close by Oct. 1. 

Panhandle recently pre-paid a $1.7 billion bridge loan used for the Texas Eastern acquisition, leaving it with about $1.2 billion of takeover-related debt. "We'll be chipping away on that," Mr. Hunsucker said. 

Panhandle's Houston real estate, which includes large undeveloped acreage fronting the city convention center, sold much quicker than expected.
Panhandle said the long-depressed Houston market improved enough this year to generate more interest than anticipated. 

Some real-estate experts suggested that with Houston real estate showing signs of recovery, it wouldn't be sensible for the company to be a seller now. "It wouldn't if we were in the real-estate business," Mr. Hunsucker countered. "But we're in the pipeline business." He added, "We just did not have the luxury of time." 

Panhandle's only sizable asset not part of the gas-pipeline business is a petroleumproducts pipeline.
Although Mr. Hunsucker maintained that wasn't for sale, he said he has had many inquiries about it.
He placed its value "probably north of $600 million." 

The buyer of Panhandle's Houston properties, JMB Realty, is a real-estate investment, development and management firm.
Assets in its own portfolio and those it manages for affiliates total more than $20 billion, Panhandle said. 

Texas Eastern's corporate headquarters has been in one of the sold office buildings.
Panhandle said it will relocate personnel there to its headquarters during a three-year period.
The merged company will have reduced the number of employees by around 600 people to 2,200 by year's end, Mr. Hunsucker said. 

Mr. Hunsucker said the company is open to other acquisition possibilities but wasn't looking under rocks to find them. "I'm like one of those big snakes," he said. "I don't need to eat every month.
I need a little time for the digestion process." 

