.START 

Olympia & York Developments Ltd. will have greater influence in the management of Campeau Corp. under terms of its $250 million loan to the struggling real-estate and retailing concern. 

Campeau Chairman Robert Campeau "is no longer calling the shots on his own," said a finance executive close to Campeau. 

In a statement late Friday, Campeau said it agreed to the terms of the O&Y convertible loan.
But Campeau said it still needed its banks' approval of the loan's terms and conditions, which include postponing the due date of an $800 million loan to April from January.
O&Y is an investment holding and real-estate development concern closely held by Toronto's wealthy Reichmann family. 

Campeau also said Friday that a management group reporting to a committee of Campeau directors will "take charge" of refinancing and restructuring the company's cash-starved Federated Department Stores and Allied Stores units.
As previously reported, Campeau intends to sell its Bloomingdale's department store chain to reduce the company's $10 billion of debt. 

A Campeau spokeswoman said O&Y "will definitely be represented" on the board committee, but she didn't know if Mr. Campeau would be part of it or whether Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. and Campeau's banks would also have representation.
DeBartolo, a Youngstown, Ohio-based developer, lent Campeau $480 million during its $6.6 billon takeover of Federated last year and has a 7.5% equity stake in Federated. 

Executives close to Campeau and O&Y said the two O&Y officials currently on Campeau's board, Albert Reichmann, chairman, and Lionel Dodd, chief operating officer, will be on the special committee.
They said O&Y will have a major influence on the refinancing of Federated and Allied and on the possible sale of other department-store chains.
Also, it's expected that the O&Y loan will be convertible into Campeau stock, reducing Mr. Campeau's fully diluted stake in his company to less than 50% and boosting O&Y's current 25% stake. 

The delay in getting its lenders' approval of the O&Y loan meant Campeau's Allied Stores unit missed the interest payment due Friday on one series of junk bonds.
Allied said it paid the interest on its 10 1/4% senior notes due 1992 but didn't pay the interest on its 11 1/2% senior subordinated debentures due 1997.
Allied said it has a 30-day grace period within which to make the payment. 

Allied didn't indicate the amount of the overdue payment, but analysts said the aggregate interest due Friday on Allied's high-yield bonds was about $50 million. 

Campeau also missed the deadline Friday by which it had to either secure financing commitments to buy back $401 million of notes held by First Boston Corp., PaineWebber Inc., and Dillon, Read & Co., or give the underwriters the right to take up 6.96% of Federated's common stock.
The Campeau spokeswoman said the status of the notes is "still open to discussion" with the underwriters. 

Trading in Campeau stock was halted Wednesday and didn't resume Thursday or Friday. 

