.START 

This British colony is finding it ever harder to retain its best and brightest people as the date for Hong Kong's return to Chinese sovereignty draws nearer. 

The number of people leaving Hong Kong will rise 31% next year to 55,000 from 42,000 this year, according to projections by a goverment task force on emigration.
A statistical profile of those who have left so far underlines the impressions of business executives and politicians that Hong Kong is experiencing a "brain drain" of young, educated middle managers and professionals. 

In 1987, the number of emigrants rose 58% from a year earlier to 30,000 people, according to goverment figures.
Last year, the number of emigrants rose 53%, to 45,800.
The projected figure of 42,000 for this year would represent a slight slowing despite the Beijing massacre on June 4, which has heightened fears that China won't keep its promises of maintaining Hong Kong's freedoms and its capitalist economic system after the colony's planned 1997 return to Chinese sovereignty. 

The Hong Kong government says the effect of the Beijing massacre won't be seen in 1989's final emigration numbers because of the time it takes for applications to be filed, processed and acted upon.
Nevertheless, many private analysts are skeptical that fewer people are leaving this year. 

Since China's brutal suppression of the pro-democracy movement in Beijing, thousands of prospective Hong Kong emigrants have flooded the consulates of the three most popular destinations -- Canada, Australia and the U.S. -- seeking visa applications.
A new resident visa program announced by Singapore attracted 20,000 potential applicants on its first day. 

However, the government cautioned against assuming that all those who have sought visa applications in recent weeks would actually emigrate or would be qualified to emigrate.
It also said that the immigration quotas of the destination countries would ultimately determine how many Hong Kong people can leave and how quickly. 

Because of these overseas limitations, the government predicts that the number of emigrants will settle into a range of 55,000 to 60,000 annually for the next few years.
Still, that would be three times the 20,000-a-year average of the early 1980s. 

Emigration from Hong Kong jumped in 1987, partly because of growing nervousness over 1997 and partly because of increased opportunities to emigrate to Canada and Australia.
Both countries have been seeking entrepreneurs and skilled workers. 

Although businessmen and local politicians began complaining about a brain drain of managers and professionals in 1987, the government at first tried to minimize the emigration issue by saying that Hong Kong people traditionally have been mobile.
A large part of the colony's 5.7 million population consists of refugees from Chinese communism. 

However, faced with mounting evidence that emigration was accelerating because of worries about 1997, the government in May 1988 established the emigration task force to study the issue.
In announcing the task force's findings to date on Friday, the government repeated that it wouldn't restrict freedom of movement from Hong Kong and said that the Sino-British agreement on the return of the colony to China also guarantees freedom of movement. 

Although a number of Southeast Asian and Caribbean countries have announced plans for investment-linked resident visas or passports, Hong Kong government officials said their research shows that 90% of the emigrants to date have gone to Canada, Australia and the U.S. 

The brain drain is also borne out in the the government's study of those who have left.
For instance, "disproportionately more" emigrants are in the 25-to-44 age group than the population at large, the government says. 

Also, the emigrants are better educated than the general population.
In 1987, 5,600 people, or 18.7% of total emigrants, held college degrees.
In 1988, 6,900, or 15% of total emigrants, held college degrees.
Only 3.5% of the general population hold degrees. 

Furthermore, many of the emigrants are managers and professionals.
Of the 30,000 emigrants in 1987, some 7,400, or 25% of the total, were in the "professional, technical, administrative and managerial" categories of the work force.
Of the 45,800 emigrants in 1988, 11,200, or 24% of the total, were in this category. (About 11% of Hong Kong's work force is categorized as professional, technical, administrative or managerial.) 

Although emigration-related turnover of staff has caused trouble for individual companies, the government hasn't been able to calculate the cost of emigration to the overall economy. 

In announcing the statistics, government spokesman Mike Rowse said the projections for the 1990s take into account local reaction to the June 4 massacre.
He added that Hong Kong companies have so far been able to replace those leaving by stepping up training programs and promoting from within.
In some cases, expatriates are being brought in, though more may be needed.
And there is a still a flow of Hong Kong people with new passports coming back to the colony, he said, adding that it was hard determine exactly how many. 

On the other hand, Mr. Rowse said, emigration is "doing damage by the loss of talent and doing damage indirectly to the morale of people left behind." 

He said that the government projections take into account the new Singapore visa package, which could allow up to 100,000 people to emigrate over the next decade.
He also said it includes the possibility that the U.S. may raise its annual visa quota for Hong Kong as high as 10,000 people from 5,000 currently. 

But he said it was difficult to factor in recent promises by Britain to devise an emigration "insurance" package for at least part of the population if conditions sour after 1997. "The whole idea is to keep Hong Kong people here and keep Hong Kong successful, not to have them go and live on the other side of the world," he said.
About 1,000 Hong Kong residents a year emigrate to Britain. (People born in Hong Kong, though they carry passports issued by Britain, don't have the right to live in Britain.) 

After the June 4 massacre, Hong Kong pressure groups stepped up efforts to lobby British lawmakers and win back the right of abode, which was lost through a series of British nationality acts since World War II. However, with both the British government and a wide range of opposition politicians lined up against the issue, it is unlikely to succeed. 

By virtue of birth and other criteria, about 3.3 million Hong Kong people would qualify for right of abode in the U.K., but British politicians have said such a number of immigrants would overwhelm British social services. 

Mr. Rowse called on British lawmakers to consider the right of abode "as an issue of principle rather than one of Asian immigration." 

