.START 

Plunging energy prices are restraining inflation, and a spurt in auto production is buoying the industrial sector, as the economy's streak of good luck continues. 

An enormous 7.3% dive in energy prices pushed producer prices down 0.4% in August, the Labor Department reported Friday, an extraordinary third consecutive month of decline. 

Meanwhile, industrial production grew at its fastest pace since April, the Federal Reserve said.
At the same time, the operating rate at the country's factories, mines and utilities remained at 83.8% of capacity, the Fed said -- high enough to represent efficient use of facilities but not so high as to cause inflationary bottlenecks or production snags. 

"Overall the statistics today paint a very pretty picture of the economy and inflation," said Allen Sinai, chief economist for Boston Co. in New York. 

But it is a picture skewed by special circumstances.
If it weren't for the decline in energy prices, the producer price index for finished goods would have climbed 0.4% last month.
Excluding food as well -- another category where wide and frequent price swings can distort trends in overall price levels -- producer prices grew 0.5%. 

Oil prices recently have begun to rise.
Consequently, Carl Palash, senior economist at McCarthy, Cristini & Maffei, a financial market analysis firm in New York, said: "I don't see inflation abating." 

The 0.3% growth in industrial production resulted almost entirely from two factors: a jump in automobile production, as factories churned out their new 1990 models for introduction this fall, and a rebound in production of coal mining equipment after widespread miners' strikes ended. "Those are temporary factors," Mr. Palash said.
Production actually declined for a wide range of consumer goods.
In other areas, it has slowed considerably through the summer. 

Still, analysts generally believe the economy is in pretty good shape. "The picture is about as good as anyone has any right to expect at this stage of a business cycle, " Mr. Sinai said. "It's a picture that says to Washington: If it ain't broke, don't fix it." 

Many economists believe the Federal Reserve will conclude precisely that and refrain from changing policy.
In March 1988, the central bank began nudging interest rates higher in an effort to slow economic activity so that prices would moderate.
But this spring, after allowing short-term interest rates to climb three percentage points, the Fed reversed course and started pushing rates down to protect the slowing economy from a recession.
Now, after easing its clamp in late July, the Fed is sitting tight. 

"The economy continues to go forward," President Bush said, speaking to reporters at a White House luncheon.
But he added, "I'm not totally relaxed on all corners of the economy." 

To some analysts, inflation remains a question.
The producer price index, which measures prices producers pay for goods, previously hadn't declined for three consecutive months since 1986.
But just as soaring energy prices pushed producer prices up at an alarming rate last winter -- and spawned fears of an inflationary spiral -- recent steep drops in energy prices caused the current string of declines. 

However, recent price trends suggest another month of declining oil prices is highly unlikely.
And even last month, prices increased more than a percentage point on an array of goods, including lawn equipment, tobacco products, prescription drugs and household flatware. 

The 0.5% rise in prices other than those for food and energy "was broad-based, and suggests that not letting our guard down on inflation as we move into 1990 is important," said Dirk Van Dongen, president of the National Association of Wholesaler-Distributors. 

But Aubrey Zaffuto, an economist at IBJ Schroder Bank & Trust Co. in New York, said, "I'm not concerned as long as we see a moderation of crude and intermediate prices." 

In August, prices of intermediate goods, products that have been partly processed, dropped 0.3%, also the third consecutive decline.
Crude-goods prices fell for the second time in two months, tumbling 1.9%.
The prices producers pay for these materials, which range from ball bearings to paper pulp, affect the cost of making finished goods, and ultimately their selling price. 

"I don't see the real fear of inflation going up really sharply; by the same token, I don't see it going down much lower," said Michael Baruschke, a manager of National Westminster Bank NJ in Jersey City, N.J. "I don't see it going higher because the economy isn't booming in any one area.
I don't see it going lower because the economy isn't doing poorly; people are still working and spending money." 

One other report released Friday contained a bit of worrisome news.
The Commerce Department said business inventories grew 0.6% in July as sales declined 0.9%.
If build-ups in stock aren't matched by growth in sales, businesses eventually are forced to cut orders, leading factories to reduce production and staff.
In July, inventories equaled 1.54 months of sales, compared with 1.51 months in June. on industrial production in August.
The figures are seasonally adjusted. 

July August 

The industrial production index for August stood at 142.4% of the 1977 average. 

Here are the Labor Department's producer price indexes (1982=100) for August, before seasonal adjustment, and the percentage changes from August, 1988. 

