.START 

House Democratic leaders are working on a proposal to raise the top tax rate on the nation's wealthiest individuals as a substitute for the capital gains tax cut approved by the House Ways and Means Committee last week. 

A senior aide to House Speaker Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) said yesterday that imposing a new, 33% top tax rate is a "strong possibility" as a substitute for the capital gains measure when it comes up for votes on the House floor next week.
Revenue raised from such an alternative, the aide said, could be used either to give tax relief to middle-income taxpayers or to expand the deduction for individual retirement accounts in line with a plan being pushed by Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas) of the Senate Finance Committee. 

According to other leadership aides, another possibility under consideration is to restrict any benefits from a reduction in the capital gains tax to middle-income and upper-middle-income individuals.
A Ways and Means Committee aide added that if Democrats want to raise more money for deficit reduction or other purposes they may propose a speed-up in payment of payroll taxes by big corporations. 

Against the wishes of the House Democratic leadership, the Ways and Means Committee last week voted 19-17 to reduce the top capital gains rate for 2 1/2 years to 19.6%.
After that the top rate would be 28%, with the gains indexed for inflation.
Capital gains are currently taxed at ordinary income rates, which go as high as 33%. 

The vote was a victory for President Bush, who yesterday warned Democrats in Congress that they shouldn't seek to punish him on other issues because they are losing to him on capital gains.
Mr. Bush, speaking at a news conference in Helena, Mont., said that he hopes a "bipartisan spirit" will prevail as the plan progresses.
But he also said it wouldn't be "right," and would be unpopular with the American people, if lawmakers fighting a capital gains tax cut refused to back the administration on other issues. 

Democrats haven't reached a decision on their strategy to try to defeat the capital gains tax cut.
But the Democratic leadership intends to pull out all the stops to fight the reduction on the grounds that it disproportionately benefits rich people and loses revenue over the long run. 

Aides argued that many upper-income individuals already pay a 33% marginal rate -- the rate on the last dollar of income -- because of an anomaly in the tax code.
The top marginal rate for the wealthiest people is 28%.
Making 33% officially the top rate would affect mostly these wealthy taxpayers and wouldn't lose revenue over the long run, as a reduction in the capital gains tax would. 

According to new congressional estimates released yesterday by House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.), a leading opponent of a capital gains tax rate reduction, the Ways and Means tax cut would cost the Treasury $21 billion through the fiscal year ending Sept. 30, 1999.
In the first three years, the rate reduction would raise $9.4 billion, because of increased asset sales, but in later years the measure would lose revenue. 

President Bush has opposed any rate increase as part of his no-tax-increase pledge.
And in the Ways and Means Committee, a long series of proposals that included the new top rate was narrowly defeated. 

