.START 

Integrated Resources Inc. is working against an Oct. 15 deadline to complete the sale of its core businesses while facing the potential loss of its sales force and continued pressure from creditors. 

The financial services company has been trying to avoid a bankruptcy-law filing since it failed to make interest payments in June on nearly $1 billion of debt. 

In late August, Integrated signed a letter of intent to sell most of its businesses to Whitehall Financial Group, a partnership of a branch of the Bronfman family and Mandy Moross, a London investor, for $310 million.
Integrated hopes to reach a definitive agreement with Whitehall by Oct. 15; creditors and sales representatives agree that it must be done by then if the field force is to remain intact.
Otherwise, the vital sales force may unravel, and creditors will grow more restive. 

"If this deal is signed, sealed and delivered on or before the 15th, they will keep 90%" of the sales force, said one managing executive who was at a recent meeting of Whitehall and about 350 managing executives here.
On the other hand, he said, "everybody I know" will sever its relationship with Integrated if the Whitehall transaction fails and nothing else comes along by that date. 

Whitehall in late August agreed in principle to pay $310 million for Integrated Resources Equity Corp. and several other of Integrated's core financial services companies.
Equity Corp. is a loosely constructed group of independent brokers and financial planners who sell insurance and annuities, limited partnerships, mutual funds and other investments for Integrated and other companies. 

When the sale accord was announced, Integrated said its investment banker, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., would continue to solicit bids for the units. 

"Drexel has received a number of firstround bids" from other interested parties, said Stephen D. Weinroth, Integrated's chairman and co-chief executive.
Mr. Weinroth last month took a leave of absence from Drexel to work full time at Integrated in the debt restructuring effort. 

"We expect to hold to the timetable," said Whitehall's managing partner, B. Lance Sauerteig.
Mr. Sauerteig said so far there aren't any major obstacles to its offer, which also includes buying Integrated Resources Life Insurance Co., Integrated Resources Asset Management Corp., Resources Trust Co. and Financial Clearing & Services Corp.
The agreement didn't include Integrated's Capitol Life Insurance Co., and Integrated is expected to continue to administer the remaining real estate and other partnership businesses. 

Mr. Sauerteig said he understood that sales representatives reacted favorably to the meeting. "The reality of it is that these are very smart people . . . (who) clearly have been hurt by this and want to see a deal go through," Mr. Sauerteig said. 

"Everybody's banking on the Bronfmans" concluding the deal, the Integrated managing executive said. 

Mr. Weinroth declined to identify the other parties he said had sent bids to Drexel.
The Coors family was rumored to be interested, but a spokesman for Adolph Coors Co., its Golden, Colo., beer company, said no one at Coors has any knowledge of any such bid.
Kaufman & Broad and Texas investor Robert Bass also had been rumored to be interested.
But sources familiar with Mr. Bass say that after reviewing the assets he lost interest. 

"I'm certainly hopeful" that a higher bid will come along, Mr. Weinroth said. "Obviously a buyer who will take everything would make our life easier." Asked whether Whitehall would consider getting into a bidding war for the Integrated units, Mr. Sauerteig said, "We made our bid, and we think it was a fair proposal." 

Meanwhile, Mr. Weinroth dismissed speculation that a bankruptcy-law filing is imminent for Integrated. "We certainly don't have any intention of filing in the immediate future," Mr. Weinroth said.
He said he isn't under any increased pressure from creditors, who are owed a total of about $1.8 billion. 

Senior Integrated creditors, who hold claims of about $1 billion, would receive proceeds from the sale of the Integrated core businesses.
They and other creditors then would receive a stake in Integrated's remaining real estate and other partnership assets, which Integrated currently values at about $700 million.
The partnership assets, which would have a long-term value of $2.5 billion, will gradually be liquidated. 

Mr. Weinroth declined to speculate on what would happen to the discussions with other bidders or the agreement with Whitehall if Integrated were forced into bankruptcy. "We don't have a definitive agreement with them (Whitehall), so that isn't addressed," he said. "I'm sure it's one of the issues that will be covered" in a definitive agreement. 

Mr. Weinroth also said the company is preparing its second-quarter financial report. "We found something we had to write down that was big, but we will probably find something else" that would help balance it, he said. "It's going to hurt the cash flows a little bit." He said he doesn't think the report will substantially alter a restructuring plan that Integrated expects to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission in three weeks. 

The plan apparently offers senior creditors a little more than 70 cents on the dollar for their claims and junior creditors half that much.
Integrated junior junk bonds are trading at about eight cents on the dollar, while senior debt is trading at about 38 cents on the dollar, according to R.D. Smith & Co. 

Mr. Sauerteig of Whitehall said he isn't sure how a bankruptcy-law filing would affect the agreement with Integrated. "It would make some difference if we've already negotiated a definitive agreement," he said. 

Lee Walzer, an analyst with R.D. Smith, which trades in distressed securities, said he doesn't think a bankruptcylaw filing is a short-term probability. "It's hard for me to think of an interest group who would benefit" from a filing before the sale of the core companies is closed, he said. 

Robert Miller, an attorney representing senior Integrated creditors, said that although his group feels a bankruptcy-law filing is "always an available" alternative, "we've been urging bondholders to hold the course while we conduct due diligence." He said the bondholder group hired the firm he works for, Berlack, Israel & Liberman, and Merrill Lynch & Co. to evaluate Integrated's assets. 

Mr. Miller said, "Our position is that in bankruptcy the chances are very, very great that there will be less value to distribute." He cautioned that the sales force is "a bunch of indpendent people" and said "the fear is that in a bankruptcy proceeding these people would abandon" the company. 

But Mr. Miller conceded that some junior bondholders who are "looking at eight to 10 cents on the dollar" are angry. "Some of them are very indifferent about whether this thing goes into Chapter 11" of the federal Bankruptcy Code, he said. 

