.START 

Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. will take a 4.9% ownership stake in Manufacturers Hanover Corp. for $120 million and purchase control of Manufacturers' CIT Group Inc. for $1.28 billion, in the biggest U.S. investment to date by a Japanese bank. 

However, it doesn't appear that Dai-Ichi, long regarded as the sleeping giant of Japanese banks, will be boosting its stake in either Manufacturers or CIT anytime soon. 

The stakes to be held by Dai-Ichi, the world's largest bank, were announced as part of a sweeping recapitalization plan unveiled by Manufacturers that includes a $950 million addition to loan-loss reserves and an equity issue of as much as $500 million before the end of the year.
Manufacturers has about 51 million shares outstanding. 

The purchases by Dai-Ichi, which means "the first" in Japanese, eclipse prior business investments by Japanese financial institutions, specifically Bank of Tokyo's purchase of Union Bank, Los Angeles, from Britain's Standard Chartered Bank PLC for about $750 million in late 1988. 

The reserve addition will result in a $775 million third-quarter loss for Manufacturers and a projected $475 million loss for the year.
In the year's first six months, Manufacturers' net income was $209 million, or $3.70 a share. 

The U.S.'s seventh-largest banking company took the steps to neutralize investor worries about its huge portfolio of loans to developing countries and comparatively weak capital base.
The addition to loan-loss reserves will boost that account to $2.4 billion or 36% of the bank's medium-term and long-term loan exposure; the reserve had stood at 22%, the lowest among major U.S. banks. 

John F. McGillicuddy, Manufacturers chairman, said he would "prefer not to do" the reserve addition and added that he would not be selling the stake in CIT "except for the fact that capital today is the name of the game." 

Asked if the actions will put the developing-country debt question behind it, Mr. McGillicuddy said, "I sure hope so." 

The move is bound to put pressure on other major U.S. banks to boost reserves before year end.
In recent months, Bankers Trust New York Corp. and Chase Manhattan Corp. have boosted reserves above 30%.
British banks, which unlike U.S. banks have tax incentives to make reserve additions, have boosted the developing-country debt coverage to 50% of their exposures. 

Securities analysts were encouraged by the actions.
James J. McDermott Jr., research director at Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, said: "In June they figured that they had a black hole of $1.8 billion in capital needs.
This gets them $1.5 billion.
This is a new company.
It will slim them down and give them focus." He added that "I think you'll see a shift in analysts' sentiment" on Manufacturers. 

The announcement came just prior to yesterday's market close.
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Manufacturers closed at $41.75, up 87.5 cents. 

Dai-Ichi, which had $410.59 billion in assets as of March 31, will pay $120 million, or about $45 a share, for its 2.7 million Manufacturers shares and has agreed not to purchase additional shares for 10 years without the bank's consent.
The price is slightly above yesterday's closing price. 

Yuko Oana, senior managing director for Dai-Ichi's international operations, said the two banks have had "a warm relationship for over 40 years." 

Manufacturers will report a gain of about $100 million on the sale of its 60% of CIT, which it bought in 1984 for $1.51 billion from RCA Corp.
Since the purchase, Manufacturers has had to completely overhaul the once-troubled asset-based lending company, selling its consumer-finance unit last year and refocusing its business on larger ticket items, such as aircraft. 

Mr. McGillicuddy said proceeds from the $1.28 billion sale will be used to pay down Manufacturers debt, adding that the bank's cost of amortizing the premium it paid for CIT will be reduced.
As a result Mr. McGillicuddy said the CIT sale will have practically no impact on Manufacturers' earnings and will unlock $850 million of value in CIT. 

Albert R. Gamper Jr. will remain chief executive officer of CIT. Mr. Gamper said the fact that CIT will no longer be a wholly owned subsidiary of Manufacturers will allow CIT to get more deeply into the leasing business than it can under current banking laws. 

Once the sales are completed and the new equity raised, Manufacturers will have about $3.1 billion in tangible equity, $61 billion in assets and a developing country loan exposure of about $6.7 billion.
As of June 30, Manufacturers had $1.8 billion in tangible equity and $74 billion in assets. 

Toshiichi Hashimoto, general manager of Dai-Ichi's New York branch, said the bank considers the leasing business particularly important and noted the CIT investment "gives us access to the leasing business in the U.S." Mr. Hashimoto also said the stake in CIT would assist the bank's merger and acquisition effort in the U.S. That's because CIT could have many small and medium-sized clients that would make potential acquisition targets for some of Dai-Ichi's large Japanese corporate customers. 

Currently, Dai-Ichi has five branches in the U.S.: New York, Atlanta, Chicago, San Francisco and Los Angeles.
The bank has also been an active lender to U.S. takeovers and leverage buy-outs, including that for RJR Nabisco Inc. Analysts estimate that Dai-Ichi's U.S. assets are around $25 billion to $30 billion. 

While it is the biggest bank in terms of assets, Dai-Ichi has lagged its Japanese competitors in entering the U.S. market.
Dai-Ichi is playing catch-up.
The bank is the product of a 1971 merger of two Japanese banks that didn't go smoothly.
The problem of fusing the two staffs, analysts and competitors contend, forced the bank to concentrate more than it otherwise might have on its domestic business.
While Dai-Ichi grappled with its internal problems, its biggest competitors made significant inroads into the U.S. market. 

Several large Japanese commercial banks already have extensive investments in the U.S.: Bank of Tokyo Ltd., Mitsubishi Bank Ltd., Sanwa Bank Ltd. and Sumitomo Bank Ltd. all have sizable branch operations in California where Japanese banks account for roughly 20% of the banking business. 

In addition, the Industrial Bank of Japan Ltd., Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan Ltd., Fuji Bank Ltd. and Sanwa all control primary dealers in U.S. government securities, an elite group of institutions that deals with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York when it buys and sells securities as part of its open-market operations.
In addition, Sumitomo Bank a few years ago paid $500 million for a 12.5% stake in Goldman, Sachs & Co., a leading Wall Street firm. 

Overall, Japanese institutions hold about 9% to 10% of all U.S. banking assets.
Moreover, Japanese financial institutions have announced or completed several large deals within the past year. 

Yesterday, Daiwa Bank Ltd. agreed to acquire the U.S. commercial banking operations of Britain's Lloyds Bank PLC for about $200 million. 

Last month, Japan's Orix Corp., a major leasing company, agreed to pay $190 million for Commercial Alliance Corp. of First Interstate Bancorp, a company involved in financing capital equipment.
In June, Orix paid about $80 million for a third of Commodities Corp., a Princeton, N.J.-based money manager. 

In June, Mitsui Bank Ltd. agreed to pay $100 million for a 5% stake in a Security Pacific Corp. finance unit that includes leasing, commercial and consumer finance and venture capital.
Mitsui also has an option to purchase another 5% interest later. 

Dai-Ichi isn't the first Japanese bank to buy an asset-based lender to U.S. medium-sized companies.
In 1984, Fuji paid $425 million for Heller International Corp.
But since then, the big Japanese bank has been forced to pump in hundreds of millions of dollars more, in a series of capital infusions and purchases of Heller problem loans, that has boosted Fuji's total investment in the company to $1.25 billion. 

But one analyst predicted that by keeping Manufacturers Hanover involved in CIT as a partner, Dai-Ichi could well avoid a similar fate. "What they are doing is getting firmly into the U.S. market, particularly the middle market," he said. 

Like most Japanese banks, Dai-Ichi doesn't worry much about the Third World debt that has so burdened Manufacturers and other U.S. banks.
Dai-Ichi's capital and assets are so huge and its Third World lending exposure so relatively small that the consequences of such nonperforming loans are negligible. 

