.START 

In what could be a landmark decision for hostile international acquisitions, Britain's Takeover Panel gave Sir James Goldsmith's Hoylake Investments Ltd. more time to pursue its unfriendly #13.4 billion (US$20.8 billion) quest for B.A.T Industries PLC. 

B.A.T, the London-based tobacco, financial services, retailing and paper giant, said it would appeal the decision. 

With the current bid obviously doomed because of regulatory delays in the U.S., the Takeover Panel permitted Hoylake to drop the bid and launch a new offer within 21 days of Hoylake's getting final approval by U.S. insurance commissioners. 

It is expected that it will be several weeks before any new bid will be made.
Should it come, it will include a cash portion, in contrast to the highly leveraged, all-paper current bid, persons in the Hoylake camp have indicated.
The current bid ranks second to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. 's $25 billion takeover of RJR Inc. as the largest acquisition attempt in corporate history. 

For the international investment community, a major issue was whether the panel could be flexible enough to dovetail its strict timetable for takeovers with foreign regulatory processes, which often exceed the timetable.
The flip side of the issue was whether a British-based target company could successfully hide behind a time shield created by lengthy foreign regulatory requirements. 

In a 24-page decision released in London on Friday, the panel said that although the fight for B.A.T is a "novel" situation, "situations of this kind," where Britain's takeover code and foreign regulatory processes must be considered, "are likely to recur." It added that the code should demonstrate that "it can adapt to new situations.
Foreign regulatory intervention is clearly one such situation." 

In London, investment bankers unconnected with the Hoylake/B.A.T battle welcomed the decision. "National boundaries are a cliche," asserted Ronald M. Freeman, head of European investment banking at Salomon Brothers Inc. "The market simply doesn't respect them." 

Added Rory MacNamara, a corporate finance director at Morgan Grenfell & Co.: "Clearly the decision limits the foreign frustrating defenses that might have been used by some companies in the U.K." 

In London, B.A.T shares jumped 18 pence Friday to close at 819 pence.
In New York, the company's American depository receipts rose to $12.75, up 37.5 cents. 

The immediate issue before the Takeover Panel involved B.A.T's Farmers Group Inc. insurance unit, the 15th largest in the U.S. Insurance commissioners in the nine states where Los Angeles-based Farmers operates must approve any change in ownership in the company. 

Sir James now faces a long uphill battle with the regulators.
By every account, he and his associates -- including financiers Jacob Rothschild of London and Kerry Packer of Australia -- haven't done much to ingratiate themselves.
Particularly irritating to the regulators were federal lawsuits Hoylake filed seeking, on constitutional grounds, to keep the regulators from reviewing the bid. 

Sir James was dealt another blow in that legal attempt Friday, when a federal court in Idaho became the fourth to deny his request for a preliminary injunction to block a state insurance director from reviewing the bid. 

Reached by telephone in New York yesterday, Sir James indicated that Hoylake may soon drop the lawsuits.
He said: "My position has always been to negotiate in a constructive and friendly way with the commissioners to transfer the ownership of Farmers." 

Sir James "can spend a year or more playing with the regulators," said an attorney for one of the state insurance commissions. "If we do get to do our review and we deny the bid, they'll appeal." 

Regulators also have been put off by the several shifts in Hoylake's strategy.
First it suggested it would put Farmers into a trust pending a sale, then it sued the regulators, then it introduced former U.S. Treasury Secretary William E. Simon as a potential buyer for Farmers, and finally it struck a deal to sell the insurer to France's Axa-Midi Assurances for $4.5 billion after the acquisition. 

"Generally, when people want to move from Point A to Point B, they draft a plan to get there," said Theodore R. Kulongoski, Oregon's Director of Insurance and Finance. "But this is the only time I've seen where every 500 yards they stop, reconnoiter the area, then decide how they'll proceed for the the next 500 yards.
I just think from the very beginning there's been no long-term strategy developed for this procedure." 

Sir James disagrees. "I can understand that when anything changes, it puzzles," he said in the interview yesterday. "But we've made it clear from day one that we didn't want to be in insurance." Hoylake's plan is to sell all B.A.T operations save tobacco. 

Mr. Kulongoski said he believes Hoylake has mistakenly perceived the regulatory procedure as a political battle that can be won or lost on appearances. "The Europeans don't know quite what to make of the American regulatory process.
They think it's a P.R. battle.
They hire P.R. firms to send out hundreds of releases, and to initiate these letter-writing campaigns.
But I think they're wrong." 

Indeed, the Takeover Panel noted that both sides' U.S. efforts have been "massive and intense." It said that Hoylake has deployed more than 110 full-time lawyers, lobbyists and public-relations personnel, while B.A.T's "battalions" include 21 law, 15 lobbying and 12 public-relations firms. 

Axa-Midi has been doing its part to win over the regulators.
Chairman and Chief Executive Claude Bebear was in San Francisco Friday to tell California regulators why his company would be a better parent for Farmers than B.A.T.
The stop was the last in a tour that brought Mr. Bebear to Ohio, Illinois, Kansas, Texas, Idaho, Washington, Oregon and Arizona. 

"I explained to them who we are, that we're an insurance company, not a raider, and that we have this joint venture with Jimmy Goldsmith," said Mr. Bebear in an interview. "We're trying to invest for a long time.
We want to keep the Farmers management team, the employees, the agents.
When you buy a company that is very well run, it would be stupid to change things.
When we explained that to the commissioners, they seemed more comfortable." 

At least some explanation by Axa-Midi was needed, since most of the documents it submitted to the regulators were in French. "I don't think I'll be reading it.
I don't remember much of my French from high school," said Pamela Scott, chief counsel of the Kansas insurance department.
Axa-Midi says it is in the process of getting the documents translated into English. 

Sir James, saying he was relieved Hoylake had been saved from "a time guillotine" by the Takeover Panel, added that he would be "happy and delighted to visit" with regulators "if they wish to see me." On his current U.S. visit, he is expected to meet with members of the media and seek meetings with political leaders in a bid to alter his corporate-raider image. 

The wrangling about Farmers made it obvious in recent days that Hoylake wasn't going to meet a Takeover Panel requirement that, among other things, the bid had to clear all regulatory hurdles by Oct. 7, or 60 days after the bid had been filed.
The panel said it gave Hoylake more time because otherwise shareholders wouldn't have had "a real opportunity to consider an offer for B.A.T on its merits." 

The panel laid down three conditions: That Hoylake dissolve its current bid as quickly as possible, that it use "its best efforts" to conclude the regulatory processes in the U.S., and that it refrain from direct or indirect acquisition of any B.A.T shares until announcement of a new offer. 

