.START 

Thou shalt not leave Drexel Burnham? 

That seems to be the message at Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc., which is completing a wrenching restructuring spurred by its settlement in the insider-trading scandal.
Now closely held Drexel has proposed a bylaws change that effectively discourages defections by employees holding Drexel stock. 

Under the proposed bylaws change, which Drexel hasn't publicly announced, shareholders who leave the firm will have to wait significantly longer to cash in their stock than they currently do.
In fact, says a Drexel official, the average length of the payout period in which departing shareholders get paid for all of their Drexel holdings will jump to 5.5 years under the new plan, from the current 1.4 years.
The wait will increase particularly for those with more than $100,000 invested. 

Drexel is one of the two largest closely held U.S. securities firms; the other is Goldman, Sachs & Co.
At such concerns, the equity that employee shareholders have in the firm is an important part of both the company's financial strength and an indicator of employee morale. 

Lawrence Eckenfelder, a securities industry analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in Los Angeles, said even though Drexel employees generally have been happy, management could be concerned that "if a bunch of people would depart the firm, it'd put more pressure on their equity base than in years past." He said the payout change, if approved, will probably help Drexel retain employees. 

About 1,000 Drexel employees have purchased and own Drexel shares; others own shares through the firm's employee-bonus plan.
In all, Drexel workers have some $1.1 billion invested in the firm, representing a significant portion of Drexel's $1.9 billion in year-end 1988 capital, according to its latest annual report. 

Drexel insists its shareholder-payout changes aren't spurred by any concerns about its capital base or disgruntled shareholders. 

Indeed, until now, few important employees have quit Drexel, despite two years of government civil and criminal investigations of the firm and its employees that culminated this month in Drexel's guilty plea to six felony counts.
But Drexel has nonetheless shed about 40% of its staff during its past six months' of restructuring, which included the sale of its brokerage network for individual investors. 

Some employees say there is a fear Drexel would be vulnerable if there were defections from several of the large remaining shareholders, such as those snubbed by certain management changes.
A Drexel spokesman said the firm has no such worries. 

Instead, said the spokesman, Drexel is merely changing to a "more conventional" from a "liberal" way of structuring payouts to departing shareholders, "in line with what other {closely held} firms are doing." This year was the right time for the change because of all of Drexel's other restructuring, the spokesman said. 

Drexel's 5,500 workers -- down from about 9,200 in April and 10,300 before the insider-trading inquiry -- will vote on the payout change at a special meeting Friday. 

Under the current and proposed payout schedules, employees who quit receive 30% of the value of their shares after 90 days.
But while under the current system, employees get fully 90% of their total payout after 18 months, under the new plan they must wait several years after the initial 30% payment.
They would get the other 70% in a 10%-a-year trickle in each of years four through 10. 

There are several exceptions to the new plan; for example, employees with less than $50,000 invested in the firm get everything back within 60 days under both the current and proposed payout plans. 

So why would the larger Drexel holders vote yes?
Among other things, say Drexel officials, the bylaws change promises a newly instituted dividend plan tied to Drexel earnings.
Also, they argue that until the final payout, Drexel employees should get a good return on their money. 

Already deducted from the $1.1 billion shareholders' equity figure, said Drexel, is the stake of indicted former junk-bond chief Michael Milken, as well as about $61 million paid this year to other employees who left the firm as the result of the sale of its retail-brokerage network and the severe shrinking of other operations such as municipal finance, municipal-bond trading and over-the-counter stocks. 

Drexel considers the payout bylaws change as the final piece in all of this year's restructuring.
According to Drexel, there are no plans for any additional large-scale staff cuts. 

