.START 

Computer Associates International Inc. fired about 900 people at its recently acquired Cullinet Software Inc., cutting swiftly and more deeply than most analysts had expected, former employees said. 

Garden City, N.Y.-based Computer Associates, which has earned a reputation for quickly slashing costs at its acquisitions, couldn't be reached for comment yesterday.
Calls to the company on Friday weren't returned.
Cullinet has indicated that there would be layoffs, but hasn't disclosed the extent of the cutbacks. 

Three Cullinet managers who were terminated last week said the unexpectedly deep cuts were likely to disrupt customer service and derail product development.
They said many seminar instructors for an annual customer meeting scheduled next week in Atlanta had been among those fired.
About half of the company's applications product development staff also were let go, former employees said. 

Still, with expenses slashed, the business could quickly become profitable.
Cullinet has recurring license revenue of about $100 million a year from its large, captive base of customers who use its data-base management software on mainframe computers, according to a report by Scott Smith, an analyst with Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. 

Sources said that severance and related payments were expected to cost Computer Associates $30 million, including $10 million in payments to Cullinet executives who weren't retained in the buy-out.
Analysts had predicted that Computer Associates would cut as much as 40% of the work force, which stood at 1,810 employees as of April 30. 

Cullinet shareholders voted last week to accept the bid, which had been valued at about $300 million.
In the transaction, Computer Associates agreed to pay one-half of a share of its stock for each of Cullinet's approximately 36 million common shares outstanding. 

The acquisition, which was announced in June, brought the end of a software-industry pioneer.
Twenty-year-old Cullinet, once a star of Boston's Route 128 region, was the first software firm listed on the New York Stock Exchange and was among the first to bring off-the-shelf software to market.
Previously, most companies wrote software programs in-house. 

But Westwood, Mass.-based Cullinet fell behind in a fast-moving software market.
The company reported its first profit in three years, $2.2 million, in the fourth quarter ended April 30.
Revenue fell 7.7% to $59.3 million.
Revenue for the full year -- Cullinet's last year as an independent company -- was $203 million. 

Computer Associates closed on Friday at $17.50 a share in national over-the-counter trading, with 1.4 million shares changing hands. 

