.START 

A Wesleyan University student filed suit against his school and 11 other private colleges seeking damages on behalf of thousands of students hurt in an alleged tuition price-fixing scheme. 

The suit, filed in U.S. District Court in New York, was the first in what could be a series of actions by students at schools whose practices of setting tuitions, financial-aid awards and salaries are under Justice Department scrutiny.
The legal action complicates the settlement hopes of some of the schools, who have been counting on resolving the federal case without a trial. 

The student, Roger Kingsepp, said the defendants, representing "the market of Ivy League and upper-echelon schools," have "engaged in a conspiracy to fix or artificially inflate the price of tuition and financial aid." The suit seeks triple damages under federal anti-price-fixing laws for overcharges, on behalf of a class of all students who were allegedly harmed by the scheme. 

The defendants named by Mr. Kingsepp -- including all eight Ivy League schools -- have each received civil investigative demands for financial information from the Justice Department.
The 12 defendant schools enroll about 125,000 students.
They include Wesleyan and Yale University, both in Connecticut; Amherst College, Harvard University, and Williams College, in Massachusetts; and Columbia and Cornell universities in New York.
Also named were Brown University, Providence, R.I.; Dartmouth College, Hanover, N.H.; Princeton University, in New Jersey; Stanford University, Palo Alto, Calif.; and the University of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia. 

Late Friday, a Wesleyan spokesman said the university hadn't seen the suit, but believed it "to be without merit" based on a description of the allegations.
All the other defendants either couldn't be reached for comment, or declined comment because they hadn't seen the suit. 

Mr. Kingsepp charged that the defendants engage in exchanges of information "that are routine, systematic and designed to eliminate any real price choices" for students.
The lawsuit heavily cited practices and documents disclosed originally in this newspaper, including an internal Wesleyan rundown of proposed 1988-89 charges at competitor schools.
The document stated that the information was confidential and obtained before schools made their final decisions on tuition charges. 

Except Stanford, every school named in the lawsuit also participates in an "overlap" practice that establishes financial aid awards for students who are admitted.
The lawsuit called the practice, which results in identical family expenses no matter where the student goes, as "unlawful." It didn't set a specific figure for the damages it seeks. 

The Justice Department, meanwhile, has widened the scope of its probe significantly -- and may broaden it even further.
Last week, it acknowledged sending a second wave of civil-investigative demands, after disclosing in August that the requests had gone to about 20 schools.
A Justice Department spokesperson said more requests may still be made.
So far, at least 27 schools have acknowledged getting the requests, including the defendants in Mr. Kingsepp's suit, the University of Chicago, Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, and several women's colleges. 

