.START 

The Medicare catastrophic illness insurance program, already under attack for its high premiums, is generating cost overruns that make some Pentagon cost excesses look modest by comparison. 

Just one benefit in the new law -- expanded access to care in skilled-nursing facilities -- will cost an estimated $2.5 billion this year, 150% above the $1 billion estimated when Congress passed the law last year, according to projections by the Health Care Financing Administration, the agency in the Department of Health and Human Services that administers federal health insurance programs. 

In fiscal 1990, which starts Oct. 1, skilled-nursing facility costs could run as high as $4.2 billion, compared with the $1.4 billion initially estimated, HCFA says.
And over five years, the cost could be as high as $15.9 billion, more than double the initial projection of $7.3 billion, the agency projects. 

Looking back, Thomas Burke, who was chief of staff at the human services department when the "catastrophic" law passed, says analysts mistakenly assumed "that there would be no significant change in utilization as a result of expanded coverage," even though the history of federal health benefits shows that more coverage leads to greater participation. 

The skyrocketing cost of skilled-nursing care has put Congress in a bind; while senior citizens are hammering Capitol Hill to reduce the unpopular income-tax surcharge that helps pay for catastrophic illness coverage, the costs of the coverage are rising out of control. "People on the Hill really are shellshocked," says Sen. John D. Rockefeller IV (D., W.Va.) 

Sen. Rockefeller, who is chairman of the Medicare subcommittee of the Senate Finance Committee, currently is in the middle of negotiations to save as much of the catastrophic plan as possible while yielding to demands to cut the unpopular premium.
It's likely that the skilled-nursing home benefits, which are designed for people who need special care while recovering from strokes, accidents and other illnesses, will be trimmed by the Finance Committee this week. 

The catastrophic law expanded skilled-nursing care by: 

-- Eliminating a requirement that only beneficiaries who have been hospitalized for three days before entering a skilled-nursing facility can qualify for benefits. 

-- Lengthening covered stays to 150 days a year from 100 days an illness. 

-- Reducing co-payment requirements. 

As a result of the changes, many people who were already in nursing facilities, but didn't qualify for benefits, suddenly became eligible.
According to Linda Keegan of the American Health Care Association, a nursing home trade group, 57% of the people who became eligible for skilled nursing home care Jan. 1, when the provisions took effect, were already in such institutions.
Many of these patients shifted from less generous coverage under Medicaid, a joint state-federal program for the poor, to the more generous, all-federal Medicare program. 

In addition, program analysts apparently didn't take sufficient account of changes Medicare already had made in 1988 to make it easier to get into skilled-nursing facilities.
As a result, even before the expanded benefits took effect, the number of patients receiving Medicare reimbursement for skilled-nursing care jumped to more than 350,000 last year from about 290,000 in 1987, according to HCFA figures.
The agency hasn't yet disclosed estimates of the patient population for this year, but they are certain to be significantly higher still. 

The leading option for dealing with the soaring cost of the program is to restore the requirement that only those who have undergone three-day hospital stays will be covered.
Congress also could lower the length of stays that are covered, but since the average stay in a skilled-nursing facility was 28.5 days last year, that change would have less impact. 

