.START 

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Merck & Co. 's new ulcer drug, Losec, for limited use in treating rare disorders caused by gastrointestinal acid. 

The FDA decided to initially restrict Losec's use until Merck conducts extensive studies regarding the drug's long-term safety.
Losec is expected eventually to gain wide use in treating mild to severe ulcers and to provide an alternative to Tagamet and Zantac, the most commonly prescribed medicines, which have combined world-wide sales of about $3 billion. 

The FDA approval for Losec only allows its use in treating inflammations of the esophagus and stomach lining, which cause a symptom similar to severe heartburn, and in treating a rare condition, known as Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome, caused by excessive secretion of gastric acids.
In March, an advisory committee to the FDA recommended the restricted approval because an early study of the drug in laboratory animals produced some cases of cancer.
Human studies have yet to uncover such problems, but the FDA advisory group said it nonetheless wanted lengthier safety studies. 

Analysts who follow the pharmaceutical industry expect Losec eventually to gain approval for wider use.
Merck said it expects to present safety data to the FDA next year.
Robert Uhl, an analyst with Salomon Bros., said that even with the FDA restrictions, many doctors will begin using the drug to treat patients whose ulcers don't respond to Tagamet or Zantac.
Once a drug is approved for sale, doctors could prescribe it for ulcers.
Merck, however, isn't permitted to market Losec to doctors as a common ulcer treatment. 

Mr. Uhl said Losec may generate $100 million in sales for Merck in 1990, rising to $400 million by 1992 if the FDA lifts its restrictions. 

Losec, known also by the generic name omeprazole, was developed by a division of Swedish drug maker AB Astra, which sells the drug in about 10 European countries.
Rahway, N.J.-based Merck holds only the U.S. marketing rights to the drug.
A European study, published January in the New England Journal of Medicine, said Losec healed a greater proportion of ulcers faster and kept them healed longer than Zantac, which is sold by Glaxo PLC of Great Britain. 

Sources close to the FDA said the agency is impressed by Losec's effectiveness and is worried that if the FDA granted an unrestricted approval, doctors might use the drug in great numbers before a fuller safety profile is produced.
The FDA "hopes the limited label will keep use down until everyone is more comfortable with the drug," the FDA source said. 

