.START 

In the past 30 years, the geologic equivalent of a millisecond, one of man's most devastating assaults upon nature has destroyed what was once the world's fourth largest lake, the Aral Sea in Soviet Central Asia.
In the course of a generation, its level has fallen 40 feet -- losing one-third of its area and 60% of its volume.
Measured another way, the lost waters of the Aral Sea (called a sea because of its size and fierce storms) would fill Lake Erie. 

As recently as 1973, the Aral Sea, straddling the border between the Soviet Central Asian republics of Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, supported commercial shipping and a thriving fishing industry that supplied 10% to 15% of the Soviet Union's freshwater catch.
The major ports of Aral'sk in the northeast and Muynak in the south were linked by steamships that traveled the 220-mile-route between them. 

By 1987 these once active ports were 25 to 30 miles from the receding water.
Rusting freighters and fishing boats littered the newly formed sand dunes nearby.
Fishermen cast their nets out for the last time in 1983.
Salinity, which had more than doubled, killed off most of the sea's aquatic life.
To preserve employment in Muynak and Aral'sk, the desert-bound canneries now process frozen fish shipped from the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. 

Each year 47 million tons of dust and salt from the exposed bottom are blown over and deposited in the cotton fields and deserts surrounding the sea.
The salt, combined with enormous quantities of pesticides applied to the fields, makes a poisonous mixture.
Everything from drinking water to mothers' milk is contaminated.
A pipeline to bring drinkable water from afar is frantically under construction.
Infant mortality in the region has climbed to the highest levels in the world. 

One of the greatest ecological disasters of the 20th century, it turns out, was no accident.
In the 1950s and 1960s, the Kremlin decided to make the Soviet Union a leading producer of cotton by dramatically expanding the area in Central Asia under irrigation and cultivation.
Some outspoken scientists and engineers expressed serious reservations about the wisdom of this plan.
But the leadership openly proclaimed that the Aral Sea, an oasis in the Soviet Union's most arid region, was a dispensable resource that could be bartered at cost for crops, especially cotton and rice. "Glasnost" and rising environmental consciousness in the Soviet Union have revealed the terrible consequences of this miscalculation. 

Soviet engineers and scientists were taught by Stalin to "make no small plans." Three large deserts, the Kyzyl Kum, the Kara Kum and the Barsuki, surround the Aral Sea.
To turn them into fertile and productive land, the engineers built the 800-mile-long Kara Kum Canal, the linchpin of a woefully ill-conceived water redistribution plan. 

By the late 1970s, this giant irrigation ditch was fully operational and siphoning off enormous quantities of one of the sea's two source rivers, the Amudarya.
This canal has poured so much water into the desert that the city of Ashkhabad has resorted to flood-control barriers for protection.
Withdrawals from the Amudarya and Syrdarya increased so much that not a drop of their water reached the sea in 1985-86. 

In the finest traditions of Soviet monumentalism, several years ago another "nature-conquering" proposal was approved to fix the damage from the first project.
Dwarfing anything conceived by the Tennessee Valley Authority, plans were drawn up to divert portions of north-flowing Siberian rivers through a long and broad canal -- the Sibaral.
The water was to be pumped down more than 600 miles from the Ob-Irtysh system far to the northeast.
A rough analogy would be pumping the Mississippi waters at New Orleans up to irrigate West Texas.
This canal was to provide relief to water-deficient parts of Soviet Central Asia and replenish the Aral Sea, the plight of which had become painfully obvious to the three million people living in its environs. 

Mikhail Gorbachev canceled this project early in his tenure as Communist Party general secretary, a decision hailed as a major victory for the fledgling Soviet environmental movement.
However, the unfolding ecological disaster that prompted the diversion scheme would not abate.
It now seems likely that the part of the Aral Sea that escapes desertification will be a mere cluster of lifeless, briny lakes by the year 2010. 

To its credit, the Soviet government has belatedly taken several steps to repudiate its earlier positions, such as that of a deputy minister who asserted that "the Aral should die beautifully." First, it declared the region an ecological disaster area.
Next, a resolution was passed last September mandating measures aimed at halting the region's environmental decline. 

Since then, the Aral region has hosted at least two high-powered, high-profile groups of Soviet politicians, writers, scientists and lawyers.
For example, the ARAL-88 Expedition completed its 69-day mission to Soviet Central Asia last October.
The expedition, led by writer Grigoriy Reznichenko, submitted its report this May.
Previewing its conclusions, in an interview following the expedition, Mr. Reznichenko stated that "as a biological object the Aral Sea has perished." Other conclusions: Life expectancy is plummeting in the region; infectious diseases, especially hepatitis, are nearing epidemic levels; and unemployment is on the rise with the loss of traditional local trades and professions.
At the Congress of Peoples' Deputies in Moscow in late spring, the Aral Sea disaster was one of the most frequently cited items on a long list of Soviet ecological calamities.
It is clear that some help is on the way.
However, given the persistent, expensive aftereffects of the Chernobyl nuclear plant explosion and the Armenian earthquake, the Soviets will be hard pressed to finance the rescue effort, estimated at 25 billion to 30 billion rubles.
Perhaps it would be best to do what one impassioned speaker at the Congress suggested: Make the restoration of the Aral Sea a critical project of international disaster relief. 

Mr. McClave is a research analyst in Soviet and East European affairs at the Library of Congress. 

