.START 

Vice President Dan Quayle candidly answered a question about strategic defenses the other day, and ended up being mugged by a straw man.
The episode is worth replaying because it illustrates the fog of misunderstanding, some of it willful, that has surrounded the debate over anti-nuclear defenses. 

In an interview with the Los Angeles Times, Mr. Quayle was asked if the Bush administration is scaling back its plans for SDI. Mr. Quayle replied: "The Reagan administration . . . talked about this impenetrable shield that was going to be completely leak proof. . . . I believe that in the semantics of let's say political jargon, that that was acceptable.
But it clearly was stretching the capability of a strategic defense system." 

He continued, "I think since that time the capability . . . has been clearly rethought.
We are looking at what is militarily effective and how this will be used for deterrence . . . and how it will be used in different types of situations." 

The vice president then spent several minutes offering real-world uses for defenses, but he might as well have been talking to himself.
The Hallelujah Chorus of SDI critics broke into headlines and cheers, claiming Dan Quayle had finally blown the cover off Ronald Reagan's political illusions.
Our own view is that Mr. Quayle's remarks will have been worth the furor if they finally blow away the SDI straw man of a perfect "Astrodome" defense. 

For most supporters of SDI, including us, the Astrodome has never been the realistic goal.
The point of introducing strategic defenses of some kind, virtually any kind, is to move away from mutual-assured destruction -- the goofy but influential notion that to prevent nuclear war every nation must be defenseless against nuclear weapons.
Ronald Reagan was making a moral point: It is wrong to leave a nation vulnerable in the name of making it safe; anti-nuclear defense is not illicit. 

Mr. Reagan understood that if he unleashed American science on defenses, it could find answers.
And that is precisely what has been happening.
SDI's Delta 183 mission is even now yielding valuable data about the abilities of sensors in space.
At Livermore Labs, scientists think they've discovered a way to make space-based interceptors that are small and smart -- so-called brilliant pebbles.
In a successful August test called "On-Target," a sensor inside a building locked onto a rocket plume on the desert range at Edwards Air Force Base -- achieving another stage in the development of interceptors.
A few months ago, SDI scientists in California successfully fired the large Alpha laser. 

Even if these technologies someday add up to a partial defense, they can contribute to deterrence.
They can put doubt in the mind of a Soviet nuclear planner: If 50% of his first-strike missiles may be destroyed by U.S. defenses, he will be that much less likely to strike at all.
Beyond the Soviets, nations from India to Brazil are developing ballistic missiles.
It strikes us as perverse to leave Americans defenseless against this emerging threat of the 1990s. 

Dan Quayle, among others, has tried to explain all this, but the efforts keep getting lost amid the cheers over the death of the Astrodome myth.
Just last week, Senator Bennett Johnston of Louisiana whooped an amendment through the Senate Appropriations Committee to cut SDI spending next year to $3.7 billion ($1 billion less than Mr. Bush's request), and to micromanage most of that.
The news about SDI isn't what Dan Quayle did to a straw man, but what Congress is doing to the real thing. 

