.START 

After a four-month investigation, police still haven't gotten to the bottom of Norman Tremblay's fish story. 

It started May 21, when the New Hampshire angler entered a 6.28-pound salmon in the annual fishing derby at the state's Lake Winnipesaukee.
He told contest officials he had reeled it out of the lake early that morning.
But a state fish and game biologist at the derby smelled a rat. 

The fish had a fin clipped with a marking like those put on fish in the state's hatcheries, but the marking wasn't the one usually found on fish in this lake.
The biologist tipped off the contest's officials who, after mulling it over, called the sheriff. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Tremblay's fish had won second place in the derby, and he drove home to his log cabin in the woods with $12,000 of prizes, including a 16-foot boat, an outboard motor and a trophy. 

When visiting a neighbor two days later, he looked up to see his boat being towed behind somebody else's truck.
After a hot pursuit, he caught up with the thieves, only to find they were deputies in unmarked vehicles.
Armed with a search warrant, they had seized his boat, trophy and other prizes, pending an investigation of possible fish fraud.
The fish, which had been sent to a taxidermist's, was taken into custody later. 

Now, law-enforcement officials are in the fourth month of a criminal investigation of a case that is "one of the most complex things I've ever seen," says Belknap, N.H., County Attorney Edward Fitzgerald.
He won't elaborate on the case or possible charges, except to say the salmon is being analyzed for clues at the University of New Hampshire.
Fish researchers there decline to comment. 

But an expert in fish forensics at the University of Washington, in Seattle, says detectives probably will have to collect tissue samples from salmon in the state's many hatcheries for comparison with the suspect fish.
DNA probes may have to be brought in.
They may need a federal grant to complete the investigation, says the expert, biologist Robert Walker. 

Mr. Tremblay won't comment.
But his attorney, Dan Harkinson, says high-powered forensics aren't needed to show there's nothing fishy about his client's salmon. "I've examined another frozen salmon from the lake, and it looks a lot like the fish Tremblay caught," he says. 

