.START 

Launching a battle in a bitter war, federal regulators filed a civil lawsuit seeking more than $1.1 billion from American Continental Corp. Chairman Charles H. Keating Jr., various members of his family and officers and directors of the parent of California's Lincoln Savings & Loan Association. 

The suit, filed Friday in U.S. District Court in American Continental's Phoenix, Ariz., headquarters city, alleges Mr. Keating and his family profited through insider dealing, illegal loans, sham real-estate and tax transactions, and the fraudulent sale of Lincoln stock to employees of the parent company.
The suit also named a number of subsidiaries of American Continental, which itself was taken under Chapter 11 federal bankruptcy-law protection the day before Lincoln was seized by regulators last April. 

Moreover, Mr. Keating and six of the other defendants Friday were charged with racketeering.
Of the damages sought, $250 million stem from charges brought under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law and could be trebled by the court. 

Although the suit alleges that Lincoln sustained total damages in excess of $1.1 billion, total damages could exceed $2.5 billion, according to an attorney familiar with the complaint. 

In addition to naming Mr. Keating, the 160-page suit alleges wrongdoing by his wife, several of their children and their childrens' spouses, many of whom work for American Continental or its Lincoln unit, based in Irvine, Calif. 

The action also names William Keating, Charles Keating's brother and a former judge and U.S. congressman from Ohio who more recently was publisher of the Cincinnati Enquirer.
William Keating, who was an American Continental director for roughly one year, said he received a copy of the suit only yesterday and declined to comment until after reviewing it. 

Charles Keating, the 66-year-old real-estate developer and heavy political contributor to candidates of both political parties, has vociferously complained that the government has waged a personal vendetta against him for repudiating its thrift-industry policies.
He was said to be traveling and unavailable to comment over the weekend.
But A. Melvin McDonald, a former U.S. attorney in Phoenix who represents American Continental and its principals, said the allegations in the suit are "trying to take things that are completely harmless and trying to make something sinister out of them." He said American Continental was "absolutely confident" that a jury would find in its favor. 

Mr. McDonald said he was struck by "the mean-spirited nature of the lawsuit, which isn't surprising.
It identifies personal members of Mr. Keating's family -- wives, husbands -- virtually seeking not only to destroy Keating but to destroy members of his family as well." He also charged regulators with leaking to reporters substantial portions of the suit as it was being prepared, saying that "we've now been defending this lawsuit for six weeks" in the press.
Charging racketeering, he said, is an attempt "to get sex appeal in their case.
These {defendants} aren't racketeers, these are people that are builders, that have been patriots of this country." 

Charles Keating has said that American Continental's acquisition of Lincoln more than six years ago was designed to allow it to benefit from liberal California thrift rules that permitted high levels of direct investment in real estate, junk bonds and other activities potentially more lucrative for an S&L than the traditional thrift-industry home-mortgage vehicle. 

But the suit by Resolution Trust Corp. -- the first it has filed since being signed into law by President Bush in August to oversee sales or mergers of the nation's insolvent thrifts -- charges that Mr. Keating and American Continental acquired Lincoln as a way of using its government-insured deposits as a personal cache for real-estate deals.
It says they engaged in circular transactions that benefited the Keating family and parent-company officials at the expense of Lincoln and the savings-and-loan deposit insurance fund. 

For example, the suit contends that family members sold personal American Continental stockholdings to American Continental's employee stock ownership plan.
Lincoln put up $15 million of its property as collateral for a loan that the ESOP needed to buy the Keating stock.
The transaction resulted in a loss to Lincoln of $11 million, the suit says. 

The suit also alleges that American Continental fraudulently siphoned funds from Lincoln, supposedly to pay the S&L's share of tax liabilities on certain loans.
Regulators say that the loans actually were sham transactions, and that American Continental used the funds for other purposes besides paying taxes.
The suit alleges that Lincoln sustained losses in excess of $125 million. 

Lincoln also had losses of $76 million, the suit claims, in a series of loans involving Rancho Vistoso, a real-estate project near Tucson, Ariz.
The suit says that the loans were granted without appraisals of the real estate, and that American Continental then drained profits from Lincoln through a complex series of transactions.
For example, Lincoln sold an equity interest in the project to American Continental, a purchase the parent financed with proceeds of "illusory transactions with Lincoln subsidiaries," according to the suit. 

Some specific allegations could provide a window on possible criminal charges that could be the next step in the legal entanglements between Mr. Keating and the federal government.
An industry attorney familiar with the case said a grand jury in Los Angeles has been investigating the company for possible criminal charges, although prosecutors there decline to comment. 

One case cited in the litigation Friday involved a sale of stock in Memorex International in which Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. played a part.
American Continental was a major customer of former Drexel junk-bond king Michael Milken. 

The suit said Lincoln tried to sell the Memorex stock to its parent for $2.8 million, based on a fairness opinion it had obtained from Drexel, but S&L regulators rejected the sale.
So, according to the suit, a Lincoln subsidiary sold the Memorex stock to a third party for $1 million, and then American Continental bought the stock for $2 million from the third party, and later resold it for $13.3 million. 

For his part, Charles Keating has filed suit in federal court in Washington, D.C., seeking Resolution Trust's removal as conservator of Lincoln.
The RTC subsequently put Lincoln in receivership.
His suit terms the April seizure of Lincoln's property unconstitutional.
The company also has filed a $150 million suit against the regulators, accusing them of "a pattern of harassment and misrepresentation." 

The RTC explained its legal action Friday by noting that "under the assignment given to us by the president and Congress to deal with the thrift industry crisis, we have a clear responsibility to take legal action where appropriate to reduce any losses to American taxpayers growing out of fraudulent financial activity." 

Many industry consultants believe that the thrift could cost taxpayers as much as $2 billion by the time it is sold, merged or liquidated. 

Mr. Keating, however, lately has been saying that there isn't much that could be recovered from him personally.
The executive, who has been most active recently running the Phoenician luxury resort in the Arizona capital, contends that he has been selling off assets and that almost all his family's wealth is in the moribund stock of American Continental. 

