.START 

Matuschka Group, a fast-growing West German financial services firm, has recruited an imposing array of international allies to better compete against West Germany's big banks in Europe's shrinking financial market. 

Matuschka, based in Munich and one of West Germany's few finance firms not affiliated with a bank, last week signed accords ceding small equity stakes in the group to six foreign financial firms, each to form the basis of mutual market access. 

Chairman Albrecht Matuschka, the feisty aristocrat who founded the group 20 years ago, and the firm's 32 other stockholding partners issued new capital to reduce their combined stake in the private firm to 75%.
The remaining 25% was then parceled out to the six outside companies, although no single stake exceeded 5%. 

Said Mr. Matuschka in an interview, "this gives us tremendous firepower while also maintaining our independence; something very rare in Germany." 

The roster of Matuschka's new stockholders explains how: 

-- Nomura International PLC, a subsidiary of Nomura Securities Co., a huge financial services firm.
The Japanese securities house already has a 25.1% interest in Matuschka's MAT Main Anlage Trust G.m.b.
H. investment unit, and links Matuschka to Japanese companies seeking financial services in Europe. 

-- GE Capital, a subsidiary of General Electric Co. of the U.S., with which Matuschka is to work on corporate acquisitions in German-speaking Europe.
Matuschka also is in talks with Kidder Peabody International, a U.S. subsidiary of GE Financial Services, for cooperation in trans-Atlantic acquisitions. 

-- Suez International S.A., a unit of Compagnie Financiere de Suez of France., with which Matuschka already has joined in a joint venture for German-French mergers and acquisitions and investment trusts. 

-- Charterhouse Bank Ltd. of the U.K., through the merchant bank's Perchdale Ltd. subsidiary.
Charterhouse, which in turn is owned by Royal Bank of Scotland, would be helpful in gaining Matuschka a beachhead in U.K. corporate finance markets. 

-- Willowbridge Investments Ltd., an affiliate of Botts & Co. of the U.K., a specialized London investment and corporate finance firm in association with Allen & Co. of the 

-- Akros International Holding S.A., a unit of Akros Finanziaria S.p.
A of Italy, a leading Italian investment firm with which Matuschka already jointly markets investments to Italian investors.
Both also are cooperating in German-Italian mergers and acquisitions.s. 

The financial details behind the strategic alliances weren't disclosed, keeping in line with Matuschka's secretive policies.
Past inquiries regarding Matuschka's fee income or the sums held in its trusts were similarly greeted by Mr. Matuschka's stock reply of "no figures." 

The strategic alliances help disarm the one often-heard criticism of the Matuschka Group, which has only 400 employees: that it doesn't have the financial resources, the manpower or the global connections to be anything more than a niche player in West Germany's investment and corporate finance markets.
The transactions also give Matuschka insurance against getting boxed out and eventually swallowed up as Europe's financial industry accelerates preparations for an integrated financial market after 1992. 

"We thought we had better to position ourselves with some strong friends because of the megalomania going on elsewhere," said Mr. Matuschka, a titled count whose lineage reaches back to the early Middle Ages. 

His reference is clear.
West Germany's big banks, led by Deutsche Bank AG, have been aggressively acquiring smaller banks and financial services firms and forging cooperation pacts with others.
Several have set up new insurance arms and home financing units to blanket the markets with financial supermarkets. 

Both a careful strategist and an unabashed critic of the big banks, Mr. Matuschka has emerged as a maverick in West Germany's clubby financial sector with extensive contacts to middle-sized companies, the bedrock of German industry. 

"Matuschka was an excellent window for us.
There aren't many private, independent firms like it in Germany," said Roger Pilgrim, a director in Charterhouse's corporate finance division, which had been looking to expand its development capital operations in Germany. "They also have professional and enthusiastic people from the top on down," Mr. Pilgrim said. 

Mr. Matuschka, who is 45 years old, began his investment company in a back alley office in Munich in 1970.
Banking on his aristocratic title and his family's links with wealthy society, he built up his TRV investment management firm piece-by-piece in the shadow of an established West German financial industry dominated by the big "universal" banks.
They are so termed because of their legally uninhibited activities covering retail and commercial banking, securities and corporate finance and lately including management consulting and insurance. 

