.START 

Wyoming's pristine mountains provide an appropriate setting for this week's meeting between Secretary of State James Baker and his Soviet counterpart.
The U.S. has pushed to put environmental issues on the superpower agenda, and Moscow desperately needs help cleaning up its despoiled landscape. 

The Bush administration is working on some minor environmental initiatives in advance of the meeting.
These could include proposals for joint cooperative research on how global warming affects arctic regions, and steps to try to clean up ocean pollution.
The Soviets also want technical anti-pollution assistance, and the U.S., citing the meeting's theme of "openness," will ask Moscow to begin publishing extensive environmental statistics so that both sides can assess the magnitude of the problem. 

Environmental issues still are a minor sideshow compared to arms control whenever senior officials from the two nations meet.
But one U.S. analyst says that if the superpower relationship continues to improve, issues such as the environment and international economics will become a permanent and significant part of the U.S.-Soviet agenda. 

"If you're looking to the 1990s and beyond, in a sense, arms control is fighting the last war," this analyst says. 

For the U.S., the easing of the Cold War era means national security concerns are being defined less in military terms and more in economic and environmental ones.
The issue is even more pressing in the Soviet Union.
Regional and ethnic groups across the Russian empire are using environmental gripes to express growing anti-Moscow feelings.
Soviet leaders worry that this anger will further fuel efforts to pull away from Moscow's central control. 

In the Soviet republic of Moldavia, an environmental group called the Moldavian Greens, formed in late 1988, blames Moscow for forced industrialization and indiscriminate use of chemicals in agriculture, which have produced widespread air and water pollution.
The Aral Sea in Soviet Central Asia and Lake Baykal in Siberia, the world's largest body of fresh water, have become lifeless, and air pollution in the Ukraine is eight times worse than it is in U.S. industrial cities. 

"The Soviet people have become acutely aware that they face an ecological crisis that dwarfs any other in the world," says a U.S. official who specializes in Soviet affairs. "They are trying to figure out what to do about it at the same time that they restructure their economy.
They don't have the resources for either." 

Andrei Kortunov, who is chief of the international security section of Moscow's Institute of the USA and Canada, says many newly elected members of the Soviet Congress of People's Deputies cited environmental concerns as the country's No. 1 problem when they met in June.
He suggests these mounting problems offer President Bush an opportunity to score public relations points in the Soviet Union at minimal cost to the U.S. 

"Some of the American technology could be used very effectively," Mr. Kortunov said during an interview here this summer. "It would create a very favorable public reaction, especially in some rural and provincial areas where the preoccupation with ecology is very drastic and where, I would say, the ecological problem is perhaps more acute than the problems of consumption." 

Secretary Baker, an active outdoorsman, has a keen interest in environmental issues.
His first public appearance as secretary of state was before a Washington conference on environmental problems.
And Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, in an article published in Pravda in 1987, talked about the importance of "ecological security." Referring to the disastrous 1986 nuclear accident at Chernobyl, Mr. Gorbachev said, "They say that one thorn of experience is worth more than a whole wood of instructions.
For us, Chernobyl became such a thorn." 

If the Soviet leader forgets, his people will remind him.
Earlier this month, a senior Soviet official visited Chernobyl, where he was berated by a resident: "Tell me, please, how are we supposed to live?
We are afraid of the water.
We are afraid of the sun.
We are afraid of the grass.
We are afraid of the soil." 

