.START 

Officials in Beijing have intensified their efforts to regain authority over China's two most independent-minded and economically liberal provinces, Guangdong and Hainan. 

The officials are using two tactics.
One is to offer Guangdong's governor a job in Beijing that would represent a promotion but would at the same time remove him from a position in which he was ignoring central-planning directives. 

The other is to step up a drive that is aimed ostensibly at fighting graft at the highest levels in Guangdong and Hainan but that several sources say is actually geared to removing cadres who have opposed the central government's hard-line stance on political and economic policy. 

Last week, Beijing dismissed Liang Xiang, the boldly reformist governor of the island province of Hainan, supposedly for abusing his office for personal gain.
But the 70-year-old Mr. Liang was closely associated with ousted Communist Party chief Zhao Ziyang, who named him governor of Hainan last year.
He had been a zealous advocate of Mr. Zhao's liberal economic reforms, often moving ahead of Beijing in innovative development programs. 

More than any other provinces, Guangdong and Hainan have benefited from the decentralization policy carried out by Mr. Zhao, who lost his job in June after refusing to use force against pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square.
Several provinces have been allowed to retain a bigger share of profit tax instead of handing over most of their income to the central government. 

Profit distribution between these provinces and Beijing has long been a source of conflict and is especially so now because the central government is strapped for cash. 

These provinces also have been allowed to raise funds in Hong Kong and elsewhere, with Hainan and Guangdong taking the most advantage of this.
Instead of relying on allocations from Beijing, the two provinces have generated their own funds to finance development and increasingly looked to capitalist Hong Kong, not Beijing, as their beacon of development.
Such stirrings of regionalism trouble Beijing's hard-liners, who have consolidated power after the democracy movement was suppressed in June.
They are moving to bring these provinces back into the socialist orbit. 

"The signs are there that the tension between Beijing and Guangdong is escalating," says a Hong Kong businessman with access to senior officials in the province. "Beijing leaders apparently want to remove cadres they don't like and replace them with their cronies in order to whip the province into line." 

The action in Guangdong also is viewed by analysts as the Beijing hard-liners' pre-emptive strike against a possible alliance between dissenting generals in the province, one of China's seven major military bases, and influential regional leaders.
Dissenting voices in the south have grown since the June 4 Tiananmen massacre, but they are too weak for any open confrontation, and Chinese analysts say Beijing is taking steps to quiet even those voices. 

According to two sources familiar with Guangdong affairs, Beijing leaders last month offered Ye Xuanping, Guangdong's governor, a more-senior post in the capital.
Several jobs were offered, including a place in the cabinet, a post that would have brought with it responsibility for overseeing Hong Kong and Macao. 

Beijing's offer was aimed at removing the governor from his lock on power in Guangdong, the sources say.
Son of the late Marshal Ye Jianying, the man who paved the way for Deng Xiaoping's re-emergence to power in 1977, Mr. Ye maintains close ties to the military.
It is because of this that Beijing feels the need to tread softly in removing the governor from his power base. 

"Keeping Ye in the south is like feeding a tiger at your doorstep," says one of the two sources. 

Both sources say Mr. Ye is reluctant to accept the offer and is likely to use his influence to turn it down.
If that happens, it isn't clear whether Beijing would force the governor to resign or offer him an even better job. 

Under the autonomous four-year rule of Mr. Ye, Guangdong has flourished by ignoring central-planning directives.
More recently, Mr. Ye has told Guangdong officials that he favors lifting martial law in Beijing, arguing that it is bad for business in the south.
Last month, he made an unsuccessful pitch to Premier Li Peng to end martial law. 

Within Guangdong -- and in contrast to Beijing and Shanghai -- the governor has shown tolerance and restraint toward dissidents.
There were no sweeping arrests in the province of dissidents for organizing the mass pro-democracy demonstrations in June and July.
Apparently dissatisfied with the governor's liberal stand, Beijing sent a team of officials to Canton's Zhongshan University last month to investigate students and teachers. 

Meanwhile, Beijing is stepping up what it describes as a nationwide drive to combat graft at the highest level of government.
While Beijing is keen to restore the government's credibility, which was badly eroded by the June massacre, several Chinese sources say the campaign is aimed primarily at removing cadres who have flouted the central government's directives.
And nowhere in China have provincial officials operated with more autonomy than Guangdong and Hainan. 

Liang Xiang, Hainan's governor, provides a striking example.
Chinese sources said Beijing was especially angered by Mr. Liang's open support for Mr. Zhao's liberal stance toward the student pro-democracy movement. 

Xu Shijie, the Hainan party secretary, disclosed the decision by the State Council, China's cabinet, to oust Mr. Liang at a meeting of the provincial People's Congress on Wednesday, according to the official China News Agency. 

In an apparent attempt to dampen speculation about the motive for the firing, Hainan party secretary Xu Shijie took pains to explain that the dismissal involved Mr. Liang's "personal" problems and wasn't related to the ouster of Mr. Zhao.
The State Council said Mr. Liang had allowed his wife and children to rake in huge profits from their businesses in Hainan.
Mr. Liang also abused his power by obtaining a permit for his son to stay in Hong Kong, the council said. 

Mr. Liang had experimented with aggressive economic reforms on the tropical island province, including leasing a large tract of land for development to Kumagai Gumi (Hong Kong) Ltd., which is 35%-owned by the big Japanese construction company Kumagai Gumi Co.
The project, which has faced stiff opposition from party conservatives in Beijing, who deem it a form of colonial subservience, has been delayed. 

Central government investigators have centered their probe on Mr. Liang's ties to Zhao Erjun, the second of the former Communist Party chief's four sons.
Mr. Zhao operated a real estate company that had allegedly speculated in Hainan property, another Chinese source says.
Mr. Liang is suspected of approving the speculation. 

A second probe instigated by Beijing involves Yu Fei, one of Guangdong's six vice governors.
He is being scrutinized for his alleged tilt toward "bourgeois liberalism," or corrupt Western influences, which hardliners blame for China's political turmoil.
Mr. Yu, who has a reputation among foreign businessmen of being a born deal maker, is renowned for pushing ahead with bold reform measures even when Beijing hasn't declared its position. 

Mr. Yu also is being investigated for allegedly accepting bribes and for his links to his chief economic aide, Xu Yunian.
Mr. Xu, Guangdong's top foreign-trade official, was sacked earlier this month for squandering public funds on luxuries such as Volvo cars and mobile telephones. 

Chinese analysts don't expect the anticorruption purge to be sweeping, but those few people from whom Beijing is gunning are prominent figures. "It's not accidental that those being purged fall in the same category; that is they have owed their ascent to either Mr. Zhao or his liberal economic reform policies," says a Hong Kong businessman. 

