.START 

For some people, the videocassette recorder is a convenience.
For Wilma Forrestal, it's almost a way of life. 

Every Sunday morning, Mrs. Forrestal, the wife of the president of the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank, grabs the television guide of the local newspaper and marks the movies that appeal to her.
Then she makes a list of the movies, along with their times and channels, and sticks it on the front of the guide.
Every morning without fail, she checks the list and sets one of her two VCRs. 

"I sound like a fanatic," she admits. "I'm really not.
I do do other things." 

Inventions of earlier decades -- the television, the air conditioner, the dishwasher -- brought the American home communications, comfort and automation.
But The Wall Street Journal's "American Way of Buying" consumer survey found that the recent inventions that Americans prize most are those that yield convenience and control: the microwave oven, the VCR, the automatic coffee maker. 

To get at the issue of just which gadgets do and don't matter to American consumers, pollster Peter Hart gave respondents a list of 19 inventions that have become major consumer items in the past decade or so, asking them to rate each on a scale ranging from "made life a lot better" to "modern frill." Three-quarters of the respondents say the microwave has made life a lot better.
More than 40% say the same for the VCR.
In terms of products that give the most enjoyment, the microwave oven emerges the hands-down favorite, with the VCR a clear second. 

And neither boom is quite over yet.
Though the survey found that nearly eight in 10 households have microwaves and seven in 10 have VCRs, they remain among the most-desired objects by people who don't yet have them.
Of course, one consumer's life-bettering invention is another's useless frill.
The Journal's poll, for instance, found that while older Americans especially cherish their coffee makers and remote control devices, they aren't impressed with computers, facsimile machines, VCRs or telephone answering machines. 

On the other hand, no group prizes that telephone answering machine more than Americans between 18 and 29 years old.
More than half of them say the machines have made life a lot better; only the microwave and the home computer are more popular. 

"I don't consider it a luxury.
I consider it a necessity," says Michael Robinson, 25, who lives by himself in Washington, D.C.
He bought an answering machine -- the kind that plays back his messages when he calls in from someplace else -- shortly after graduating from college. "My sister was going to call me the other day and tell me when she was arriving in Washington, but I didn't know where I was going to be," he says. "I told her to call the answering machine and then I checked it every 45 minutes or hour." 

In Mr. Robinson's circle, the answering machine seems to be replacing the "Dear John" letter.
He has more than one friend who has phoned an estranged lover's home in order to leave a message on a machine without having a conversation. "I've never done it," he says. "It's kind of cheating.
But it's effective." 

Some celebrated modern inventions fail to impress American consumers.
Roughly half those surveyed denounce the compact disk player and the Walkman-style portable stereo as modern frills.
In the case of the Walkman especially, the poll indicates a possible saturation point: While a third of all households have lightweight stereos, only a scant 3% of the remainder say that they strongly want one. 

The invention on the list that consumers labeled a frill most frequently was that status symbol of the prosperous business executive, the car phone.
Yet according to the survey, many of the people who have car phones love them, and more than twice as many people want to buy them as now have them. 

By asking which products consumers now own and which ones they would most like to have, the Journal survey provides a rough indicator of a national wish list.
Some of the results were surprising -- for instance, the showing by home computers.
The computer industry largely regards the home market as a fad that faded.
But according to the poll, while 19% of respondents already have computers at home, another 25% who don't have them strongly want them. 

Demand for home computers dried up in 1985, rebounded in 1986 and 1987 and then leveled off in 1988. "Last Christmas was a disappointing Christmas.
The industry is nervously looking forward to this one," says William Bowman, co-founder of Spinnaker Software Inc., a Cambridge, Mass., company that never realized its dream of riding a home computer boom to riches. 

Mr. Bowman, now a marketing consultant with Regis McKenna, says demand for home computers will pick up as rapidly improving computer graphics attract a new group of users.
The Journal's poll suggests that the strongest unsatisfied appetite for home computers isn't among the richest consumers -- who are more likely to have a computer at home already -- but among those who earn less than $50,000 a year.
One big factor in wanting a home computer is children: One in every three households with kids at home puts a computer on its wish list. 

The video camera is another product that still has some upside potential.
According to the Journal survey, 14% of households now have a video camera, while another 25% are strongly interested in having one.
Here, too, children count: As with the computer, one in every three households with children wants a videocam. 

Of fax machines, perhaps the hottest current fad, only 7% of respondents say they strongly want one -- but since only 1% have them now, that suggests there's still some growth left in that market, too. 

To a surprisingly large number of Americans, it's the little things that make life much better.
Take the modern coffee maker, for instance.
At best, it saves a few minutes a day.
Yet more than half those surveyed say it has made life a lot better, and only about one in every 10 deems the coffee maker a modern frill.
In contrast, two of every 10 say that about the home computer and six of every 10 feel that way about the car phone. 

Barbara Clay owns four fancy coffee makers, the kind that actually grind the beans as well as brew the coffee.
One sits near her desk at the Office of Management and Budget in Washington so she doesn't have to rely on what passes for coffee in government offices.
One is in her kitchen.
And, she says, "I have two in the closet at home that I am prepared to use should one of mine break." 

Miss Clay isn't the kind of person who sets the timer on the coffee maker every night so she doesn't have to bother in the morning.
She saves that treat for Sunday mornings. "Instead of my alarm clock," she says, "there's the aroma of fresh-perked coffee." 

(See related story: "Most Consumers Shun Luxuries, Seek Few Frills but Better Service" -- WSJ Sept. 19, 1989) 

Percentage of total responses to the question: "How satisfied are you with your life right now?" 

Note: Does not include "Not sure" responses 

Source: WSJ Centennial Survey 

Percentage of respondents choosing these headlines to describe the '80s 

Source: WSJ Centennial Survey 

Percentage of total respondents citing product as "making life a lot better" and as a "modern frill" 

Source: WSJ Centennial Survey 

