.START 

Giant Group Inc. 's recent agreement to acquire Aspen Airways Inc. is at first glance puzzling: Why would a company involved in cement making, newsprint recycling and fast-food hamburgers buy a regional airline? 

But the move is characteristic for former entertainment magnate Burt Sugarman, who holds about 31.8% of Giant.
Mr. Sugarman, who is Giant Group's chairman, has always had a propensity for overseeing an eclectic mix of businesses.
And this most recent acquisition simply makes it a new hodgepodge. 

Meanwhile, a new emphasis for Giant may be emerging.
Last week Giant said it would study the feasibility of building a major recycled newsprint mill that could triple the output of its current facility in Pomona, Calif.
A glut of old newspapers across the country mean that raw material for this business is cheap and plentiful; if demand for recycled newsprint from newspaper publishers improves, Mr. Sugarman could be expanding at the right time. 

Giant acquired the newsprint operation earlier this year from Media General Inc. as part of a settlement resulting from a hostile takeover attempt.
It didn't seem like a good fit for a company, which also held a big stake in an entertainment concern, Barris Industries Inc., best known for "The Gong Show." 

But Giant's core business in cement making in fact had been involved in resource recovery for years by burning waste materials to fuel its Pennsylvania and South Carolina plants.
Mr. Sugarman has made noises about selling the cement operation since 1987. 

Mr. Sugarman has said that his businesses relate to each other because they are all low-cost operations in some sense geared to a mass market, whether game shows, the 22%-owned Rally's fast-food chain or even cement. 

Giant sold its stake in Barris earlier this year, severing its ties with the Guber-Peters production company, makers of "Rain Man" and "Batman." But the 50-year-old Mr. Sugarman got his start producing television specials, went on to produce such movies as "Children of a Lesser God," and has never indicated he's finished with the entertainment business. 

Mr. Sugarman couldn't be reached to comment. 

