.START 

McDonnell Douglas Corp., calling it an "obvious improvement to be made," recommended that airlines add a few simple parts to the DC-10 that could prevent an accident like the July crash in Sioux City, Iowa, that killed 112 people. 

During that disaster, the rear engine on United Airlines flight 232 exploded, severing all three hydraulic lines on the tri-jet.
The lines, a series of half-inch, fluid-filled tubes raddled through the plane, are connected to devices on the wings and tail called actuators; they, in turn, direct movable flaps that give the pilot control of the aircraft. 

But if the No. 3 hydraulic line became ruptured with the new design in place, a shut-off valve would automatically close.
That would keep the fluid from draining and preserve enough pressure in the system for the plane to be landed safely -- even if the other two lines were also crippled.
If such a valve had been present on flight 232, the crew "would have had a relatively easy time to arrive at the end of the runway," said Dale Warren, a vice president at the company's Douglas Aircraft Co. subsidiary here. 

The Federal Aviation Administration is expected to soon make the alteration mandatory on domestic DC-10s, and international regulatory bodies would probably follow suit.
About 400 of the planes are in service around the world. 

Mr. Warren likened the introduction of the valve to adding airbags in automobiles, calling it something "over and above the basic industry standard." He said the catastrophic failure of the No. 2 engine on Flight 232 was "unprecedented," adding that the chances of such a thing happening "are less than one in a billion." 

But, clearly, McDonnell Douglas has been under fire since the Sioux City crash to better protect the DC-10's hydraulics.
Indeed, the company has been walking a tightrope -- asserting that the plane is safe as is, while trying to figure what action might assuage the public's growing fears about flying on it. 

In a front-page story in this newspaper after the July accident, aviation experts questioned the configuration of the DC-10's hydraulics and said other planes have more fail-safe systems, including the use of shut-off valves.
Following the article, the International Airline Passengers Association, a travelers' advocacy group, called for the grounding of the DC-10 fleet.
And Sen. Howard Metzenbaum (D., Ohio), citing The Wall Street Journal story, wrote to FAA Administrator James Busey, questioning whether the crash "might have been averted if the hydraulic system was designed differently." 

After the Douglas announcement about the modification, Mr. Busey said in a statement that the change will "make a good airplane even better." 

Still, for some, the addition of the shut-off valve seems unduly belated. "It was either completely overlooked or else they were dead set against changing a damn thing," said Rick Clarke, a pilot and president of an Annapolis, Md., consulting firm called Air Safety Planning Associates. 

A spokesman for the airline passengers association added, "We're delighted that they're taking steps without waiting for regulatory intervention . . . but we're saddened that time and events seem to have been the final catalyst." 

Mr. Clarke pointed out that the hydraulics on Lockheed Corp. 's L-1011 tri-jet include a shut-off valve.
An L-1011 design manual, in fact, says that in the event of "an explosive failure of the No. 2 engine . . . a shut-off valve closes, protecting against the loss of system fluid." In addition, Boeing Co. put shut-off valves on some of its aircraft after the 1985 crash of a Japan Airlines 747 in which the plane's rear bulkhead broke loose and tore hydraulic lines. 

But Mr. Warren -- noting many safety features on the DC-10, including the employment of backup, or "redundant" hydraulic systems -- insisted that until the Sioux City accident, the possibility of such a large failure of the No. 2 engine was something "that probably nobody has recognized." 

He also discouraged comparisons to the L-1011, explaining that the DC-10's tail is designed very differently and includes some superior handling features. "There is no valve such as this on an L-1011 to our knowledge," Mr. Warren maintained. 

The installation of the valve -- as well as a pair of switches in the hydraulic fluid reservoir that can shut the device if they sense the liquid level getting too low and an indicator light in the cockpit to signal a problem -- is a relatively simple and inexpensive procedure.
It's expected to cost about $10,000 a plane, and the entire fleet could be retrofitted within 21 months.
It isn't clear yet who will pay for the new equipment, but typically the carriers bear the financial burden in situations such as this. 

McDonnell Doulgas indicated it's also likely to introduce the valve on its MD-11, the scion of the DC-10 and a cornerstone of the company's financial health. 

Mr. Warren added that the changes already have been endorsed by several airlines and an industry task force formed last month to study whether any redesign is needed to improve the survivability of wide-body jets damaged during flight. 

Meanwhile, The National Transportation Safety Board is still examining the Sioux City crash.
Investigators suspect the engine broke up after the fan disk -- a huge hunk of titanium that holds the fan blades in place -- failed, possibly because of a tiny imperfection.
But they aren't certain because the disk is still lost amid the corn stalks in Iowa and probably won't be found until the autumn harvest. 

Earlier this month, the FAA said it was preparing to order expensive new tests on the DC-10's engines.
Mr. Warren hinted that some official action could come "within a matter of days." A spokesman for General Electric Co., which makes the engines, said it was premature to comment. 

