.START 

Ferranti International Signal PLC, Britain's third-largest defense-electronics company, is mired in a scandal stemming from its 1988 merger with companies controlled by James Guerin, a Pennsylvania arms maker renowned in the defense community for his close ties to the Pentagon and U.S. intelligence officials. 

Ferranti hoped to significantly boost its business with the U.S. military by joining forces with Mr. Guerin.
Instead, it is looking into suspected phantom or overstated foreign contracts inherited from one of Mr. Guerin's companies.
And Ferranti, according to analysts and industry officials in the U.S. and Britain, eventually may have to write off $100 million or more of those contracts. 

The controversy has raised serious questions about Ferranti's management, as well as the nature of Mr. Guerin's extensive but little-known dealings with Pakistan, South Africa, Iraq and other countries.
Over the weekend, news reports in Britain even speculated about Ferranti's long-term survival if the controversy continues to grow and the suspected contracting irregularities turn out to be more extensive than the company has acknowledged. 

Ferranti knew that the secretive Mr. Guerin had almost single-handedly built a backyard workshop into a $500 million-a-year international defense business.
He became deputy chairman of the merged company.
What Ferranti apparently didn't know was that some of Mr. Guerin's arms transactions already were under criminal investigation in the U.S., along with his close association with a now-defunct minority defense contractor. 

Barely 15 months after Ferranti completed the $1.54 billion merger, it has become a cautionary tale of the pitfalls of international mergers and acquisitions. 

Ferranti's American woes illustrate the special risks of cross-border takeovers of defense concerns, which often have classified contracts and programs otherwise shrouded in secrecy.
The lesson comes as defense companies are responding to shrinking military budgets in the U.S. and elsewhere by seeking to forge international alliances. 

"Institutions financing international defense transactions need to be more aware of due diligence issues" to uncover potential financial sleight of hand, says Barbara Bruser, an aerospace industry analyst for Security Pacific Merchant Bank, a unit of Security Pacific Corp.
To unravel the details of military sales, adds Ms. Bruser, foreign purchasers "need to make sure they have adequate U.S. representation." 

In this case, Ferranti's top managers handled the bulk of the "due diligence" investigation, according to James Lupton, an official at Baring Bros., the British investment bank that worked on the merger for Ferranti. 

Ferranti, already facing other problems, shocked investors last week by announcing an unusual review to determine the value of certain overseas contracts it inherited from a unit of Mr. Guerin's former International Signal & Control Group PLC, which was founded in the U.S. but incorporated in the United Kingdom.
Trading of Ferranti shares was suspended immediately by the London Stock Exchange. 

On Friday, Ferranti said it "suspects significant irregularities" on several of the contracts, noting that the issues were "still far from resolved." Ferranti also announced it hired the auditing firm of Coopers & Lybrand to conduct an urgent investigation.
A Ferranti spokesman said the company wouldn't have any comment, beyond its earlier announcements, until the internal investigation is completed. 

Industry officials speculated that cash payments for certain contracts, including some involving Pakistan, prompted the internal investigation.
But the company declined to confirm or deny that. 

British news reports over the weekend indicated that Ferranti's management was actively seeking a friendly takeover or cash infusion, and that top officials were in the U.S. for such negotiations.
However, the company's chairman, Sir Derek Alun-Jones, and another top official were at home yesterday.
They declined to be interviewed. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Guerin's own legal problems in the U.S. are growing deeper as the Justice Department, the Internal Revenue Service, the Customs Service and other federal agencies step up a criminal investigation of his complicated finances and arms transactions over the years. 

In addition to Pakistan, his companies sold military equipment to, among others, China, Iraq, Nigeria, and the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia, according to defense-industry executives.
Law-enforcement officials say that the Philadelphia grand-jury inquiry, which began well before the merger, is focusing on whether the sales complied with U.S. export license requirements and other laws.
Mr. Guerin, who resigned from Ferranti's board in May and sold all his 32 million shares in the company, also remains under investigation by a second Philadelphia federal grand jury for separate dealings with the disgraced and nowbankrupt defense contractor he helped set up in Lancaster, Pa.
Eight officials of the minority-owned firm, United Chem-Con Corp., including former president James Christian, have pleaded guilty to participating in an elaborate conspiracy to defraud the Defense Department of more than $12 million.
Mr. Guerin's brother-in-law, Carl Jacobson, another associate of Mr. Christian, has admitted to bribing a Navy official and also is cooperating with investigators. 

Mr. Christian, for his part, has told prosecutors and probation officers that Mr. Guerin, his mentor and a former United Chem-Con director and creditor, was the driving force behind the company's operations.
Neither Mr. Guerin nor his lawyer could be reached for comment over the weekend, but in the past he has disputed that allegation. 

Mr. Guerin has such a strong penchant for secrecy that he agreed to pay the former general counsel of one of his companies nearly $2 million in return for, among other things, a pledge that the lawyer wouldn't divulge information about Mr. Guerin's activities or criticize him publicly.
Mr. Guerin is now contesting the agreement on the grounds that he was improperly coerced to sign it. 

Mr. Guerin, who prided himself on being a major benefactor of various community and charitable activities in the Lancaster area, has resigned from nearly all of his community posts, put much of his remaining business assets up for sale and moved to Florida. 

As part of the United Chem-Con inquiry, prosecutors also are investigating whether Rep. Joseph McDade (R., Pa.) violated election or bribery laws in accepting more than $45,000 in campaign contributions and speaking fees from officials of United Chem-Con and others affiliated with the company.
Rep. McDade recently repaid nearly $20,000 to the trustees of the defunct company, while maintaining through his lawyer that he never acted improperly.
Among the issues being examined by the grand jury are the links between Rep. McDade and Mr. Guerin. 

Regardless of how the criminal investigations are resolved, they already have hurt Ferranti's business.
The U.S. Army earlier this year canceled a $23 million contract for bomb fuses originally awarded to one of Mr. Guerin's concerns, and additional Pentagon contract cancellations are likely.
Ferranti officials said that they expected that hundreds of workers at Mr. Guerin's old plant near Lancaster, which is now part of Ferranti Defense Systems, will be laid off or transferred in the next few months. 

Joann S. Lublin contributed to this article. 

