.START 

A congressional plan to cut the tax on capital gains could create a bumpy ride for stocks. 

The tax cut would be good news for individual investors, who would keep more of the gains when they sell investments at a profit.
But at least in the short run, it would be bad news for the stock market, prompting cautious investors to take their profits from the post-crash rally and run. 

That's the reading market professionals give to the capital-gains measure approved by the House Ways and Means Committee late last week.
The bill would cut taxes on profits from the sale of stocks and other investments. 

A competing Senate proposal to expand the deduction for individual retirement accounts would be a clear boon for the market, as well as investors, experts say, luring new dollars into long-term savings and investments.
But while the IRA plan has broader appeal, it isn't seen as a realistic rival to a capital-gains tax cut.
Budget constraints would rule out revenue-losing IRA tax breaks for the foreseeable future, legislative insiders say. 

The controversial capital-gains proposal, meanwhile, still must survive a full congressional vote before it becomes law.
But the odds are very good that some capital-gains tax cut will be passed before the end of the year. 

In its present form, the capital-gains proposal has two phases: For twenty-seven and a half months, it would allow investors to exclude from taxes 30% of any gain they realize from the sale or exchange of stock, bonds, real estate or other capital assets they have held for more than one year.
Gains from artworks, antiques, coins and other collectibles wouldn't qualify, however.
The exclusion, which applies to assets sold between Sept. 14, 1989, and Dec. 31, 1991, would effectively cut the top capital-gains rate during that period to 19.6%.
The top rate for taxable investors currently runs as high as 33%.
Pension funds and other tax-exempt institutional investors, which make up 70% of the market, wouldn't be affected by the proposal. 

After that first-phase window closes, a different provision would kick in that would allow investors to exclude from taxation any gains attributable to inflation.
Although investment professionals applaud this part of the plan as a likely long-term plus for the market, they fear the initial phase would do more harm than good. 

"To jack the {capital-gains} rate around like this distorts" investor behavior, says Tony Brush, partner in Bradley, Woods & Co., a public-policy research firm. "If you're trying to encourage people to invest long-term, this just isn't going to do it." 

Of course, the rationale in Congress for the temporary 30% exclusion isn't so much that it will help investors, but that it will raise new tax revenues to help reduce the budget deficit.
That means spurring investors to sell assets and take profits -- which is precisely what worries many market professionals. 

For instance, when President Bush proposed cutting capital-gains taxes to 15% earlier this year, the Treasury figured that reduction would boost asset sales 91% in fiscal 1991 to a total of $349 billion.
Those sales would have included not only stocks, but also bonds, depreciable real estate and other capital assets.
Although nobody knows exactly what kind of selling the current proposal might promote, many professionals see the stock and real-estate markets as being vulnerable. 

"I'm disturbed by the near-term impact, which is negative" for these markets, says Abby Joseph Cohen, senior investment strategist at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
The proposal "creates a narrow window for investors to take their gains and run." 

That incentive is especially ticklish, she says, in the light of the strong rally in stock prices since the October 1987 crash. "People who are sitting on gains of 50% or more are going to say 'Forget about the long term, let me sell it now' -- especially when you give them the added incentive of a temporary capital-gains cut," she says.
That could put pressure on such stocks as AT&T, regional telephone companies and many over-the-counter shares, issues for which tax-paying individuals are the dominant shareholders, she adds. 

Many market analysts see the new proposals prompting a wave of selling similar to the one that occurred in late 1986, when investors rushed to realize profits before tax reforms eliminated preferential capital-gains tax rates. "It's entirely possible you could see a similar sell-off" if the current proposal is passed, says Richard Bernstein, senior quantitative analyst at Merrill Lynch & Co. 

But although the 1986 wave of profit-taking was quickly followed by a stock-market buying spree in early 1987, producing some of the biggest monthly gains in history, few professionals see such a quick recovery today.
The crucial difference is that "the economic fundamentals {supporting the market} were much more positive" in 1986 than they are now, says Drexel's Ms. Cohen. 

Even so, many professionals do expect the long-term appeal of the inflation exclusion to mitigate the plan's negative near-term impact on the market.
Steven Einhorn, co-chairman of the investment policy committee at Goldman, Sachs & Co., says, "While you can't dismiss the possibility of a sell-off, my sense is that it would be moderate and containable" because the second phase, when the inflation exclusion takes effect, "would be recognized as something positive and would offset the selling pressure." 

By taxing only real -- or inflation-adjusted -- capital gains, the second phase of the proposal would effectively add 1.5 percentage points a year to individual investors' after-tax returns in the stock market, Mr. Einhorn estimates.
That extra after-tax return would make stocks more attractive relative to bonds and other income-paying investments, which wouldn't benefit as much from the capital-gains cut. 

As a result, "it could encourage individuals -- who have been steady and massive liquidators of common stocks in recent years -- to slow that liquidation or even become net buyers of stock," says Mr. Einhorn. 

The effect would be especially positive in growth-oriented sectors of the stock market, "because it would reward people for building plant and building a business," says Howard Stein, chairman of Dreyfus Corp.
These are the kinds of activities that tend to create capital-gains for investors.
For example, he says, long term such as capital-gains cut "would have a very positive effect on environmental investments," such as companies involved in the fast-growing business of cleaning up water and air pollution. 

Meanwhile, the Bush administration is expected to lobby heavily to extend the initial 30% capital-gains exclusion beyond the proposed 1991 deadline.
If those efforts succeed, that could give a major boost to small stocks and secondary markets, such as the over-the-counter market -- both favored playing fields for individual investors. 

A recent study by Merrill Lynch's Mr. Bernstein, for instance, estimates that every five-percentage-point reduction in the capital-gains tax would cause small stocks to outperform the broad stock market by 12.5 percentage points.
That means that if the top capital-gains rate remained at 19.6%, "small stocks could gain an average of 25 percentage points a year relative to the Standard & Poor's 500 index," he says. 

