.START 

Despite the chaos in the junk bond market and to the great relief of takeover-stock speculators, First Boston Corp. made good on its commitment to lend $230 million to an investor group that bought restaurant operator Jerrico Inc. for about $470 million. 

First Boston, a unit of CS First Boston Group, had agreed last month to make the temporary loan, known on Wall Street as a "bridge loan" because it is intended to be replaced within a few months by permanent financing through the sale of high-yield, low-rated junk bonds. 

But because of last week's sharp price decline of many junk bonds, some takeover-stock speculators who had bought Jerrico shares and expected to resell them at a profit to the buy-out group feared that First Boston might delay the loan.
The announcement yesterday that the buy-out group, led by Castle Harlan Inc., New York, had accepted all shares of Jerrico that were tendered, came as a big relief to takeover-stock traders, or arbitragers. 

"The fact that {the loan} did get funded in the middle of all the hullabaloo going on in the junk bond market was a good sign," said one arbitrager who declined to be identified. 

Some arbitragers had feared that First Boston might be inclined to delay the transaction because the firm already had made about $1.7 billion of bridge loans to three other companies and has agreed to lend an additional $700 million as part of the pending $3.35 billion acquisition of American Medical International Inc. 

Officials of First Boston, however, said the arbitragers shouldn't have been worried. "While the market may have been unsettled, this is the business we're in," said David M. Malcolm, a managing director involved in First Boston's corporate finance and high-yield bond activities. "We're ready, willing and able to do deals that make sense, and this deal makes sense," Mr. Malcolm said. 

Arbitragers also had been concerned about First Boston's willingness to lend to the Jerrico buy-out group because First Boston last year had made a bridge loan to the Federated Department Stores unit of Campeau Corp. and wasn't able to sell all the junk bonds necessary to repay the loan.
Moreover, disclosures of Campeau's deepening financial troubles and the failure of one of its units to make an interest payment last week prompted much of the decline in junk bond prices. 

And in August, First Boston had to pull back a proposed $475 million sale of junk bonds by a group that purchased Ohio Mattress Co. because investors were unwilling to buy the bonds.
First Boston has lent $450 million to the Ohio Mattress group that won't be repaid until the bonds can be sold in a revised form. 

First Boston expects that most of the $230 million loan in the Jerrico transaction will be repaid with proceeds from the sale of junk bonds; the rest is expected to be repaid through a private placement of securities and a small amount of bank borrowings. 

Jerrico, based in Lexington, Ky., operates the Long John Silver's seafood restaurant chain.
Jerrico is being purchased by a unit of Long John Silver's Holdings Inc., which is controlled by Castle Harlan and DJS-Inverness & Co.
Both Castle Harlan and DJS Inverness have recently purchased other restaurants. 

Including the assumption of Jerrico debt and fees and expenses, the total value of the transaction is estimated at about $620 million. 

