.START 

Scientists have long known that breathing ozone on especially smoggy days is bad for people and can cause coughing, chest pains and temporary respiratory ailments. 

But now concern is growing that ozone at levels occurring regularly in big cities may cause permanent damage, chewing up lung tissue little by little over many years.
This could make many people prone to a precipitous and irreversible loss of breathing power in later life. 

Research on the matter is far from conclusive.
But some recent animal tests suggest that permanent changes occur in human lungs exposed to big-city ozone levels over long periods.
In a study by researchers from Duke University and the Environmental Protection Agency, rats exposed to ozone for 18 months developed lung-tissue abnormalities resembling the early stages of fibrosis, a disease that can fatally narrow air passages. 

Such studies are notoriously tricky; in fact, one other recent animal study showed no signs of long-term ozone damage.
But "there are many reasons to strongly suspect that ozone's mechanism of action on cells, if repeated many times, would lead to chronic lung disease," says Bernard Goldstein, former EPA research director. "Now we are starting to see studies suggesting that ozone {at big-city levels} accelerate lung-function decline as we get older." Dr. Goldstein now heads the New Jersey Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences Institute in Piscataway. 

The research is important because more than a decade of efforts to stem ozone pollution have failed.
About half of Americans live in areas where ozone levels exceed the federal ceiling at least once a year, ranging from Los Angeles to rural Maine. 

Ozone, a highly corrosive form of oxygen, blocks harmful solar rays at high altitudes but is a problem at ground level.
It forms when sunlight hits auto exhaust and smoke from power plants and factories.
Auto makers have slashed their engines' ozone-forming emissions since 1970, but the gains have been offset by rising numbers of cars traveling more miles than ever. 

"Most air pollutants are at levels thousands of times below what would be lethal," Dr. Goldstein says. "But in some cities on the worst days, ozone is only 10 or 20 times below lethal levels." 

President Bush's recently proposed clean air package would further clamp down on ozone precursors.
But in July, the congressional Office of Technology Assessment projected that without new technologies and life-style changes, dozens of U.S. cities will remain in violation of the federal "safe" level of 0.12 parts per million. 

Surprisingly little is known about ozone's chronic effects.
That's partly because smog only became a serious public-health problem in the past 20 years or so.
The picture is further confused by countless common chemicals that also hurt lungs.
And lung diseases tend to develop insidiously, often causing marked breathing difficulties only after knocking out a critical mass of lung tissue -- about 25%. 

Only one study has traced the impact of long-term ozone exposure on humans.
Conducted by researchers at the University of California at Los Angeles, the study suggested that in Glendora, Calif., a smoggy town east of Los Angeles, lung functions develop more slowly in youngsters and decline faster in adults than in Lancaster, Calif., a town with cleaner air.
But the study wasn't conclusive, partly because some initial participants dropped out. 

In Los Angeles, researchers are studying the lungs of people who have died from various causes in their late teens and early 20s -- members of the first generation to grow up breathing heavy smog. "We're seeing lung disease more serious than I'd have expected in these kids," says Russell Sherwin, a University of Southern California researcher leading the study.
But he isn't yet sure whether ozone is to blame. 

That leaves animal research, which has yielded conflicting results.
The Duke University-EPA study followed research with monkeys at the University of California at Davis that also showed tentative evidence of long-term ozone damage. 

But a recent rat study, conducted by General Motors Corp. researchers, didn't show such signs.
In fact, "we were surprised at how little effect we could see" after 18 months of ozone exposures far higher than people get in big cities, says Elaine Wright, co-author of the GM study.
The Duke-EPA study, however, used an especially sensitive technique to spot lung abnormalities that may have been missed in the GM study, some researchers say. 

In another recent study, scientists exposed rats to city-like ozone for six weeks, then to airborne asbestos for five hours.
A month later, the ozone-exposed rats had retained twice as many asbestos fibers in their lungs as had a control group exposed to asbestos after breathing pure air.
That indicates ozone may impair the lungs' ability to clear toxic substances, increasing risks of cancer and other diseases, says Kent Pinkerton, who led the research at the University of California at Davis. 

Scientists agree, however, that the ozone-cancer link remains weak.
More worrisome, they say, is that ozone may be quietly compounding effects of viral attacks and other respiratory insults.
Such factors wipe out lung tissue in all people as they age.
Accelerated by ozone, these factors may wipe out reserves that normally provide a protective cushion against breathing problems.
Scientists add that children's developing lungs are particularly susceptible to permanent damage.
And short-term studies indicate that children's lungs are irritated by ozone at levels below the federal standard. 

