.START 

Reeves Communications Corp. said it is in talks with Britain's Thames Television PLC about the possibility of it being acquired by Thames. 

Reeves, a television producer and syndicator, declined to elaborate or disclose financial terms under discussion, but industry executives estimated that it would cost about $100 million to purchase Reeves. 

Thames is the leading commercial television station in Britain and also produces programming.
Foreign television companies find U.S. television producers desirable because of their film and videotape libraries, as well as their role as suppliers to the major networks.
Last year, for example, another British concern, Television South PLC, acquired MTM Entertainment Inc. for $320 million. 

Reeves has been without a prime-time hit since "Kate & Allie" was canceled by CBS Inc. last spring.
It produces "Home," a daily daytime series on ABC, a subsidiary of Capital Cities/ABC Inc. and "Doctor, Doctor," a prime-time series on CBS which the network is saving as a possible midseason replacement. 

Reeves had a loss of $12.2 million for the fiscal fourth quarter ended June 30, in contrast to a profit $3.9 million for the same period last year.
Revenue fell to $28.9 million from $46.7 million.
For the full year, Reeves reported a loss of $14.9 million, compared with net income of $8.3 million in fiscal 1988.
Revenue slumped to $79.2 million from $105.5 million. 

Marvin H. Green Jr., Reeves's chairman and chief executive, said that although earnings were "disappointing," the company "generated substantial cash flow" during the past fiscal year from the syndication rights for "Kate & Allie" and "Gimme A Break," which ran on General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co. 

Mr. Green also said that he expects Reeves to have a full production schedule nest year.
It will produce "Witness to Survival," 13 half-hour advertiser-sponsored programs, as well as "Jackpot," a co-production for first-run syndication.
In national over-the-counter trading, Reeves closed at $6.50, up 37.5 cents. 

