.START 

Jean Claude Leny, chairman and chief operating officer of Framatome S.A., a French nuclear power engineering concern, said the company will invest more than $50 million in a new U.S. joint venture that will provide high-technology products and services for U.S. nuclear power plants. 

At a news conference here, officials of Framatome and Babcock & Wilcox, a subsidiary of McDermott International Inc., announced the formation of B&W Nuclear Service Co., based in Lynchburg, Va. 

Officials of Babcock & Wilcox declined to say how much capital the U.S. company would provide, but they acknowledged that Framatome is, in effect, buying "a piece" of the McDermott affiliate, which has contracts with a number of utilities to provide nuclear power plant engineering services. 

Babcock & Wilcox already has an agreement wth Framatome and other companies in the French nuclear power industry to market fuels for light-water reactor power plants through B&W Fuel Co., which was formed in 1987. 

Charles W. Pryor, Jr., vice president and general manager of the Babcock & Wilcox nuclear power division, will be president of the new nuclear service company.
He said B&W plans future cooperative efforts with French and West German companies to develop and market commercial reactors in North America. 

This cooperation will involve B&W and Nuclear Power International, a joint venture that Framatome set up last April with the KWU Group of Siemens AG of West Germany. 

Mr. Pryor said the partnership with Framatome in B&W Nuclear Service Co. will involve shared investments in new products and technologies, coordinated research and development programs, and use of Framatome's experience in the construction and servicing of nuclear power plants. 

Mr. Pryor said 54 U.S. utilities currently are operating 113 licensed nuclear power plants with more than 100,000 megawatts of installed capacity and another 10 plants are under construction. 

"We estimate that over $2.5 billion was spent last year on purchased nuclear services," he said, adding that about $1 billion of that was spent for the type of services "for which our new company will compete." 

Several other U.S. companies, including Westinghouse Electric Corp., General Electric Co. and Combustion Engineering Inc., as well as several engineering companies and numerous medium-sized specialty concerns, also are competing for contracts to provide products and technical services required in the operation of commercial nuclear power plants. 

